1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01873)

That is such a relief to me, because we know that one person’s wee things are another person’s ridiculous frippery. On Tuesday, in what the Financial Times described as the highest-profile intervention yet from business, the chief executive of BP, Bob Dudley, said that he was against Scotland leaving the United Kingdom. He said that there is too much uncertainty, including about what currency an independent Scotland would use. In response, the First Minister told BBC Scotland that, “of course, there are many, many chief executives who are firmly in favour of Scottish independence.” Will the First Minister name the “many, many chief executives” of oil companies such as BP who are in favour of Scottish independence?

The First Minister has got a problem with the big things, such as answering the question that he was asked. Not for the first time, the First Minister is deciding for people what they are saying. He tells the rest of the United Kingdom what is in its interests in relation to currency; he tells Europe what it thinks about what might happen to Scotland in the future; and now he is telling Bob Dudley what he thinks the future is for his company. The First Minister should listen to what Bob Dudley said, rather than assert what he said. BP has invested £35 billion in the North Sea and is planning to invest another £10 billion by 2017. BP’s North Sea investment employs 4,000 people, and to date it has extracted more than 5 billion barrels of oil and gas. I suggest that we listen to what Bob Dudley says. The First Minister said that “many, many chief executives” back Scottish independence. I ask again: will the First Minister name the “many, many chief executives” of companies that are comparable to BP who back independence?

Sorry, but I was only taking the First Minister at his word when he said that “there are many, many chief executives” who support independence. As he said it, I presumed that he would be able to give us at least one name, rather than all that displacement activity. On Tuesday, the chief executive of Sainsbury’s, Justin King, said of Scotland: “Once it is a separate country, we and other retailers will take a view of what the cost structure is, and of course the revenue structure too. If you were to strike that today, there is no doubt Scotland is a more costly country in which to run a grocery retail business.” Sainsbury’s says that independence has negative consequences, and so do Asda and Morrisons. Together, they employ—[Interruption.] It might not matter to SNP members, but it matters to shop workers the length and breadth of this country. The chief executives of BP, Sainsbury’s, Asda and Morrisons have all warned about the consequence of independence. The First Minister says that “there are many, many chief executives” who are in favour of his plan. Again, I ask him to name the “many, many chief executives” of businesses that are comparable to BP and the supermarkets who actually back him.

It is obvious that the First Minister’s special advisers have been on double time trying to find him words to put in a space so that he does not have to answer the question. It is precisely because we are concerned about the consequences for ordinary people that we challenge the First Minister on his obsession of the past 40 years. Is it not the case that rule number 1 in Alex Salmond’s book of communication is to assert something that is untrue and keep on repeating it often enough in the hope that people will believe it to be true, even when it is not? The First Minister cannot explain what the currency would be in an independent Scotland, but every major supermarket—not the elite—says that the price of groceries would go up, and the chief executive of one of our biggest oil companies has recommended that Scots should reject separation. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland says that he has failed to answer basic questions on pensions. The First Minister’s response is to stick his fingers in his ears and carry on regardless. At what point does the First Minister acknowledge that the chief executive of BP, our supermarkets and ICAS might know what they are talking about? At what point will he accept that leaving the United Kingdom will be bad for the people of Scotland?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01854)

The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, said yesterday that he would have no say in there being a currency union if there was a yes vote but that, if there was one, we would need to have shared institutions, shared mechanisms and tight fiscal rules. We would cede sovereignty. [Interruption.]

Scottish National Party members obviously did not listen to what Mark Carney said, but that, of course, is par for the course—they do not listen to anyone who says anything that might challenge them. That would mean that an independent Scotland would have to share mortgage rates, tax rates and a banking system and have our spending, borrowing and welfare decided by a foreign country that we had just left. In that respect, I pass on my gratitude to John Swinney, wish him all the best in his next role and ask the First Minister whom he would prefer as his replacement—Ed Balls or George Osborne?

I fear that the First Minister thinks that all this questioning is just another “ridiculous frippery” that he does not have to deal with; the rest of us are in the real world. I had thought that the First Minister said that the reason for wanting independence was that all decisions about Scotland should be made in Scotland, but it turns out that he does not mind that all those things will be decided elsewhere. Mark Carney said two other things yesterday, one of which was that he reported to the United Kingdom Parliament—a Parliament from which Alex Salmond proposes to remove all Scottish representation. Mark Carney also said that the decision on a currency union was entirely one for politicians. Considering that both George Osborne and Ed Balls have said that a currency union is highly unlikely and that, yesterday, the Treasury said that it was highly unlikely, what is the First Minister’s plan B if a currency union fails?

I am not sure at what point arrogance simply becomes delusion, but I think that we are pretty close to that point now. The First Minister must think that all Scots’ heads button up the back but that, after independence, at least they will have zips. It is a ludicrous defence by a man who used to cry freedom but who now gives us a list of wee things that we could do, which we could do—[Interruption.]

I am not sure that the bravehearts in the SNP imagined that the reason they wanted independence was childcare. The First Minister’s list exposes the fact that he no longer even defends the concept of independence himself. The First Minister reminds me of Hiroo Onoda, the Japanese solder who fought on for 30 years after 1945 in the Philippines, refusing to admit that the war was over. The war on the First Minister’s currency plan is over, and Alex Salmond has lost it. Instead of trying to nail his currency plan to its perch to make it seem alive, will the First Minister just be honest with the people of Scotland? His adviser John Kay told him to come up with a plan B. Will he now have the decency to share that plan B with the people of Scotland?

I expected that there might have been something in there that responded to the challenge of the question that I was asking. This is all displacement activity. Most of the things that the First Minister mentioned he could do right now. [Interruption.]

What he concedes about his vision of independence is that it would be constrained by a foreign Chancellor of the Exchequer. That was the message from yesterday. What the First Minister is proposing is not going to happen. If it ever did, it could give this Parliament less power in the future than we have now. [Laughter.] SNP members should come back and listen to what is happening in the real world. The First Minister’s answer is that, after a yes vote, those in the rest of the United Kingdom will recant—they will U-turn and start agreeing with everything that he says. If they are going to go that far, they might as well call themselves Nicola. It was reported that, as Mark Carney left his press conference yesterday, he said, “It’s over. It’s over.” Why will the First Minister not reveal his real plans for a new Scottish currency and admit that his plans for a currency union are over?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01832)

We have just voted on a budget of scarce resources. Every pound and every penny should be accounted for and explained. The First Minister’s trip to the Ryder cup cost in excess of £468,000. VisitScotland has accounted for how it spent £414,000 of the total figure but, despite a series of freedom of information requests and missed deadlines, the Scottish Government has failed to account for £54,000 of that total. Will the First Minister please account for that spending now?

The Scottish Government has spent £1 million of taxpayers’ cash on a record 14 special advisers and still the First Minister cannot come up with an answer to a simple question. My mother used to say that every penny should be a prisoner because it came from the sweat of your father’s brow. The First Minister should be as cautious with public spending and the public purse. It is entirely reasonable to ask what has happened to that £54,000. VisitScotland has admitted to spending almost £1,000 on a pianist, more than £1,100 on flying in chefs from Gleneagles and more than £1,700 on ties. It has been reported that the First Minister chose not to stay in the hotel where the rest of the delegation stayed, but in the more exclusive Peninsula hotel, further away from the course. Suites at that hotel cost more than $2,000 a night. Will the First Minister confirm that he stayed in that hotel, explain why he wanted to stay in a more upmarket hotel than the rest of the delegation and what that cost?

It is possible to do all that this year and answer simple questions about the money that the First Minister has spent. I have to say that that answer plumbs the depths in finding anything to talk about except a simple question about a hotel bill. That £54,000 is more than twice what the average person earns in a year, but the First Minister cannot account for how he spent that much money in just a week. When The Daily Telegraph asked the Scottish Government to account—[Interruption.]

I am not sure whether we have quite got to the point of journalists not being allowed to ask questions but, if we have, we are in a very serious place. When The Daily Telegraph asked the Scottish Government to account for the whole half a million pounds spent on the Ryder cup, the Government said at first that it could not. Then it said that it could. Then VisitScotland accounted for what it spent. Then the Government told The Daily Telegraph that it would give details on 10 January. Now, two weeks after that deadline and two months after VisitScotland responded, the First Minister still cannot give an answer. I ask him again: how did he spend his cut of the half a million pounds spent on a trip to the golf? [Interruption.]

I welcome the unemployment figures—I genuinely do. I just want an explanation of the figures that I have given and of how the Government spent £54,000. The First Minister has still not explained it. The First Minister talks about VisitScotland. It has done its job: it has explained how it spent its money. We ask him to follow its example. We know that he went to extraordinary lengths to stop the public finding out that he spent £250 of their money on a pair of Chinese checked trousers when he forgot his tartan trews, but this is more serious. What do we know? We know that the First Minister spent half a million pounds on a trip to the Ryder cup and that he reportedly upgraded himself—at our expense—to stay in a hotel that is frequented by Beyoncé, Brad Pitt and Justin Bieber.

This is the question. For those who do not know the Peninsula Chicago, it is “for those who love to spoil themselves with a luxurious five-star experience, without losing that comfortable home-away-from-home feel.” The First Minister has to explain how he spent the money. He should understand that, in the real world, the people of Scotland will be disgusted at how he treats himself at their expense. Will he now at least have the decency to explain to them how he spent, in just one week, the £54,000 of taxpayers’ money that he still has not accounted for?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01815) You know that we always aim to please, Presiding Officer.

Both the First Minister and John Swinney have said that Scotland pays 9.9 per cent of tax revenues into the United Kingdom and receives back only 9.3 per cent of public spending. That suggests that Scotland pays in more to the UK than we get out. Could the First Minister tell me how much money is 9.9 per cent of tax revenues and how much money is 9.3 per cent of spending?

That is a classic First Minister answer: “If you don’t like the figures I give you, I have another set prepared from earlier on.” The First Minister did not answer the question that I asked him about the way in which he misrepresents those figures. According to the figures in his own “Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland” report, 9.9 per cent of revenue comes to £56.9 billion, and 9.3 per cent of spending amounts to £64.5 billion. So, actually, Scotland gets £7.6 billion more out of the United Kingdom than we put in. Is it not the case that, if the Scottish Government’s own figures show that we get more money out of the United Kingdom than we put into it, it is deeply misleading to try to give the opposite impression?

In all of that, the First Minister did not respond to the question that I asked about how his own figures show that we get more out than we put in. The First Minister should recall that the finance secretary, in a private paper to the Cabinet, confirmed that Scotland will have a larger deficit than the rest of the United Kingdom by 2016. Of course, that paper was for private consumption, not for the rest of us. If the First Minister could put down for a moment his statistical tommy gun and cease randomly spraying out figures in answer to questions that he was not asked, we might get somewhere. I have asked the First Minister about two specific figures: what Scotland pays into the United Kingdom and what the United Kingdom pays out to Scotland. Can he confirm that Scotland puts £56.9 billion into the UK in tax, as is stated on page 598 of his own white paper? Can he also confirm that we get £64.5 billion back, as per page 68? Those are his own figures. Can he confirm that his own figures are correct and show that Scotland gets more back from the United Kingdom than we put in? [Interruption.]

It is interesting that the First Minister has now denied what John Swinney said in his private paper, which is that we would have a greater deficit by 2016. I do not think that any of us should take lectures in economics from a First Minister—even a former Royal Bank of Scotland economist—who said in the chamber on 28 November: “We get 9.3 per cent of the spending, but we raise 9.9 per cent of the revenue; 9.9 per cent is greater than 9.3 per cent.”—[Official Report, 28 November 2013; c 25054.] Even a primary school child could tell us that that depends on the big figures that those are percentages of—it is not credible. Since the First Minister embarked on his referendum campaign, he has been making promises that he claims that he will deliver if Scotland votes yes. However, his own figures show that there would be even less money to spend if Scotland voted to go independent. In the real world, where we look at the figures, where we talk in private as we do in public, that is a fact. Is it not the truth that not only will the First Minister be unable to make good on those promises, he will not even be able to deliver on what we have right now?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01800)

The Scottish Government’s white paper compares Scotland’s growth rate with the growth rates of a selection of independent countries. If it were proved that Scots would be better off now had we matched the growth of those nations over the past 30 years, would that be a compelling reason to vote yes?

So, it is not the compelling reason that the First Minister had in his own white paper. That is interesting. The First Minister’s white paper says that Scots would be better off, if we take the period 1977 to 2007. We asked the Scottish Parliament’s financial scrutiny unit to look at the past 30 years for which figures are available. The same comparison, examined over the past 30 years, actually shows that each and every Scot would be nearly £2,500 worse off. What made the First Minister hand pick the 30-year period from 1977 to 2007 rather than use the most up-to-date figures that are available?

That is just so much noise—the First Minister did not answer the question that I asked him. With respect, his white paper chose those dates. It is incumbent on the First Minister to explain why so much of his prospectus is based on an argument that bears no scrutiny. The First Minister is asking the people of Scotland to trust his white paper. However, it has only one page on Scotland’s finances and it projects finances for just one year. It looks back to a period that favours the First Minister’s case, when the overwhelming evidence is that we would, over the past 10, 20 and 30 years, have been worse off. In his own words, he said that we would be £900 better off, but the truth is that over the past 30 years, by his own rationale, we would have been £2,500 worse off. That, of course, is the case where there are figures. Where, however, are the price tags for renationalising the Royal Mail, for transformational childcare or for his high-speed rail proposal? No one is suggesting that those are bad things. [Interruption.] Even in the real world, no one thinks that childcare and a rail link are bad things. However, we think that we need to know how we are going to pay for them. Every family in the country understands that. So, I say: “Go on. Don’t just tell us what you are going to propose. Give us just one—one!—of those price tags and let us see whether it is real.”

First of all, if we are going to look at this week’s vote, one can only presume that the Scottish National Party Government did not want transformational support for childcare, because it voted it down. Secondly, whatever figures the First Minister has just quoted, he is no longer defending his own approach justifying support for independence in his white paper. I did not say that the challenge for the white paper is that it is not ambitious enough; I said that it does not match its claims with any figures to make it credible and believable. The First Minister did not answer the question on prices, but what the Government cannot price the Parliament can. It would cost £1.16 billion for Royal Mail and £1.2 billion for childcare, but there is no explanation of how that would be paid for. As for the rail link, even the Scottish Parliament information centre cannot price that. For those of us who live in the real world, a shopping list without a price list is just a wish list, and according to the First Minister’s own figures we would have even less money to spend on those things. The First Minister has asked us to publish an alternative to his white paper, but is it not the case that the real alternative to the white paper is called the truth? [Interruption.]

I, too, wish everyone a happy and very peaceful new year as we look forward to all the excitement of 2014. The First Minister talks about the importance of Scotland’s future, but we should also be talking about the importance of Scotland’s present. The First Minister fails to talk about not just what will happen for young people in the future, but what we could do right now to help families across Scotland; that help is far more limited than it could be. Over the past few months we have seen a different side to the First Minister, which many of us did not know existed. We know that Alex Salmond has been arguing for 40 years to break up the United Kingdom, whether as a young radical in his party, a Royal Bank of Scotland economist, a back-bench MP or Scotland’s First Minister. However, it is only in recent months that we have found out exactly why that passion for independence burns so bright in him: it turns out that all along it was about child poverty, getting women back into work and a fairer welfare system for the most vulnerable. For 40 years he has been making the case, but only now has he chosen to share with us the profound reasons that converted him to the nationalist cause all those years ago: child poverty, childcare and welfare. It turns out that he is less “Braveheart”, more “Soccer Mom”. Some of us might be a little suspicious of the First Minister’s motives.

Let me make some progress first. We have been struggling to recall his famous child poverty speech; his tireless campaigning for improved childcare has sneaked under the radar; and his passion for a better welfare system has escaped most of us. The reason why we are suspicious is this: Alex Salmond and his Scottish National Party colleagues believed in independence while Labour was lifting hundreds of thousands of children out of poverty. He talks about the success of lifting children out of poverty since 1999, but that happened because of choices by a Labour Government in this place and at UK level, not simply because of devolution.

I can never reconcile the reality of what is happening in our communities with the figures that the First Minister puts forward. The reality is that it has stalled over a period. He is incapable of even acknowledging Labour’s record levels of employment among women through improved childcare, working tax credits and a range of other measures. While we were doing that, the SNP still campaigned for a separate Scotland. Who can forget that when Alex Salmond was asked in 2010 whether people should vote for a Labour Government with a record for compassion on welfare or a Tory Government that would attack the poor—as it always has—he said “Vote for Nick Clegg”? We know how that worked out. We must always judge people by their actions and not their rhetoric. We are supposed to believe that the leader of the SNP has been on a political journey from being a man who said that he did not mind Margaret Thatcher’s economic policies to one who has been transformed into a child poverty campaigner, albeit one who believes in cutting taxes to big business by 3p more than anything that a Tory chancellor could produce. The truth is, yet again, that the motion before us today is just the latest justification for a failed and unpopular ideology. Whether children are poor or rich, whether women work or stay at home, whether welfare is fair or unfair, the SNP would still believe in independence, and it should at least have the honesty to accept that. The SNP believes in independence because it is nationalist. [Interruption.]

That is not an unreasonable position, but I just wish that the SNP would be honest about it rather than try to package it as something that it is not. Today the First Minister set out a plan to deliver free school meals that was first promised in 2007. What a journey it has been; it was pledged seven years ago but never delivered because, perhaps understandably, other priorities were pursued. Now it has been reprised because the UK Government has acted on it and provided the money. This is the same UK Government that the motion states is driving thousands of children into poverty. The Scottish Government challenges that by copying that Government, and we are supposed to believe the SNP Government that could not provide free school meals in the previous session of Parliament when it says that with a smaller budget it can deliver the policy now. That is the logic that Alex Salmond expects Scotland to buy into, but the people of Scotland are not stupid. There is an argument for free school meals on health grounds, perhaps on educational grounds and even on societal grounds. However, is it, as the motion suggests, the most compelling approach to tackling child poverty in these tough times? At the moment, the poorest children already get free school meals. By extending the policy to all other children, the First Minister has chosen to spend the money that he has received on everyone else but the poorest children.

First of all, the SNP has been able to resist that argument since 2007 but, secondly, the child poverty organisations are also committed to addressing the question of childcare and believe that that is every bit as much of a priority. The reality is that the First Minister has done what Governments do: he has made a choice. At one level, it is an unenviable choice, because it is between good things. I would love to have a debate on the pluses and minuses of spending money on free school meals instead of childcare but we are not allowed to have that in here. All of a sudden, the test of one’s commitment to child poverty is about free school meals but I would argue that the debate is much richer and more substantial than that. For example, the First Minister could have chosen to reinvest some of the £1 billion that he has cut from anti-poverty measures that provided free breakfasts for some of the poorest children in our communities. That would have been a good thing. He could have chosen to invest in childcare and the early years to give those young people a better start. That would also have been a good thing. Instead, he chooses school meals. That choice, too, is a good thing but it comes at the expense of the other choices he could have made. He should at least have the bravery to be honest about that decision and make an argument for it against other options. Again, instead of doing that, he hides behind the referendum. When asked about the white paper, he said that the thing he was most proud of—remember this?—was his commitment to childcare. He had an opportunity to show that his new-found commitment to childcare was more than a referendum ploy—

Sit down. Members: Oh! [Interruption.]

What a shame—bless him. The First Minister had an opportunity to show that his new-found commitment to childcare was more than a referendum ploy and to start delivering for working families and children now. However, instead of making that start now, he says, “I can’t deliver childcare until after independence.” As a mother and someone who for 20 years taught some of the poorest children in our communities, I have to be honest and say that school meals would not be my priority in addressing child poverty. We have said—as the First Minister said before the holidays—that we would make our priority the 10,000 vulnerable children who would benefit from better childcare. Six weeks ago, it was the First Minister’s priority and, for all the noise from his front bench, it is not his priority now. Rather than help families now, he chooses to make it a false offer for the referendum. He has the power to do this now but he makes these people wait so he can engineer a false argument for changing the constitution. We know that this Government will stop at nothing to achieve a yes vote. It appears that it is so desperate, it would even vote against achieving what it claims is its flagship policy of childcare. The truth is that it has only one policy—independence, for better or worse. Everything else is a means to an end. I listened to the First Minister’s speech and what I heard was this: “Although I tell you childcare is my priority, it is not enough of a priority for me to find the resources right now to make it happen.” Families who are juggling jobs and childcare deserve better from a Government that cynically decides that although it has the money, it will not spend it on the things that were its priorities. I move amendment S4M-08707.3, to leave out from “deplores” to end and insert: “believes that the UK Government’s economic and social strategies have failed and threaten the progress made by the previous Labour administration in tackling child poverty; agrees that devolution allows the Scottish Parliament to take a different approach; notes that progress in tackling child poverty has stalled in Scotland under the current administration, and, while recognising the value of free school meals, calls on the Scottish Government to take action to deliver for children now, including providing 50% of two-year-olds with 600 hours of free early learning and care in 2014.”

We made the simple point that the Scottish Government could use the consequentials to deliver its commitment on childcare now. What is wrong with that? [Interruption.] It is your commitment.

I agree strongly with the member’s view that childcare helps vulnerable families above all others and that it is particularly important from the point of view of employment. Therefore, can he explain why his party’s choice is to spend money on free school meals—which, by definition, will not go to the poorest and most vulnerable children in our communities—rather than on its commitment to free nursery provision for 50 per cent of vulnerable two-year-olds? I would like to get an explanation of why that choice has been made.

1. In this last First Minister’s question time of the year, I wish everyone—and I mean everyone—a happy Christmas and a very peaceful new year. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01781)

Earlier this year, we were shocked to find out that proportionately more patients were dying in Lanarkshire than anywhere else in Scotland. This week, we found out why. According to staff, NHS Lanarkshire is in “a state of perpetual crisis”. That raises serious questions about the running of our health service. Alex Neil is blaming everyone—bar himself. When will the Scottish Government take responsibility for the problems in our national health service?

It is precisely because the problem is serious that the matter has been raised. The difficulty for the Scottish Government is that it appears to be responding to bad headlines rather than addressing problems of which we have been aware for years. On rare diseases, cancer drugs or trolley waits, it seems that a headline in the Daily Record is what is needed for the cabinet secretary to respond, rather than there being an understanding that these are huge problems that have to be addressed over time. The high number of deaths may have been unique to Lanarkshire, but the problems that caused them are endemic in Scotland: overworked nurses, overstretched doctors, not enough beds, and gaps in out-of-hours and weekend provision are all problems that have been growing for a number of years. Can the First Minister tell us why his health secretary is only now addressing the problem in his own constituency, although alarm bells have been ringing across Scotland for some time?

Firstly, that situation is not happening just in Lanarkshire, it is not just happening now and it is not happening simply because a measure was introduced to identify the problem. Had the First Minister listened to staff over the years, he would have known that there is a problem. We are now in a position in which only a third of nurses and midwives say that they can meet the conflicting demands during their time at work, and just a quarter think that there are enough staff to allow them to do their job properly. That is not something that we should be complacent about, nor has it happened just over the past couple of weeks. Healthcare Improvement Scotland uncovered weekend staffing levels as being a key problem in NHS Lanarkshire. Through freedom of information requests, we have a snapshot of staffing levels elsewhere. NHS Lothian has reported that its medical staff drops from more than 1,000 a day to just 25 at weekends, NHS Forth Valley has at the weekend half the nursing staff that it has on a week day, and in NHS Fife consultant numbers fall from 210 to 7 at the weekend. All over Scotland, hospitals are operating with minimal resources against increasing pressures, just as NHS Lanarkshire is.

What will it take for the First Minister to acknowledge that we have a serious problem in delivering the health service that we want for Scotland?

The First Minister has returned to his comfort zone; he wants this to be a fight between politicians about numbers and manifestos. Let us not worry that staff are saying that they cannot do the job or that NHS Lanarkshire “is in ... perpetual crisis” because he can show that his numbers are betters than ours. That is nonsense. The First Minister does not need to listen to me. Let him listen to Theresa Fyffe, the Royal College of Nursing Scotland’s director—[Interruption.]

I suspect that Theresa Fyffe knows a great deal more about the matter than any of us in the chamber. Less than an hour ago she said: “The Scottish Government cannot simply continue to say that the number of nurses working in the NHS is higher now than it was a couple of years ago—this misses the point entirely. We need enough appropriately skilled nurses—and other staff—working in the right places to both meet growing demand and deliver good quality care.” That is the challenge to which the First Minister needs to rise.

I have a question. Audit Scotland says that the pressures will increase, the British Medical Association says that the situation is unsustainable and the Royal College of Nurses is calling for a full review. Those calls are backed by The Herald newspaper, which is leading calls for an honest debate. Is the First Minister prepared to get beyond crisis management and agree to a full-scale review of NHS staffing and resources, and to confront with honesty the scale of the challenge that has been identified by health service staff and patients?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01754)

In 2007, the Scottish National Party pledged to ensure that children in primaries 1 to 3 would be in classes of 18 pupils or fewer. When he was asked in 2007 whether he could guarantee that that would be achieved in one parliamentary session, the First Minister told the chamber, “Yes, I can.” Nearly seven years on, is the First Minister closer to or further away from reaching that goal than he was when he took office?

So, in summary, “It wisnae me.” Talk about being in government and doing what you are supposed to do. Pupil teacher ratios are now worse than they were when Labour was in power, so even that defence does not help the First Minister. The answer is of course that, seven years on, the number and proportion of classes of 18 pupils or fewer have gone down not up. Pupils in primaries 1 to 3 are now less likely to be in classes of 18 or fewer than they were when Alex Salmond became First Minister. I thought that Scotland was on pause; now we find that it is on rewind. The number of primary school pupils on the school roll has gone up since 2007. That would suggest that—just to keep pace, let alone meet his own targets—for the First Minister to be serious about his pledges the number of primary school teachers ought to have increased, so can he tell us how many more primary school teachers have been hired since he came to office?

Our figures in primary school education were better before the First Minister came to power than they are now. What the First Minister said sounds like one of those answers that prove that the world is not round in order to get him through the next half hour. At some point, he needs to come back to the real world, where parents, teachers and children are. The reality is that he does not appear to have believed even in his own education policy; it was simply grist to the mill to change people’s votes and not to change the lives of our children and their educational opportunities. The number that I referred to is down, too. We have almost 1,000 fewer primary school teachers now than we had when the First Minister came to office. This is a First Minister whose promises on education are bogus, and the only things that are more bogus than his pledges are his attempts to keep them. The First Minister put class sizes at the heart of his education policy. In recent years, secondary school rolls have reduced, which should make it easier to have smaller class sizes. Has the number of teachers fallen faster or more slowly than the rate at which the number of pupils that they have to teach has dropped?

I hope that the First Minister was watching “Newsnight Scotland” last night, because his education secretary made the astonishing defence that up was down, that good was bad and that better was worse. The education secretary lives in a fantasy world; I suggest that the First Minister should stop listening to his education secretary and look at what is happening on the ground. If the First Minister wants to look at what councils are doing, let us look at Dundee City Council—the last time that I looked, it was an SNP administration. In its area, the number of pupils in primaries 1 to 3 who are in classes of fewer than 18 has gone down in one year by two thirds. That tells us that the problem is not for individual councils but for his Government. Instead of getting civil servants to find some bizarre defence from the figures, it is about time that the First Minister got his Government to confront what is happening in the real world to real families. There are now almost 3,000 fewer secondary school teachers than there were when he came to office and almost 4,000 fewer teachers overall. Class sizes are going up, not down. There is a pattern here, which we have seen in great form today. The First Minister makes a pledge based not on its merits but on how good a soundbite it is. He then hands the onus to someone else—usually councils. He starves them of cash and blames them when they fail to meet the bogus pledge that he tried to con the public with in the first place. That is cynicism on stilts, and it is not worthy of this Parliament at all. Here is the question—[Interruption.]

The children are obviously not away to their pantomime today. [Interruption.]

If we cannot trust the First Minister on his key pledge in his 2007 manifesto, and if somehow Scotland does vote yes next year, who will he blame when we find out that his white paper is not worth the mouse pad that it was googled on?

I am grateful for the opportunity on behalf of the Labour Party to support the motion of condolence on the passing of Nelson Mandela. I concur with everything that the First Minister said. I am all too aware that, given the capacity of Nelson Mandela, his energy, compassion and courage, and the forgiveness embodied in him, this is a life so immense that words can barely capture the character of the man or do him justice. As I was travelling through the centre of Glasgow today to get the train, I was reflecting on what I might say. I spotted flowers in abundance laid across the pavement, and I realised that they were there to mark the passing of Nelson Mandela. They were in the place, right at the very heart of Glasgow, that was named after him when he was given the freedom of the city. I am proud that Glasgow was the first city in the world to convey this freedom upon a man who was imprisoned because of his belief in equality and justice—a belief for which he was prepared to die. I recognise that, as the First Minister said, other cities such as Aberdeen followed. It was, of course, more than a gesture. Mandela spoke of the impact of the news on those in jail. It was an act of solidarity that gave them succour and told them that the world outside supported them. It was solidarity, but it was also a rebuke to the apartheid regime, both symbolically and in a practical way. In a perhaps typically Glaswegian approach, the creation of Nelson Mandela Place did not just involve renaming a street; of course, it was the street that housed the South African embassy, which meant that correspondence to the embassy had to be delivered in the name of the man who symbolised the world’s abhorrence of the apartheid regime that it defended. Indeed, I recall that postal workers would not deliver correspondence to the embassy if it was not properly addressed, which led eventually to the embassy being forced to get a post office box number to avoid the problem. All of that, of course, highlighted the increasing absurdity and isolation of its position. It took courage. There were those who spoke out and asked for action. It is important to reflect that the struggle against apartheid took leadership and the immense courage of those who were at the heart of the suffering, but it also took individual decisions to choose humanity, often in countries, such as Scotland, where there were family connections to South Africa. People acting in small ways right across Scotland and the United Kingdom led to international consequences. That involved people far beyond politicians, with Brian Filling, who we have seen this week, the churches, people of compassion and the trade unionists all coming together to reject the regime and its brutality. There are many examples over the years of people choosing the world that they wanted and fighting for it—people such as Bob Hughes, who led the Anti-Apartheid Movement at a UK level for many years. Of course, there is a strong tradition of solidarity in Scotland. Another example, which is perhaps not remembered so well, is the rectorial campaign at the University of Glasgow in 1962, which transferred a student election into an election that had an international impact. Students across parties supported Albert Luthuli, who was elected in his absence—a man who was awarded the Nobel peace prize for his struggle against apartheid. He was prominent in the ANC and could not leave his country to take on the rectorial duties, but the message of solidarity, even at that time, ran very strong. I am proud that our own Donald Dewar was part of that campaign and that a Luthuli scholarship still exists. Indeed, in the 1970s, a fellow student of mine on our politics course had come from South Africa to study because of the benefit of that scholarship. He was a bright young man who still could not vote in his own country and would not have a vote for many years to come. There was solidarity and there was a campaign, but it was not a campaign that those involved believed could easily be won. We remembered Soweto and the death of Steve Biko. I vividly remember standing in protest with many others in 1979 outside the South African embassy, pleading for clemency for Solomon Mahlangu, who was to be executed, and the absolute sadness when we realised that international pleading had failed and he had been killed. It seemed overwhelming and impossible that change might come. When it did and Nelson Mandela walked from jail tall, smiling, dignified and unbroken, how many across the world found hope again—a belief that change might be possible—because of that man and the individual decisions to boycott, support sanctions and challenge investments in South Africa? All of us could tell that that work could make a difference and that there was a point in politics and campaigning. Surely the awe in which we hold him is magnified by the way in which he responded. He sought to heal his country and unify through peace and reconciliation. We look now and say how right that was, but it was not an easy option or route to take. In the past few days, I am sure that many members have, like me, watched on television the lessons and message of Nelson Mandela. One image struck me like a physical pain. The truth and reconciliation process was being looked at. People spoke of their loss and suffering, confronted their tormentors, and their tormentors confronted their past. Archbishop Tutu had his head on a desk weeping, overwhelmed by the pain that truth and reconciliation bring. The man whom we mourn today for his courage and towering ability was dignified, but not a man who stood on his dignity. With his humanity, warmth and smile, he spoke to us, and he was of us. That makes his suffering over 27 years and his survival of it all the more remarkable. I recall when Nelson Mandela came to Glasgow to receive the freedom of the city. He came to George Square, and I recall the joy when he addressed us and then could not resist moving to the music. The folk singer Ian Davison wrote a song that captures that moment and told us that Nelson Mandela was not an ordinary leader, but one who could dance, too. He wrote: “We’d sung about him for years, And there were speeches everywhere. But I’ll never forget the cheers, When Mandela danced in the square.” We remember Nelson Mandela and seek to console and reach out to the family who lost him, who suffer most from his loss, and to the country that he so proudly served. He fought injustice when there seemed to be no chance of victory, but he fought, endured and won. When he won, he struggled as hard for peace as he had to defeat apartheid. Nelson Mandela was the best of Africa. He was the best of humanity. He was the best of us all.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01735)

I thank the First Minister very much for that update. Our thoughts are with those families who have been sorely affected by the bad weather, but also with all the brave people of the emergency services and other agencies who are working to get Scotland safe again, so that people can move about the country. The First Minister put childcare at the heart of his white paper on independence. Can he tell me what the final stage of his plans would cost, how many jobs would be created and what the average salary of the jobs would be if a separate Scotland was going to recoup the cost of the policy—[Interruption.] Forgive me, but I thought that the policy was a serious one. I asked what the average salary—[Interruption.] SNP back benchers are laughing, but perhaps we can get the answer to my question. How many jobs would be created and what would the average salary of those jobs be if a separate Scotland was going to recoup the cost of the policy, as the white paper says it would, in income tax?

Whatever that was, it was not an answer to the question that I asked. Perhaps the First Minister will want to reflect on the fact that modern women are not too impressed by men who promise the earth without providing any evidence that they are serious about doing so. On that evidence, he is not serious about the matter, so let me try and help him. The Scottish Parliament information centre estimates the cost of the policy to be at least £1.2 billion a year, and that is without the cost of new buildings and facilities to meet increased demand. Since the First Minister has promised for months that the white paper would answer all the questions about independence, he must have worked out how many jobs would need to be created, and at what average salary, for the policy to pay for itself. Unfortunately, in 670 pages, there was enough room to explain what time zone we would be in, but not those details. Will the First Minister give Scottish families, men and women the details that they deserve to know?

First of all, the First Minister reread the answer to the question that I did not ask him. He has not yet explained how he would cost the bit beyond the first term. He simply ignored that. He then says that the policy is transformational but does not give us the figures. We need to know the figures for it to be more than simple assertion. I have done some estimates of my own. [Interruption.] In order to be of assistance to the First Minister, of course. Let us give the First Minister the maximum benefit of the doubt. There are currently 90,000 women unemployed. Let us imagine that they all get jobs because of the policy, even the ones without children. To give the First Minister the biggest possible tax base to draw from, let us say that the 35,000 jobs that he says will be created in childcare do not go to any of those women but all go to unemployed men. That is 125,000 people off the dole, saving at the most £370 million in jobseekers allowance. Those people need collectively to pay £830 million in income tax for the policy to pay for itself as the much-vaunted—[Interruption.]

I am only quoting what the white paper says. It is supposed to be the bible. It is the white paper that says it, and presumably the First Minister will rest on the figures in the white paper. Does that not mean that, on average, every single one of them would have to earn more than £42,000 a year, almost twice the average wage, for an independent Scotland to recoup the money?

Now we have the truth of it—this is not about men and women struggling with childcare; it is about getting on to the benefits of independence. How disgraceful it is that the First Minister is using the issue as an opportunity to argue about independence, rather than to address the needs of families across Scotland. The First Minister says that the policy will benefit lots and lots of people. I hate to tell him that that is not good enough. His white paper is predicated not on output, but on the money that would be recouped through income tax. He has not been able to show us the figures. If he is telling us that his white paper does not tell us the truth, that will come as no surprise to us, but it might come as some surprise to the members behind him. If the First Minister does not like my figures—and as his own figures do not appear to exist—I will give him some figures that he has not provided today. According to Scottish Government figures, if 105,000 women joined the workforce—that is more than the number of women who are currently unemployed—the tax revenues would be less than half of the most optimistic estimates of the cost of the proposed policy. Last week, the First Minister googled his answers, but even Google cannot make those figures work. In order that we do not have to wait for a freedom of information request to get the fag packet that the policy was worked out on—crudely, to win votes for independence, not to meet the needs of families—will he now publish full costings of his flagship policy, or admit that it is a shameless attempt to con the people of Scotland, which we have all seen through?

I thank the First Minister. I appreciate his statement and acknowledge the way in which politicians and Governments at every level and from across parties have come together to ensure that the things that need to be done are being done. Everyone appreciates that. There is a time for questions—there are many questions—but now is also a time for reflection. On Friday night, the frailty but also the strength of humanity shocked us and made us humble, and even proud. On that Friday night—the last payday before Christmas—friends and family gathered in one of Glasgow’s warmest and friendliest pubs—then tragedy struck. It reminded us of the frailty of human life. When I heard the news, I was going home after spending my Friday as the people in the Clutha had been spending it—listening to a band in a pub. My son was playing in that band. Even now, I feel the shock of hearing that, for the people in the Clutha, their evening had ended in such tragedy. Our hearts go out to the families of the nine victims and all who were injured. What happened to the people in the Clutha Vaults is difficult to fathom, but the response of the people of Glasgow was truly remarkable. We would all like to think that when faced with such an incident we would do the right thing, but none of us really knows until we are tested. Well, Presiding Officer—hundreds of Glaswegians were tested on Friday night and we found out something marvellous about them all: their determination to do the right thing and not to worry about the cost. I am proud of the friends of mine who I know stopped to help their neighbours, and we are all proud of all those who refused to pass by on the other side. A lesson on the strength and beauty of humanity went out from Glasgow on Friday night. We can also be proud of members of our emergency services, some of whom were on the scene within a minute. Police, fire workers and ambulance staff did not stop to grieve the loss of three of their own, but instead focused solely on saving lives, while council workers volunteered immediately to get in and do the practical things that needed to be done, including feeding people, making the street secure and so on. Those people are still involved in the aftermath—helping, supporting, caring for and restoring Glasgow. We know that for some people this is more than just an event or an incident. Many will mourn now, while others will suffer injuries and trauma from their experience. For them, life will never be the same again and our thoughts and prayers are with them all. Out of that tragic loss, however, we have gained pride in the spirit of our community. Surely that gives us all some light and hope.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01716)

Muchas gracias. Yesterday, the Spanish Prime Minister made it clear that, by leaving the United Kingdom, Scotland would also leave the European Union and would have to reapply as a new member. What part of that statement does the First Minister not understand?

I know that the First Minister likes to quote selectively, but that takes the biscuit. Looking for reaffirmation, where does he find it? However, let us hear what the Spanish Prime Minister, Señor Rajoy, said. “I would like that the consequences of that secession be presented with realism to Scots. Citizens have the right to be well informed and particularly when it’s about taking decisions like this one ... I know for sure that a region that would separate from a member state of the European Union”—[Interruption.]

I am not sure whether that is the defence that the SNP is going to prosecute. Dearie me. Señor Rajoy said: “I know for sure that a region that would separate from a member state of the European Union would remain outside the European Union and that should be known by the Scots”. The Spanish Prime Minister is being straighter with the people of Scotland than the First Minister is. Since, in any negotiation, Señor Rajoy will have a veto, should the First Minister not listen?

I know what a nation is; the problem is that the First Minister does not seem to understand what a veto is. It does not matter who else he quotes, if there are 28 states with a veto they can use it if they choose to do so. This is the First Minister who said that he had EU legal advice “in terms of the debate”, which did not exist in terms of reality. The President of the European Commission, Mr Barroso, has said that Scotland would have to reapply to the EU, and now the Spanish Prime Minister agrees with him. However, in Salmond’s world they are wrong. Here is negotiation Salmond style. Yesterday, he said that without Scottish electricity England’s lights would go off—as though he is Vladimir Putin and the rest of the UK is the Ukraine. What is the First Minister going to turn off in Spain— Members: Fishing rights!

What is the First Minister going to turn off in Spain if it insists that Scotland is not in the EU? Is he going to threaten to blockade the North Sea again, as he did in June this year?

I used to say to my children, “What you want is not necessarily what you get.” The First Minister needs to understand that it is not his assertion that matters, but what people are entitled to do. If people cannot agree, they can disagree, or they can agree on conditions, and we do not know what those conditions would be. The reality is that the white paper—so vaunted, like an Argos catalogue but without the prices—is truly historic: no document has become obsolete quite so quickly. What it says about keeping the pound is just plain wrong. Now we know that what it says about Scotland staying in the European Union is just plain wrong. However, the First Minister thinks that if he asserts things often enough they become true, and that, if he says that it is common sense or as sure as night follows day, his next statement will be believed however unbelievable it is in reality. What does it say about Scotland when Scots have to listen to a foreign Government to find out the truth?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Today at First Minister’s question time, the First Minister said that he had a letter from the European Commission’s secretariat-general that implies that an independent Scotland could apply for European Union membership from within. He omitted to say a number of other things about that letter. He omitted to say that it goes on to undermine entirely the points that the First Minister made. He omitted to say that it was not a response from the EC to the Scottish Government. As the First Minister’s official spokesman confirmed this lunch time, the First Minister omitted to say that he does not know who the letter was sent to or what that person asked, and that they had found this random letter through a trawl of the internet. Presiding Officer, I believe that the First Minister’s use of that letter was an attempt to deceive the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish people. Can the Presiding Officer tell me whether government by Google is in order?

Will the member take an intervention?

Surely the point is that the Government needs to invest the money in order to let women work and then get the resources, which means that it has to put in the money up front. The investment should be made immediately—surely the First Minister could do that now.

If that is the First Minister being positive, heaven help us when he decides to turn negative. His speech was entirely in tune with his world view, which is rooted entirely in negativity and grievance. All of his political life, he has wanted to free Scotland from the United Kingdom, and that is his view of what the United Kingdom wants to do to Scotland. I understand that the First Minister has started quoting Nehru on national identity. I wish that before he published the white paper he had taken on another quote from Nehru: “a theory must be tempered with reality.” Without that, his paper becomes more of a wish list and he appears more like Nero. There is a case for independence that, although I do not believe in it, can at least claim to be coherent. It has been put by the First Minister’s former deputy, Jim Sillars, and involves Scotland having its own currency and not being a member of the European Union. Anyone who truly believes the First Minister’s mantra that the best people to govern Scotland are those who live and work here would follow that view, and Alex Salmond certainly used to when he called sterling a “millstone round Scotland’s neck.” Now he is claiming ownership of that millstone and demanding the right to wear it still. The First Minister claims that his white paper is full of detail, but I have to tell him that there is an enormous difference between a lot of detail and a lot of words. Far from being “tempered with reality”, the white paper is assertion-rich. On the pound, for example, it says on page 85: “Scotland will continue to use the pound.” Members: Hear, hear. [Interruption.] I did not realise that SNP members would be quite so true to form at every opportunity. Let us imagine that that were true. We would then have an independent Scotland that relied on a foreign bank and foreign taxpayers for our currency and a foreign Parliament, from which we had withdrawn Scottish representation, would draw up the rules. [Interruption.] I do not know whether members have realised this but that independent Scotland would have its interest rates, tax policy, spending policy and borrowing limits set by a foreign country. It would be the greatest loss of sovereignty for Scotland since Edward invaded in 1296. That is, of course, if we could cut a deal to keep the pound. Yesterday, Prime Minister David Cameron said that such a deal was “highly unlikely”. [Interruption.] Well, I expect that he is entitled to his opinion in these negotiations. In saying that, he echoed the words of George Osborne, Ed Balls and of course Carwyn Jones, the First Minister of Wales, who equally has an interest in these matters. Even if they agree to it, the likelihood is that the people in the rest of the United Kingdom would require a referendum to join a currency union, just as they would if they were to join the euro. Imagine Scotland’s future currency depending on a referendum in which no Scots would have a vote. How would a politician persuade the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland that the Scots who had just left them should keep the pound, especially as the Scottish Government’s case for leaving is based on the view that the rest of the United Kingdom has held us back ever since the union was created? If they needed evidence of that view, they had only to listen to the First Minister’s speech. The idea that we would abuse the rest of the United Kingdom for doing us down and then go back to it saying, “Could you do us a favour and let us share our currency?” simply beggars belief. We would also need people to agree to the lender of last resort, which would mean that, if a Scottish bank needed a bailout, English, Welsh and Northern Irish taxpayers would foot the bill. The Bank of England is funded by taxpayers, but because Scotland would not pay tax to the rest of the United Kingdom it would not pay a penny itself. How can the First Minister think that anyone north or south of the border believes that that deal could be done? Even his former economic adviser John Kay says that a deal for a separate Scotland to keep the pound would be incredibly difficult to reach. He says that the whip hand would be with the rest of the United Kingdom. Professor Kay, whom the First Minister trusted to give him advice on the economy, says that the conditions that the rest of the UK would impose are likely to be too restrictive to be desirable. Alex Salmond’s economic adviser says that there would need to be a plan B—a separate Scottish currency—but in the white paper we have a plan A that is not tempered with reality and no plan B at all.

That is just completely ludicrous. [Interruption.]

On that most basic part of the plan, for all its 670 pages and 170,000 words, the white paper cannot say what currency a separate Scotland would have. Let us remember what Professor Kay said about the fundamental argument that runs through the whole white paper: “I think people who talk about what independence would be like in economic terms need to get beyond vague aspirational statements of a rather ludicrous kind: ‘In an independent Scotland we would have the powers to tackle poverty in Scotland’”. He went on: “Nor should we devote much time to arguments for independence which are of the kind that an independent Scotland would have lots more money from some unexplained source and would therefore be able to avoid making choices about taxation and spending and debt, which rather unfortunately have to be made in the framework of the United Kingdom or indeed in any framework other than that which characterises cloud cuckoo land.”

If that were transformational and the First Minister believed that it was that important, he would start now. [Interruption.]

I think that the First Minister has discovered the issue of childcare only very recently. Let me tell him that it is something that I have understood all my working and personal life. That is why—[Interruption.]

That is why I offered to work with the First Minister to establish a childcare commission to look at exactly how we would fund childcare right now. I offer that to him in good faith again now: I will work with him on his budget to ensure that childcare is properly funded. Let us meet and we will discuss that. He is the man with the budget. [Interruption.]

I will take his nodding as an agreement that he will meet me and we will look at the budget and how we fund childcare.

Yes.

We have a £30 billion budget. I am happy to work with the First Minister—[Interruption.]

I have said that the First Minister has a budget. We across the parties will work with him to deliver childcare changes now. It is clear that he thinks that that is a killer point. I am very committed on childcare, and he should be, too. He should put his money where his mouth is and make a difference right now. [Interruption.]

If this debate were not so serious, it would be entirely laughable. We have a white paper that does not answer fundamental questions about the currency and the European Union but manages to answer questions about what my home telephone number will be and what we will call this country after independence. The First Minister mistakes words for answers, and the people of Scotland will understand that. On better childcare, reform of the council tax and relieving the victims of the bedroom tax, the reality is that we could do all those things now if he were serious about making this Parliament work. A can-do attitude does not sit with this Government, because its case relies on saying what it cannot do. It is a theory of a nation that is not tempered by reality. This is a Government that promises better childcare if we vote for independence but which in six years has not been able to deliver an extra hour of physical education for our children. It has been argued that the white paper is all pros and no cons. I disagree. The white paper is littered with con tricks. Scotland deserves better and Scotland will see through it. I move amendment S4M-08407.1, to leave out from “welcomes” to end and insert: “believes that Scotland enjoys the best of both worlds, a strong Scottish Parliament in a strong UK; notes the publication of the Scottish Government’s guide to an independent Scotland, and looks forward to a debate over the next year that reflects the priorities of the people and strengthens the position of Scotland as a partner in the UK rather than as a separate state.”

Will the member give way?

One of those activists is, of course, Jim Sillars, who said that to be a separate, independent Scotland, we would need a separate currency. What is his legacy to the member?

Will the member take an intervention?

John Swinney pretends that everybody in the rest of the United Kingdom is a Conservative, which is not true. He denies the radical voices across the United Kingdom that believe the same things as Labour does. The issue is not about being Scottish or English but about being progressive or not progressive.

What we have today does not mark the beginning of the end of the United Kingdom, but perhaps it marks the beginning of the end of the yes campaign. The white paper has 670 pages, but they are 670 pages of assertion and uncertainty, amplified by a statement from the Deputy First Minister that was a full exercise in assertion without evidence. There is still no guarantee on the currency, and the much-vaunted legal opinion on our EU membership is noticeable only by its absence. The headline offer is another promise on childcare that the Scottish Government could deliver now but refuses to do so. Children are being denied the chance of proper care until their parents vote the way that the Scottish National Party wants them to. How cynical is that? Beyond today’s events, the fundamental questions remain unanswered. Does not the Deputy First Minister accept that she cannot guarantee Scots what currency they would have for their wages, mortgages, pensions and savings because her plan is to rely on the good will of the rest of the United Kingdom, who are the same people whom she claims are doing us down and that is why we need to leave the United Kingdom in the first place? Of course, the Deputy First Minister says that if Scotland is not allowed to keep the pound, we shall simply default on our debts. The reality is this: the SNP is asking for a divorce but wants to keep the joint bank account. So, is plan B simply to do a runner? [Interruption.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01690)

This week, the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a respected independent think tank often quoted by the First Minister, said that because of falling North Sea oil revenues and an ageing population, an independent Scotland would face significant tax rises or public spending cuts. I do not suppose that any of us here imagines that we are going to get an answer, but with a cock of the head and an indignant sideways look, could the First Minister tell us why the IFS is scaremongering like that?

The IFS is just asking us to look at the real world. Why would we bother with all that malarkey when we can just make things up as we go along? How will we deal with an ageing population? Presumably we will all just get younger under independence. There will be £300,000-worth of Oil of Olay for each man, woman and child. Of course, the IFS said that even in its most optimistic of forecasts, income tax would have to go up by 8p or VAT would have to rise to 27 per cent to fill the fiscal black hole. Chuckling at his own jokes, as he likes to do, and selectively quoting lines that suit his argument—I am sure that he is looking for them right now—could the First Minister tell us why the people of Scotland should believe him rather than the evidence of their own eyes?

Another of the First Minister’s tricks is to go on and on answering a question that he was not asked. When the IFS says that in its most optimistic forecast income tax would have to go up by 8p or VAT rise to 27 per cent to fill the fiscal black hole, only the First Minister could say that the IFS validates his position. It does not. Indeed, I would not be surprised if convicted Enron executives across the United States were, at the moment, planning their appeals, saying, “I know we fiddled the figures, but Alex Salmond has taken it to a whole new level.” With every economic paper the First Minister publishes, Fred Goodwin must feel a day closer to redemption; each prospectus must make Bernie Madoff spit out his breakfast in admiration. Feeling free to quote a former Labour chancellor in a falsetto voice, to dig up a blog that he was trawling through last night or to give us some more selective quotes like the last few we just got, can the First Minister explain to us why the fiscal black hole exposed by the IFS does not actually exist and why there is nothing to worry about after all?

The First Minister is guilty not just of selective quoting, but of selective thinking. The First Minister says that the IFS is helpful, but only to the extent that it agrees with him. We know that SNP back benchers are helpful to the First Minister only when they agree with him, but he ought to look at the whole of the IFS study and take it on board. Just like at the start of his campaign, the First Minister is going to the cinema on Tuesday. What is he going to see—“Historic Day V” or “Honey I Shrunk the Fiscal Gap”? If the First Minister is to be believed, we will not just be a new country after independence, but he will invent a new arithmetic. While the choice in every other country in the world is between tax rises and cuts in spending, Alex Salmond will have us believe that we are the only country in which the future is this: how big a tax cut can we give to big business and how much more can we spend on good things? Is it not the case that at the very heart of next week’s white paper and at the heart of everything that the Government does is the belief that if the First Minister and his colleagues say something confidently and often enough, no matter how wrong it is, the people of Scotland will be daft enough to believe it?

Presiding Officer, I move, That the Parliament expresses its deep regret and sadness at the death of Helen Eadie MSP; offers its sympathy and condolences to Helen’s family; recognises her proud record in Scottish politics as a parliamentarian, a campaigner and a constituency MSP, and acknowledges her as a true champion for the Fife communities that she represented for 14 years. I rise to move the motion of condolence with a heavy heart and a sadness at the loss of Helen Eadie that I know is shared across the chamber and far beyond, and still shocked at the suddenness of her illness and her passing. I know that Helen’s family, who are here today, have been touched and moved by the warmth of the tributes to Helen and the support to them at this terrible, rawest time of loss, when they will so keenly feel the gap left by the passing of Helen. I thank the party leaders, the Presiding Officers, members of the Scottish Parliament past and present, members of Parliament, councillors and folk from all airts and pairts—Fife and elsewhere in Scotland—who joined us at her funeral to mark her passing and celebrate the life of a woman who defied simple definition. Helen was one of the class of 1999. She was part of that group who came together as the Scottish Parliament was created. She was marked out from the beginning as a woman of deep passion for a politics that was inclusive, and as a woman who was driven by a desire to create a better, fairer Scotland. She was spurred by a deep conviction that injustice, whether social, political or economic, could be tackled—it did not have to be this way. From the start, it was evident that Helen, as a socialist and co-operator, did not simply talk about what she cared about; she campaigned, she championed and she got things done. Born in Stenhousemuir, Helen had a lifelong commitment to the values of the Labour and co-operative movement. Leaving school at 15, she quickly became involved in trade union activity—and I understand that, equally quickly, she was sacked for that trade union activity. She went on to work for the GMB in London for many years and she influenced the Labour Party at its very heart and centre throughout the 1970s, an achievement that she was so modest about that most of us were not properly aware of what she had done. When Helen and her family returned to Scotland in the mid-1980s, she was appointed to the post of manager of West Fife Enterprise, starting her new job on the first day of the miners strike in 1984. Her evident love for all of Fife’s communities and her passion in support of the ex-mining communities in particular, working with the Coalfields Regeneration Trust among others, was shaped by the impact of that strike on the families and communities whom she tried hard to support through those times. Helen’s CV is a rich one of great achievement from a time when women were far less visible in political life than they should have been. She was a pioneer for women and a lifelong commitment to equality shaped her every action. Helen was far more than her list of achievements. She was a woman of great warmth and compassion and I was struck by the fact that the new members of our group after the 2011 elections all gave testimony to her warmth and her welcome to them when they first came to the Parliament at what was a very difficult time for the Labour Party. She could inspire great loyalty and affection, and that is no more evident than among her constituents. That, I believe, was because of her focus on making things happen. Not only did she talk about what she could do; she actually delivered. I understand that her commitment to childcare brought her to establish a co-operative nursery in London many years ago that is still going strong. Watching Helen champion the cause of disabled workers at Remploy or speaking out on behalf of families without the proper care and support that they needed, I was always struck by the almost physical impact on her—the emotional drain on her of the desire to give them a voice. She did not simply represent people; she stood with them. Going beyond simple empathy, she felt their troubles and that gave her an even steelier resolve to get the help or action required. When, on occasion, she incurred the wrath of the Presiding Officer, it was always her overwhelming sense of injustice and her desire to make the case for action that led her to ignore the warnings from the chair to draw her remarks to a conclusion. There is no doubt that some people underestimated Helen’s capacities and abilities. She did not fit the stereotype of a politician. It is equally true to say that it was her unique, non-stereotypical approach to politics that engendered such love and affection from her constituents and all those who needed her to work as effectively as she did in the cross-party groups on which she served. Helen was an unlikely rebel—and we all know how much party leaders love rebels. But rebel she did on occasion, always driven not by a desire to be noticed but by her absolute conviction of the right or wrong of an issue, which led her to act. Helen was a fine parliamentarian, taking her role on committees seriously and tirelessly looking at legislation and interrogating ministers to ensure that they were held to account. She was an internationalist, proudly and fiercely pro-Europe when being so was not always in fashion in the Labour Party, and until her death championed the interests of people across eastern Europe, most recently Bulgaria. Her constituents’ love and admiration translated into political support at elections, not least in 2011 when many of us suffered electoral defeat and difficult times. I believe that that support was a harvest that she earned for the work that she did, but that harvest was not the purpose of her work. Her work, her motives and her campaigning were not about securing votes but about making a difference in people’s lives and I believe that that is one of the many lessons that we can take from Helen Eadie about how to do politics. Helen was a woman with a twinkle in her eye and a woman of modesty, loyalty, great warmth and deep compassion, and I count myself privileged to have been for many years a recipient of her kindness and generous praise. Above all, however, she was a woman who knew love in her long and happy marriage to Bob and who in equal measure loved and was loved by her daughters, her son-in-law, her beloved grandchildren and her family. Those who attended yesterday’s funeral and saw all those wonderful photographs of Helen’s life must, like me, have been struck by how happy she always seemed, how warm and enriched her family life was and how much more bitter it now makes the loss that her family is to be denied her planned retirement, when she was going to be able to spend even more time with her precious boys. I was asked what Helen Eadie’s legacy would be. I think that it is this: that politics can be honest; that political action can be part of, not separate from, communities; that politicians doing their job can make the world a better place; that as a society we can co-operate, not compete; that it is possible to do things in a different way; and that injustice in all its forms should be refused. Above all, her legacy to her beloved family is to know and understand the values of equality, justice and community and to know what love really is. We salute Helen in all her many facets; thank her for all she did; and mark the passing of a wife, mother, mother-in-law, sister and grandmother, whose loss to those who loved her most is beyond words. Farewell, Helen. We shall miss you. [Applause.]

I am proud to speak in the debate. In 2011, as a consequence of the reorganisation of the boundaries for Scottish Parliament elections, I was elected to represent the area that covers the Govan shipyard, which is a privilege that I know my predecessors Nicola Sturgeon and Gordon Jackson took very seriously. Across the water, Bill Kidd was given the honour of representing the area that includes the Scotstoun yard. On the opening of the Parliament, one of his predecessors—the late Donald Dewar—said: “In the quiet moments today, we might hear some echoes from the past: the shout of the welder in the din of the great Clyde shipyards”. The twin centres of Clyde shipbuilding, and their sister yard in Rosyth, are a source of great pride, not just to those of us who are lucky enough to represent them, but to all of us who have a sense of Scottish history, an interest in our country’s industrial heritage and the desire to create and retain high-skilled, well-paid jobs for our fellow Scots.

Ian Davidson stands second to none in championing the interests of shipyard workers. He has fought to secure jobs in the face of the threat that the commitment of Gil Paterson and his party to separate Scotland from the rest of the United Kingdom poses for those workers. Perhaps Gil Paterson and his party should be a little more honest about what their prospectus is. Those black and white pictures of armies of working-class men flooding in and out of the shipyard gates, bending steel and metal against a backdrop of cranes and docks, and building floating marvels, are iconic images that are integral to the history of Glasgow and Scotland. Jimmy Reid famously said: “We don’t only build ships, we build men.” We only have to listen to two of those great men—Sir Alex Ferguson and Billy Connolly—to get a sense of the pride that was felt about those workplaces and the special people who made up the workforce. The fact that we in Scotland possess those amazing skills and expertise, which were once the envy of the world, is a source of great pride to all of us. Sadly, our competitors in other countries did not just sit back and admire what we did in Scotland and across the UK; they, too, learned how to build such amazing ships. They invested in their industries and found any competitive edge that they could to take us on at that game. At one point in the early 1900s, the Clyde built one fifth of the world’s ships and, at its peak, shipbuilding in Scotland employed 100,000 people. Scotland still has a proud shipbuilding industry, but it is not what it once was—we know that. The days of thousands of young men leaving school and walking into an apprenticeship in the shipyards the very next day have gone, yet the industry is still a key one for Scotland. It provides not just thousands of jobs but, with them, good wages and high skills to boot. The decision to go ahead with the aircraft carriers, ordered by a Labour Prime Minister from Fife, may have been viewed as controversial in some quarters, but it was not viewed as such by the thousands of men and women who set about that mammoth project in the knowledge that it would provide for their families in the coming years. It was a lifeline for those workers, but it was a project that had a clear end date and, sadly, that end date is close. There will no longer be enough work on the Clyde to sustain the workforce at its present capacity. The fact that the 800 workers affected knew that this day would come makes it no less of a blow to them and to our shipbuilding industry. In responding to the news from the Secretary of State for Defence earlier this month, the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, said much that I agree with. Yes, we are all saddened for the proud shipbuilders in Portsmouth, and we remember the solidarity that exists across the workforce, wherever it is based. It is beyond argument that there has been a steady decline in our shipbuilding industry over a long number of years, which should worry us all. I, too, am concerned about our reliance on naval contracts and the uncertainty that comes from the gaps in those order books.

I am not clear what point the minister is making. We must recognise something about which the Government has done nothing. It spoke about diversification only last week, after the crisis emerged, rather than doing the work of Government in the long period beforehand. Nicola Sturgeon has my full support in exploring any diversification routes that we can explore to move on from dependence on the Ministry of Defence for thousands of jobs, although it appears that BAE Systems is an obstacle to that. It does a particular kind of job and wants to continue doing it. Perhaps we could have done more. We all knew that this day would come. Perhaps we should have come together across parties and Governments long before now and attempted to map a long-term future for our shipbuilding industry. However, it is not too late. We stand ready to engage in that debate, to learn from our neighbours the way that they once learned from us, to help to manage any change and to exploit future opportunities for the world-class skills and facilities that we have on the Clyde, at Rosyth and in our defence industries. If Germany and our other neighbours in Europe can compete at the high end with Korea and China, let us understand what we have to do. Let us get round the table with the United Kingdom Government, the management and the trade unions and work together to save our shipyards. We can call it a summit, a commission, a task force or whatever, but it will have my full support and that of the Scottish Labour Party. However, we must recognise that any change cannot and will not happen overnight. A diversification plan will take many years and much investment to implement. Scotland will not become a world leader in shipbuilding by sheer will alone or because the Scottish National Party says so. If we are to have a future in shipbuilding, it will be possible only if we retain the skills and capacity that we currently have in Scotland. If the workers leave the shipyard gate with no prospect of returning anytime soon, the skills that have been passed down the generations will be lost with them. There will be no one to teach the next generation how Scots built ships. The one thing that we have—our skills—will be lost. If we are to retain those skills, we need to keep the jobs on the Clyde and, no matter how inconvenient it is for some, there is only one game in town: our only option for bridging the gap between the carrier project that kept Govan and Scotstoun open and any future plans for shipbuilding is naval contracts. Members should make no mistake: if naval contracts dry up, the skills and capacity on the Clyde will go with them and the shipbuilding industry will be lost to Scotland. No one in the chamber would welcome that prospect. There is a serious prospect of more naval contracts coming to the Clyde. Philip Hammond has announced three ocean patrol vehicles and, of course, the big prize—type 26 frigates. Despite the conspiracy theorists, he has also insisted that the Clyde is the best place in the United Kingdom to build those ships. On commercial grounds, there is no contest. There is now only one barrier to the future of Scottish shipbuilding: the referendum on Scottish independence. Let us be absolutely clear: complex warships such as the type 26 frigates will not be built in an independent Scotland. Common sense tells us that Governments of any stripe will ensure that high-end defence projects are built within their own territories.

The exemption applies precisely because we are inside the United Kingdom. [Interruption.] Members cannot wish that away. The Clyde is the best place inside the United Kingdom but, if we are not in the United Kingdom, the contract will not be let to an independent Scotland. [Interruption.]

I have acknowledged Nicola Sturgeon’s work with, and commitment to, the shipyards for which she once acted and I accept that she has a good understanding of the challenges that the industry faces, so I am at a loss to understand some of the wild misrepresentations that she has offered over the past few weeks. Nicola Sturgeon has said that the Clyde is the only place where we can build these ships now. Let us put aside the fact that she argued her case even when Portsmouth was still open, but she knows that the UK Government has made it clear that the recent decision is reversible and that Portsmouth could be fired up in plenty of time to take on the work if Scotland were to leave the United Kingdom. Nicola Sturgeon has said that the UK Government currently orders warships from Korea and collaborates with Australia on defence projects. The UK Government ordered a tanker from Korea and worked with the Australians on design work. That lack of candour and honesty has been the hallmark of the SNP’s approach to the referendum. The SNP tells us that there are no consequences and no downside to a yes vote, even when it comes to people’s jobs.

For the avoidance of doubt, let us be clear that if Scotland votes yes next year, it will be the death knell of a proud industry. [Interruption.]

That is not defeatism but the real world. If SNP members do not believe me, they should come and join the people in the real world who work in the industry. John Dolan of Scotstoun said: “It is quite clear if Scotland votes yes, we will not be building ships for the UK Government”—

Listen to the men who work in the industry. We know what you think. You should understand what the people in the shipyards think. Raymond Duguid of Rosyth said: “If Scotland was independent, no one in Scotland could bid to build type 26. So that would, yes, decimate the industry”—

Duncan McPhee of Scotstoun said: “we would be greatly reduced or completely finished as a shipbuilding industry”. John Wall of the Confederation of Shipbuilding and Engineering Unions has said that, to his mind, there is no way on God’s earth that under an independent Scotland we will any longer be in the fight. Eric McLeod, GMB convener at Babcock Marine Rosyth, said: “No UK Ministry of Defence means no more shipbuilding jobs in Scotland.”

As Donald Dewar foretold, we have heard the shout of the welder in the din of the great Clyde shipyards, and it is time that the Scottish Government listened. The shipyard workers have spoken out to protect their industry. SNP members may condemn me, but they ought to listen to what these men have to say about the consequences of next year’s vote. When people come to vote on 18 September next year, they will do so for many reasons and this may be a factor. I suspect that there are people on the Government benches who care about the shipbuilding industry but privately accept that the closure of the shipyards would happen and is a price worth paying in order for Scotland to be independent. However, the least that they can and should do is to be honest with the people whom they represent about the consequences of such a decision. Jobs on the Clyde are not the reason why I support the United Kingdom. I believe that our argument is far deeper and richer. However, I have to say in all seriousness that, had I been a nationalist over these past few weeks, I am sure that I would have at least paused for reflection on whether my commitment to my political project would come at the cost of people’s jobs. At least be honest and tell them, “You may lose these shipbuilding jobs, but it is a price worth paying for Scotland to be separate”—

The fact of the matter is that, in this debate, the people within the industry tell us the consequences and the people who support independence tell us that we should not listen to those voices in the industry. That is unacceptable. If people cannot speak truth to power, what is the point of this Parliament and what is the point of trade unionists who are committed to their industry saying what they believe to be the consequences? Of course, there may be good things about independence and people are entitled to their view—although I am certain that there is a downside—but how can we have a real debate about our country’s future in this climate when we are not even permitted to give voice to those who understand the industry, who understand the consequences and who are asking those who support independence to explain what they would do instead? The people of Scotland deserve honesty. The people who earn their living in the shipyards deserve honesty about their future. Let us hope that we can have some honesty from the Government today. I move, That the Parliament regrets BAE System’s announcement that it intends to cut 1,775 jobs across its UK shipyards and supports all efforts to minimise compulsory redundancies and to redeploy people where possible; welcomes, however, the confirmation by BAE Systems that the Clyde is its preferred UK location for the construction of the future Type 26 global combat ship; notes that Scotland plays a significant role in the UK, European and worldwide defence industries, including hosting the largest defence electronics manufacturing site in the UK in addition to its shipbuilding but notes the benefit to this industry of UK defence contracts, and therefore considers that the best way to safeguard the future of Scotland’s defence manufacturing industry is to remain in the UK.

Nicola Sturgeon and I agreed that sustaining jobs on the Clyde was a good thing. This minister seems to be suggesting that it was a bad thing and that, if we lose the jobs in a year’s time, the decision was a bad thing anyway. Will he clarify whether he thinks that the decision on the Clyde was a good thing, notwithstanding—I have talked about this on many occasions—the direct consequences and impact on those people who have lost their jobs?

Will the member explain why she quotes so extensively from that person but chooses to ignore the words of the conveners in Scotstoun, Govan and Rosyth, who are telling her that the vote next year will have consequences for jobs on the Clyde? Why does not the member listen to the conveners? She is prepared to quote a man who happens to agree with her.

Is Sandra White saying that John Dolan from the shipyards is belittling Glasgow and the people of Scotland when he expresses his concerns? What about the convener at Thales UK, who told me that it has moved from uncertainty to vulnerability? Is he belittling the industry that he cares deeply about?

1. In a week in which I know that we are, across the chamber, mourning the loss of our friend and fine parliamentarian, Helen Eadie, I ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01670)

I thank the First Minister for those kind words. I know that across the chamber there has been great comfort from the kind words that people have expressed at the loss, particularly for Helen’s very precious family. On 20 March, a spokesperson for the First Minister said: “The cast-iron position is that an independent Scotland will continue to use the pound”. With less than a fortnight to go before the publication of the white paper, is that still the Scottish Government’s position?

That is interesting, because I thought that we had experienced a historic day in Scottish politics. That is right—it would appear that someone in the Scottish Government has told the truth. Colin McKay, Alex Salmond’s chief strategist, told a conference this week: “We cannot assert as an a priori fact we can achieve a currency union with the UK”. The First Minister’s chief strategist is clear: no cast-iron guarantee can be given. Even in Alex Salmond’s world it cannot possibly be true that one can both have and not have a cast-iron guarantee. Given that rare moment of candour, what is the First Minister’s plan B if he is unable to successfully negotiate a currency union with the rest of the United Kingdom?

That was not so much cast iron as brass neck. The fact of the matter is that if the First Minister knows what his position is he has an obligation to share it not with me, but with the people of this country who are concerned about their pensions and mortgages and whether they will have a pound. We know that the First Minister is a master negotiator. We saw that during the historic Edinburgh agreement when he went into a room with David Cameron and gave him everything that he wanted—[Interruption.]

Alex Salmond will forgive me if I do not share his optimism about negotiating a currency union in the space of 18 months and getting a deal that works for the people of Scotland as well as the arrangement that we now have. Colin McKay, the First Minister’s chief strategist, is also concerned about that timeline. He says that it is “impossible” unless the UK Government wants to negotiate a smooth transfer of powers. Given that Alex Salmond seems to believe that the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland are so unreasonable that he has felt for all his political life the need to break away from them, how confident is he that he can strike a deal with a Westminster Government in just 18 months?

This is an SNP that could not stay up to support the minimum wage and that would not go through the lobbies to protect people against the energy companies that are ripping them off. The First Minister says that the UK adviser says that it can be done in 18 months. His own adviser says that it cannot be. That must be the first time that he has taken the UK Government’s advice ahead of that of his own advisers. Alistair Darling has also said: “But Mr Salmond must have a hidden fallback option because ‘no one but a fool would go into a negotiation if they hadn’t got a plan B’”. It seems that we have here a fool who has no plan B on the currency. I must admit some concern about the wellbeing of Colin McKay. Has anyone seen Alex Bell since he appeared on “Newsnight”? Did he get a visit from Shona Robison? Is he in the same gulag as Professor Chris Whatley? Is the reality not that the First Minister does not want to give the people of Scotland the truth about independence in the debate because his case does not add up? Is the truth not that he cannot stand having a debate with the people of Scotland at all?

1. I welcome the Deputy First Minister to her position. To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01653)

The Deputy First Minister and I know Govan shipyard well, and I am sure that she shares the bittersweet feeling about yesterday’s announcement by the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Defence. There is great sadness for the families of the 840 people who will lose their jobs and for their colleagues in Portsmouth, but there is a degree of relief that shipbuilding on the Clyde has a future. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to secure the future of our shipyards?

We know that work on aircraft carriers will continue on the Clyde and that 2,500 jobs will be sustained as a result of the order for three ocean-going offshore patrol vessels. Beyond that, it is vital that the Clyde shipyards secure the work to build the type 26 frigates. We know what the Deputy First Minister thinks and hopes will happen. We also know what she would like to happen. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with BAE Systems and the UK Government to secure that work? Can she give my constituents and hers a guarantee that that work will come to the Clyde?

The fact of the matter is that we already have joint procurement: it is called the United Kingdom. The Deputy First Minister wants to break that up and then reinvent it and pretend that there is not a difficulty. Yes, Govan is the best in the United Kingdom. I want Govan to stay in the United Kingdom so that it can benefit from that position. I do not doubt the Deputy First Minister’s personal commitment to the individuals within Govan shipyard, but the problem is that her prospectus for Scotland threatens them and their jobs. If I were her, faced with the consequence of that prospectus, I would change the prospectus rather than explain away the concerns of those within the industry who are now highlighting these matters. The Deputy First Minister has spoken about diversification, but there needs to be a base to work from in order to deliver diversification and there would be consequences while that was happening. Given that naval contracts could dry up within a few short years, what discussions has she had with BAE Systems about diversifying work on the Clyde? Does she have a diversification plan ready to be put in place? Can she tell the workers in my constituency when she anticipates that work on the first non-naval contracts will begin?

If this was only an argument between the Deputy First Minister and me, that might have been an acceptable answer, but people are worried about their jobs and they deserve better. John Swinney and his party have been arguing for independence for 30 years. One would have thought that they might have spoken about diversification before yesterday. Even if people agree with the SNP’s position, they know that, in order to move from one place to the other, a bridge is needed to create that security. There is no diversification plan; the SNP’s position is simply a defence against the reality it faces. That reality is not just faced by us in the chamber: it is much more serious for those who depend on the jobs. This morning, I spoke to the shop stewards convener at Thales. He described the position that the workers are in following yesterday’s announcement as moving from uncertainty to vulnerability. That vulnerability is because the United Kingdom Government has made it clear that defence contracts will not be let outside the United Kingdom—[Interruption.]

I think that people in the defence industry would prefer to hear what I am about to say rather than catcalling from the SNP back benches. Let me repeat: the United Kingdom Government has made it clear that defence contracts will not be let outside the United Kingdom and therefore will not come to Scotland if Scotland were outside the United Kingdom, which is what all those in the SNP aspire to. The reality is that the United Kingdom has not built a warship outside the United Kingdom since the second world war. If the Deputy First Minister is so sure that the contracts would go ahead regardless, can she guarantee the rest of the United Kingdom that an independent Scotland would place orders for warships with English yards? I think that we know the answer to that. [Interruption.]

Can the Deputy First Minister explain to both her and my constituents who work on the Clyde—irrespective of what she hopes for, aspires to or believes in—what will happen to their jobs should there be a yes vote?

I will always stand up for the constituents I represent and I will always stand up for the people of Scotland. The Deputy First Minister’s problem is that, once the vote is taken next year, we would have no control or influence over what the UK Government would do because we would not be in it. The Deputy First Minister highlights all the issues about how we can work with other people. They represent the current benefits of being in a United Kingdom: sharing risk, pooling resource, coming together in tough times and making sure not that we put Govan workers’ jobs at risk but that we protect them in the future.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01630)

If the First Minister’s budget includes a commitment to address the question of the bedroom tax, we will, of course, support it. Does the First Minister agree with his energy minister, Fergus Ewing, that a freeze of gas and electricity bills is unworkable, or does he agree with his employment minister, Angela Constance, who welcomed the idea?

One would think that, having had a fortnight off, the First Minister might have had a think about doing his job properly. [Interruption.]

The First Minister would do well to listen to the lesson of Dunfermline. The people of Scotland want Scotland off pause; they want him to stop obsessing about independence, and for him to do his day job. As a bonus, he might, once in a while, answer a question. I asked him what his view is on the energy freeze, and he said nothing. Let us look at Nicola Sturgeon’s proposal for a price cut in relation to energy. She said that she would pay for it by moving green charges from the bill payer to the taxpayer: paying Peter by robbing Peter. What she did not say is that the same report that gave her the idea also tells us that breaking up the single United Kingdom energy market could result in higher bills for Scots. Indeed, Citigroup estimates that it would cost the average Scottish family an extra £225 a year. I think that that is a better definition of unworkable. Rather than the bill payer or the taxpayer footing the bill, why will the First Minister not stand up to the big six energy companies on behalf of the people of Scotland and back a freeze?

First, on the issue of Grangemouth, the First Minister’s comments were unworthy of the significance of the issue for the people of Scotland. [Interruption.]

On Grangemouth, my only focus is to ensure that a workforce that has been loyal throughout this period is treated with respect. On that, across the chamber, I am sure that we are agreed. If the First Minister imagines that what he has given as an explanation of his policy and that of the big six will wear with families across Scotland who are being ripped off day and daily, he needs to go out and speak to people in our communities about their experience. Let us get this right, because I think that the First Minister agrees that the Tories have got their energy policy wrong. David Cameron says that he wants to move green charges to general taxation; Alex Salmond also rejects the policy and says that he wants to move green charges to general taxation. It would almost seem that Alex Salmond is closer to David Cameron than most of the Tory Cabinet—[Interruption.]

I know that they do not like to hear it. Who also backs the First Minister’s position? The big six energy companies. Even an ex-Tory Prime Minister, Sir John Major, is more radical than the First Minister. He wants a windfall tax on the energy companies. What does the First Minister want? He wants to give the self-same companies a cut in corporation tax 3p lower than whatever George Osborne sets it at. Once again, why will the First Minister not stand up to the big six energy companies and back a price freeze?

For the avoidance of doubt, it is now clear that Alex Salmond’s position on the freeze on fuel is argued in the exact same terms as David Cameron and the six big energy companies. What a counsel of despair; we cannot take on those big companies because they will do bad things just now to stop measures being effective in the future. He should stand up to them, not explain away what they are doing to the people of this country. The First Minister says that he wants Scotland to be a progressive beacon. Let us look at his record. During the banking crisis, he stood up for Fred Goodwin and the bankers. At the height of the Milly Dowler phone hacking scandal, he stood shoulder to shoulder with Rupert Murdoch. Now, as families throughout the country are being ripped off for electricity and gas, he stands with the big six energy companies. Is not it the case that the First Minister, who has cut £1 billion from anti-poverty schemes, does not stand with the families or with the pensioners who are unable to heat their homes this winter? He stands with the energy companies who are ripping them off, by offering them bigger tax breaks than even the Tories are.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01620)

Last week, the Scottish Government’s fiscal commission announced that an independent Scotland would have not just one oil fund but two, yet the First Minister’s own civil servants reported in March last year, and again in October, that an oil fund would not work unless the First Minister either raised taxes or cut spending. Which is it and when was he going to tell us?

I had expected an attempt by the First Minister to blind us with science. Perhaps I should have predicted instead that he planned to deafen us with gobbledygook. That did not answer the question that I asked. To remove doubt, here is what it says in the advice that he was given last year: “if the Scottish government had wished to establish an oil fund, it would have had to reduce public spending, increase taxation or increase public sector borrowing.” In the reporting of this issue, the First Minister has said that events have overtaken that advice, or that the fiscal commission’s report reflects it. Can he now read out where that advice was repeated in the fiscal commission report or tell us which events have overtaken it? Once again, just like with John Swinney’s paper that doubted the affordability of the state pension and talked of public spending cuts—we knew that the Scottish National Party members would groan because they did not expect other people to know what they said in private—we know that this Government says one thing in private and another in public. Will the First Minister now come clean with the people of Scotland? Will he raise taxes or cut spending to pay for his oil fund, and when was he going to tell us?

It was not my party that walked through the lobbies to create a Tory Government under Margaret Thatcher. [Interruption.]

I know that SNP members do not like to remember their history, but that is what the SNP did to Scotland and Scotland will never forgive them. For all that chuckling nonsense from the First Minister, he ignored the central question. The one thing that the fiscal commission report makes clear is that the oil fund is not a saving scheme; it is an insurance policy against the volatility of oil prices, although it does rather sound like the kind of oil fund—[Interruption.]

The noisier the SNP members get, the more troubled they are. It sounds rather like the kind of oil fund where people get a free Parker pen just for inquiring. The fact is that the First Minister does not want to admit that his oil fund will not work without tax rises or spending cuts. He does not want to admit that he has been told that, rather than setting up a Norwegian-style oil fund, Scots would be better off investing in United Kingdom bonds. That is why the issue is serious. There is a central deceit in what the First Minister says—the people of Scotland, upon independence, are immediately expecting increased spending on services while his own independent advice says that, precisely because of independence, he would need to redirect moneys from public expenditure to a stabilisation fund. So let us have an answer: does the First Minister want tax rises to pay for his oil fund or cuts in hospitals and schools, and when was he going to tell us?

Whatever that was, it will not give anyone confidence that the First Minister has a clue about what he is talking about. His own fiscal commission said: “It therefore requires fewer resources to be allocated to current spending, or to reducing other taxes, than would otherwise be the case.” The First Minister is simply dishonest when he talks about a stabilisation fund—

The First Minister is not being accurate when he says that a stabilisation fund—[Interruption.]

However we describe it, the First Minister said that the stabilisation fund was about a windfall. The stabilisation fund is to address the volatility of oil over time and his own fiscal commission says so. We know that John Swinney told the First Minister the truth about the state of the public finances in private. The First Minister wanted that hidden from the public. Now he says that, in a separate Scotland, we would have two oil funds, when he has been told in private not once but twice that that would not work without there being an impact on taxation or public spending. Unless the First Minister is denying that that advice was given to him, he needs to explain why it is no longer relevant. When was he going to tell us? When was he going to tell us whether his choice is to raise taxes or cut public spending? The answer is never. Honesty is not something that this Government deals in. [Interruption.]

I am astonished. I do not know what word we use to describe somebody saying—[Interruption.] I accept the advice of the Presiding Officer, but I have to say that I do not know what word we use to describe a Government that says one thing in private and something different in public. The fact of the matter is that Scotland is on pause and we will not be given the full facts by this Government ahead of the referendum.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01594)

I, too, welcome Mohammed Sarwar to his new position, in which I am sure he will serve as well and as honourably as he did in his previous position. Obviously, we welcome jobs coming to Scotland. The challenge will be whether people can access those jobs. In 2011, the First Minister pledged to reindustrialise Scotland. To do that, we need to equip the people of Scotland with the skills to take up the jobs, and to do that we need to have the colleges to teach people the skills. Can the First Minister tell me whether the number of people in colleges in Scotland has gone up or down since he came to office?

It is pretty basic in education that when someone is asked a question, they answer it. That answer was a complete failure. Of course, when this Government came to office, a full-time college course was 720 hours a year; then this Government cut that to 640 hours a year. What this Government has done is cut the hours of teaching, cut the definition of a full-time course and graduated with honours in cooking the books. Only the First Minister could describe the cuts to the college sector as massive investment. The First Minister often talks of full-time equivalents, but it is not full-time equivalents who get jobs, it is people; and it is not full-time equivalents who marry, raise families or build communities, it is people. Can the First Minister tell me whether the number of people going to college in Scotland has gone up or down on his watch?

I assure the First Minister that my 20 years in education showed me what is and is not an answer to a question, and that not responding to a question that has been asked is displacement activity. Let me tell the First Minister some of the facts that clearly no one has written down for him in a big book to read out. Since 2007, the number of women going to college has fallen by 77,000 and the number of adults who left school with no qualifications but got a second chance at college has almost halved, with nearly 60,000 being denied that second chance to learn. Despite what the First Minister says, even the number of 16 to 18-year-olds going to college has fallen by 7,000 and the number not in education, employment and training is going up. Can the First Minister give me one of those most accurate answers ever given to any Parliament anywhere and simply tell us whether the number of people going to college has gone up or down since he came to office?

I hesitate to say this, but it feels as though a Scottish education was rather wasted on the First Minister. If there are pressures on further education budgets, they are at his choice, and the price of his education choices is being paid by women, 25-year-olds and those who need a college education but cannot access it. Of course, education is a Scottish tradition and a modern necessity if Scotland is going to compete in the modern world. People now do not have just one career or job but several, and we need lifelong learning to support people from unemployment to employment and from uncertain part-time work into full-time work. The idea that it is nothing to do with Government that women with caring responsibilities cannot access a place on a full-time course that meets their needs is an absolute disgrace. What did John Henderson of Colleges Scotland tell the Parliament this week? He said: “we seem to have retreated from colleges’ role in lifelong learning. ... We know that people’s lives change and that the economy changes, and yet we no longer seem to have the capacity in the college system to respond to those changes”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 1 October 2013; c 2928.] This First Minister is not reindustrialising Scotland—he is deskilling it. Is it not about time that we had a First Minister who leaves the displacement activity for elsewhere, who does his job, who shows he cares about education and who pays attention? Instead, what do we get? A part-time equivalent.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01582)

Why is the Scottish Government cutting help for victims of the bedroom tax by £20 million next year?

Yes, of course—but the problem with the First Minister is that he talks about the bedroom tax all the time, but does not act in the interests of ordinary people. If people were to be comforted by promises in the future, we would be in a strange place. What we can do now is what actually matters. There is £20 million this year, but there is nothing next year and, this year, there is half of what the organisations that he mentioned expected. The real reason why the Scottish Government is cutting off support for the victims of the bedroom tax is that it sees injustice not as an opportunity to help people in Scotland who are suffering, but as one to be exploited ahead of the referendum. If the First Minister really wanted rid of the bedroom tax, he would urge voters in England in 2015 to vote Labour to abolish it—[Laughter.]

—rather than asking them to vote for Nick Clegg, as he did in 2010. The memory banks have been wiped, but the evidence of the First Minister’s poor judgment is seen again in that. We know that the First Minister does not agree with John Swinney on renationalising postal services, on pensions or on the public finances. Does he agree with his Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth that the reason why the Government will not help victims of the bedroom tax is that it does not want to let Westminster “off the hook”? [Interruption.]

John Swinney has given less than half of what people asked for this year and will give them nothing next year. The reason why he will give them nothing next year is that that is another justification for separation, rather than a policy that should be tackled. The First Minister is fond of saying that the best people to make decisions about Scotland are the people who live here, and who care most about Scotland. He has the power to help victims of the bedroom tax now and, with an underspend of £179 million last year, he has the funds. Is it not the case that although the First Minister might live in Scotland, he has decided not to act because he does not care about the victims of the bedroom tax and would rather exploit their pain?

If the First Minister was interested in his day job, he would know that there is not a £20 million limit on what he can spend. Even if that were true, it does not explain why he is not putting any money into next year’s budget. There is nothing there. Perhaps another reason why the Government is not helping is that, instead of having civil servants try to improve the lives of Scots and to find ways of supporting people, the First Minister has them writing fantasy plans for a Scottish air force, Scottish embassies and our own secret service. While the First Minister has been doing that, between trips to the Ryder cup and Wimbledon—I advise him not to go again to Wimbledon and behave in the way that he did this year—we have been working. I have here the bill that can protect Scotland from the bedroom tax. It has been lodged in Parliament today and it has support from the very organisations that the First Minister has cited. Instead of cutting help for victims of the bedroom tax, will the First Minister pledge to sign this bill now and do the right thing by Scotland, rather than the right thing by the SNP?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01559)

Excellent. Writing in The Guardian, the First Minister’s former head of policy, Alex Bell, the man charged with writing the white paper on independence until as recently as July this year, says of the nationalist movement that Alex Salmond leads: “At its worst, it succumbs to the temptation to focus on old songs and tired policies. In this, Salmond is wrong.” Mr Bell goes on to suggest that he had difficulty in writing the Government’s white paper on independence because the First Minister’s arguments are false. He says of the task of writing it: “Had the superficial elements of the independence argument been true, this would have been easy.” Is the First Minister’s former head of policy right? If not, why not?

That was stunning. The dispute is not whether the First Minister is a wonderful person; it is whether he is right or wrong. For a supporter of independence to attack the Labour Party is perhaps expected, but it is a serious matter to hear Alex Bell—the man whom the First Minster chose to write the blueprint for an independent Scotland—express those views. The future of Scotland is supposed to hang on the First Minister’s long-awaited white paper. We deserve to know why the man who was writing it left the Government. Here is a clue. Mr Bell writes: “Salmond has denied a crucial truth about the debate: Scotland’s problems are common to the developed world”. If the First Minister cannot persuade those whom he hired to advise him of his case for independence, what chance does he have with the rest of us?

Only in the First Minister’s world does somebody saying that Alex Salmond is wrong mean that Alex Salmond is right. Alex Bell may support independence, but he agrees with me that we should address the long-term problems such as pensions and an ageing population. However, he lost that argument with a First Minister who always and ever puts his own interests ahead of the interests of the people of Scotland. If Alex Bell were a one-off, we could understand it, but the First Minister has form. What did his Nobel laureate adviser Professor Joseph Stiglitz say of his corporation tax plans? He said: “Some of you have been told that lowering tax rates on corporations will lead to more investment. That fact is not true.” What about Alex Salmond’s former economic adviser Professor John Kay? He described the First Minister’s claims as “cloud cuckoo land”. Does the First Minister ever reflect—[Interruption.] Well, we know that no one on the back benches will ever say the words, “Alex Salmond is wrong,” so someone else has to say it for them. Does the First Minister ever reflect that perhaps it is not his advisers who are wrong but he who is wrong?

Presumably, when the rest of Scotland is now disagreeing with Alex Salmond, it gives him some comfort to read out nice words about himself. However, perhaps he should take things a little more seriously and reflect on what Alex Bell has actually said. People across Scotland are finding the First Minister increasingly deluded and unconvincing. No wonder the First Minister’s old deputy, Jim Sillars, has said of the Scottish National Party: “Totalitarian would be a fair description of Scotland’s majority party.” [Interruption.] And totalitarianism does involve shouting people down. On a host of issues that are important to the public, which will need to be answered in coming debates on independence, the evidence is that no serious work has been done. Those willing to be told to shut up seem happy to follow whatever line is laid down for them. Today, the Institute for Fiscal Studies has said that the First Minister has a £5.9 billion black hole in his finances—something that he ignored when John Swinney pointed it out to him in private months ago. Is it not true that the people of Scotland do not believe what he says about independence and that even his own side do not believe him any more?

I am proud to rise and speak to the amendment in my name. Indeed, it is because I am a proud Scot, not despite it, that I support Scotland’s remaining strong in the United Kingdom. My head tells me that it is right but my heart, too, cries out for co-operation, not division. Over the next period, we can argue about individual figures, but I want to make a number of points about the substance underpinning this debate. I will reflect on a number of the false premises that underpin the nationalist position and then speak about my vision for the people of Scotland and across the UK—a vision of a politics that is rooted in the real world, not entirely detached from it. The nationalists’ central argument is that, by definition, decisions made about Scotland in Scotland will always be better. However, that argument points to Scotland leaving not only the United Kingdom but Europe, the United Nations and NATO. If only Scotland can decide, no power to make decisions can rest anywhere else but in Scotland—and that is a self-evident nonsense. Last week, Alex Neil told us that our constitutional argument was like that in South Africa and India, but our relationship with the rest of the United Kingdom is not a colonial one and ought not to be characterised in such terms. We are told that we are different and that our concerns and priorities are different from those in the rest of the United Kingdom but, as we know, families across the United Kingdom are worried about jobs, their children’s education, their elderly parents’ care and making the world a safer place. There is more that binds us together than will ever divide us.

I thought that I made an excellent point, but obviously the First Minister, as ever, missed it. He is saying that all decisions have to be made here, but we have the right to make decisions where decisions lie. The logic of the First Minister’s position is that we would not be in Europe, the United Nations or anywhere else. There is an assumption that the rest of the United Kingdom wants to deny us our rights and potential, that Scots are more progressive, fairer and more generous, and that, if only we could rule ourselves, all the ills of society would disappear. That complacency and that belief that there are inevitable differences denies the need to reaffirm every day the importance of fairness, justice, respect and compassion, and insults all those radical voices right across the United Kingdom who are as concerned as we are about what is happening in the country. Only the Scottish National Party could look at the record of Labour Governments in creating the NHS, developing the welfare state, opening up educational and economic opportunity, tackling child poverty and supporting people into work, say that there is no difference between Labour and the Tory party, and then say that it offers a promise of a better world that is funded by cuts in corporation tax to 3p lower than anything that a Tory chancellor would offer. The truth is that, regardless of economic circumstances, on high days and holidays, in good times and bad, the SNP holds on to its belief in independence. That is not a response to the banking crisis, foreign wars or a Tory Government; it is the politics of nationalism looking for a justification—a belief that is held when all else changes, regardless of what the evidence says. I changed my mind in the 1980s when I saw what Thatcher was doing to children whom I taught, but I know that Alex Salmond has been on no constitutional journey. He believed in independence 40 years ago and he believes in it today. The SNP says that it speaks for Scottish values, but the values of community, co-operation, being a good neighbour and solidarity are embodied in the United Kingdom, not repudiated by it. The SNP often tells us to look at our history, but it is too often guilty of rewriting our history. An understanding of our history makes me a socialist, not a nationalist. [Interruption.]

Alex Salmond looks at the Parliament of 1707 and says, “This Parliament is reconvened.” This Parliament, with a democratic suffrage, has nothing to do with that of 1707, and anyone who does not see that does not understand. It was not the common identity of crofter and landowner that drove land reform; it was the struggle of land leaguers such as my great uncle, who demanded that they have the right to have control over the land that they worked. It was not the common Scottish identity of trade unionists and factory owners that challenged exploitation and danger in the workplace; it was the coming together of working people across the United Kingdom in the Labour and trade union movement to demand protection and rights in the workplace. It is not the common identity of Scottish men and Scottish women that has seen women’s lives transformed in the past century in the home, in the workplace and in education. My daughter’s future and her opportunities were shaped by a women’s movement that demanded that the way things were should change and a Labour movement that delivered in legislation equal rights for women. I know that there are progressive people in the SNP ranks, but the reality is that the great changes in our history—the steps and progress in the lives of women, people with disabilities and people who have suffered discrimination and disadvantages and on the huge issues of the environment and justice—were won despite nationalism, not because of it. They were driven by a trade union movement determined to make the world a better place, an environmental movement determined that we would not destroy our planet, the women’s movement, the suffrage movement, and people coming together through generations with common interests to make a difference. Change is won not by changing the country’s constitutional arrangements, but by winning the argument and proving that we can create a better society. The constitutional debate is not about which policies we will propose in the general and Scottish elections, and it ought not to be presented in those terms. The constitutional debate is about a once-in-a-lifetime decision to see what our relationship should be with the rest of the United Kingdom. However, there will be a prize in 2014 when the debate is settled and, in my view, Scotland confirms its place in the United Kingdom, because it will end the political equivalent of having a get-out-of-jail-free card, whereby Scotland, uniquely in the world, does not have to address demographic change in times of economic hardship and ministers always have someone else to blame. Then, we can start dealing with the real challenges of life in modern Scotland, as Alex Bell, whom I think everyone knows, has reflected. We will see an end to the tired and tedious and the old tunes. We can have a Government that says in public what it thinks in private. We can get a Government that respects local democracy rather than one that cuts its funding and then denounces councils that have to live with the consequence of that cut in funding. There are hard questions. How do we make our public services sustainable and able to meet need rather than that being simply a slogan? How do we keep our older people safe, our youngsters educated and the economy strong when people do not trust politics and the debate on how taxation can be fairly levied to create a strong society can barely even begin? That is the tough politics. That is the argument, rather than our infantilising an electorate into choosing between electoral bribes and believing that it is possible to have everything without it costing anything. We can get back to the rigour of a Government that looks at the evidence, understands the problem and then makes change happen. That is not what we have now, which is not a Government but a campaign while Scotland is on pause and civil servant brains are applied not to the challenge of climate change and an ageing population but to an imagined world post 2014. We have a Government that is not asking the hard questions on health or education, or on a care service in which a girl of 17, with four days’ training, is expected to go out on her own and look after 20 different groups of people; and a Government that says that it cares about homelessness but no longer even counts the number of people who are rough sleeping on our streets across Scotland. Since 2011, we have had an obsession with the referendum and we have had more historic days than you could shake a stick at, with the cynicism of promising everyone everything that they want. Let us make the case proudly and stand up for staying in the United Kingdom. Let us refresh the opportunity to defeat nationalism and do the real job of politics: to make and win the political case for the real change that we need to make our society safer, stronger and fairer. Let us have not the tired and tedious and the old songs but honesty, openness and coming together to deal with the real experience of Scots across this country. Let us use the talents of all of Scotland to make sure that Scotland is a better place. Let us have not nationalism but a coming together of the people of Scotland in the United Kingdom to make sure that Scotland is, and not just claims to be, a better and fairer place. I move amendment S4M-07721.1, to leave out from first “agrees” to end and insert: “welcomes the people of Scotland having their say on the constitutional future on 18 September 2014; believes that Scotland is best served by a strong Scottish Parliament in a strong UK, and looks forward to a debate over the next year that reflects the priorities of the people and strengthens the position of Scotland as a partner in the UK rather than as a separate state”.

The reality is that the First Minister will argue for independence regardless of what Government is in power, regardless of what the situation is and regardless of the evidence that it will damage the people of Scotland. That is not a journey but simply being obdurate.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01534)

In 2008, as part of the preparations for the Glasgow airport rail link, four plots of land at 57 Clark Street, Paisley, were bought on behalf of the Scottish Government for £840,000. Can the First Minister tell me from whom the land was bought and to whom has the land been subsequently sold and for what price?

There you go: there was me thinking that this was First Minister’s questions, where the First Minister has the opportunity to show how much in control of his Government he is. Let me help the First Minister. The land was bought in 2008 for £840,000 from a businessman called John McGlynn, who was then a donor to the Scottish Conservative Party. Since then, of course, Mr McGlynn has been on something of a political journey; he now supports the yes campaign. Since then, he has been appointed to the Scottish Government national economic forum and he has bought back the land from the Scottish Government for £50,000 and made a profit of £790,000. Is there some connection here or has Mr McGlynn just benefited from the First Minister’s gross incompetence with public funds?

I was attacking no one. I was expecting the First Minister to justify his actions, and he has absolutely failed to do so. The fact of the matter is that the Scottish Government bought the land for £840,000; it was signed off by the Scottish ministers; and the Scottish Government then sold the land for £50,000 when not obliged to do so to kill a project that John Swinney himself has called “desirable” and which Transport Scotland is still exploring. In case the First Minister has not noticed, Scotland has for the past five years been going through one of the deepest downturns in our history. In that time, the First Minister has slashed spending on skills and colleges; has underfunded vital public services with the result that some of our most vulnerable old people get just 15-minute care visits; and has cut funding so that many people with a bus pass have no bus to get on. In those circumstances, how does the First Minister justify buying a piece of land for £840,000 and then selling it back to the person he bought it from for just £50,000? What was the First Minister thinking of?

I think that we might hear the First Minister talking about a something for next to nothing Scotland. I am not addressing the question of the businessman who benefited; I am asking the First Minister to take responsibility for what was done by his Government. All of the displacement activity that we just witnessed might make the First Minister feel better for the present, to get him through the moment, but when he is done with that he will still have to answer this serious question—and I do not think that the First Minister understands, even at this stage, how serious the issue is. I am asking a simple question: how did we get in a situation in which a piece of land was bought with taxpayers’ money for the guts of £1 million and sold back to the same person a few years later for just a fraction of that? There are people watching this at home who are struggling to pay the bills or put food on the table. They have to account for every penny that they spend. Can the First Minister explain to them either why the issue has nothing to do with him or how he managed to buy a piece of land with their money for £840,000 and sell it for just £50,000?

Just to clarify, the land was bought on behalf of the Scottish Government for the Glasgow airport rail link project and was sold by Transport Scotland, the agency of the Government over there. We are well aware of the due diligence in handing it over to Transport Scotland from SPT, but the Government took over the project and it is still accountable for the decision that was subsequently made—£50,000 it was sold for. [Applause.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01524)

I thank the First Minister. Nicola Sturgeon’s department told the Public Audit Committee that her five biggest transport projects cost £3.3 billion. The true figure is £3.8 billion—half a billion pounds more. Why did Nicola Sturgeon mislead Parliament and the people of Scotland in that way?

I assure the First Minister that I did catch up with the evidence to the Public Audit Committee yesterday, which was described as insulting to this Parliament. I cannot believe that the Scottish Government thought that we could build a railway without needing to pay for the land on which it would go—I do not know whether Nicola thought that she was going to build a transatlantic monorail. I think that the First Minister does not understand why people think that he is out of touch. When he is shown a £500 million discrepancy, he does not try to explain it. Instead, he tries to explain it away. That is simply not good enough. Nicola Sturgeon seems to be running her department with the same competence with which she is running the yes campaign. She missed half a billion pounds. Let me explain what that buys: it buys nearly 14,000 teachers; it pays for 16,000 nurses; and—let me say so that the First Minister, in his world, can understand—it buys nigh on 1,000 trips to the Ryder cup. Was Nicola Sturgeon being deliberately misleading, or is her eye off rising costs to the taxpayer because she is too busy watching the yes campaign’s support going down?

I am glad to see that the squirrel is back, refreshed after its holidays. In the real word, it is beyond belief that that is a suitable response from someone who is charged with not knowing where half a billion pounds is. You have found half a billion pounds missing and you need to take responsibility—[Interruption.]

Of course, in the First Minister’s world, that was an explanation. However, if his answer is true, why has the Auditor General for Scotland Caroline Gardner described the Government figures as “incomplete” and “inconsistent”? Why was Peter Housden hauled before the Public Audit Committee yesterday to be dealt with by all the parliamentarians, not just the convener? Was he to be a scapegoat? Whether he is sneaking into primary schools the back way or fêting Rupert Murdoch at Bute house, the First Minister at the first sniff of trouble refers himself to Peter Housden, knowing that he will be cleared. Now Nicola Sturgeon gets to use Sir Peter as a human shield. Perhaps they do not know this on the Scottish National Party benches, but we live in an era in which, for too many families, every penny is a prisoner and in which families are putting back on to supermarket shelves treats and even basic goods that they used to be able to afford. How, in that climate, can this Government have got its figures wrong by half a billion pounds?

The First Minister is not on good land when he talks about civil servants being unable to defend themselves. This is the First Minister who gave us the most accurate answer ever given to any Parliament and then had to come back at 5 o’clock to bravely blame the civil servants for making a mistake. This is about ministerial accountability and responsibility, not about scapegoating civil servants. Over the summer, Alex Salmond promised every Scot a £300,000 North Sea dividend after separation. Now we know that his figures have a half-billion-pound margin of error. Here is why this matters and what people fear. In the increasingly unlikely event that Scotland votes to leave the United Kingdom, we will find out the day after the referendum that everything that the First Minister claimed before on the currency, on pensions, on welfare, on oil revenues and on corporation tax was possibly incomplete and inconsistent and he will tell the nation, “Sorry—it was the civil servants’ fault”. Is it not the case that ministers are spending their time on their separation obsession that most Scots reject, and that while their campaigning is failing to convince Scots this SNP Government is failing to run the country?

This is another sad day for the Scottish Parliament as we gather to reflect on the loss of David McLetchie, whose untimely death we deeply regret. On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I not only offer our sincerest condolences to his family and friends, who must feel his loss most fiercely, but recognise that David was a man who had a huge impact on people across this chamber and far beyond. As has been said, David was another of the 1999 group of MSPs who were given the task of lifting the Scottish Parliament from the dry words of a parliamentary act to a living, breathing part of Scotland’s political, economic and social landscape, and he was a key player in helping the Scottish Parliament become that place. Again, as has been said, David was a great parliamentarian, fierce in debate and unrelenting in deconstructing arguments that might have displayed any hint of inconsistency. He was logical and rational, with a devastating turn of phrase. I still remember to this day the feeling of stress when, serving as a minister, I would see him rise to his feet in that languid way of his to deliver what we all feared would be the killer question. Although his wit and withering scorn were his greatest weapons, I believe that he deployed them not to belittle but to make his case. Yes, he was tough in debate, but it was always the argument, not the person, he was pursuing. Of course, David McLetchie was far more than simply a debater. In committee, his passion to make the Parliament work, interrogate legislation and develop policy was at its most evident. Always willing to do the heavy lifting, he took his job seriously, regardless of whether that work would be recognised or heralded by others. I believe that he simply wanted to make a difference. David McLetchie always made you think. It was rather unsettling for a Tory to do this, but I often found him challenging me to test my own assumptions rather than to presume them to be a self-evident truth. It is a useful lesson for us all, I think. I recall his capturing in a wonderful phrase the weakness of some of us in Scotland’s political environment when he said that we may now be living in a Scotland where that which is not banned will be compulsory. David was a man of intellect and wit with interests far beyond politics, and his life and legacy are hard to describe fully. What do I think when I think of David? At heart, when I think of David, I smile. For all our political differences, his humanity, compassion and interest in people were far stronger. He valued people, listened and revealed a warmth and friendship that could never be limited by party boundaries. Across this chamber, we shall miss his wisdom, his commitment and his love for life. In conclusion, I want to echo the words of the Presiding Officer. If there were ever a testimony to the person David McLetchie was beyond this place, the man who was not simply a politician, it was to be found in the words of his son James who, at his funeral, bravely and compellingly described what David meant to his family through tough and happy times. It is testament to the way that this man—this husband, father and son—lived his life that those who knew him best could speak so powerfully of his goodness and love for them. We shall miss David and our thoughts today are for this good man taken too soon and for those for whom this loss is so much greater still. [Applause.]

The First Minister’s statement was so uplifting that I almost felt like reaching into Jackie Baillie’s handbag for a saltire. [Laughter.]

I imagined that during the recess the First Minister might like to re-engage with the real world but he is, on the evidence of his statement today, as distant and delusional about what Scotland is like as he was on the day that he left for the recess. Despite Andy Murray’s best efforts, the summer did not get off to the best of starts for the First Minister. He has kept himself busy by making a series of speeches—each one more ludicrous than the last. We, too, could be like the Isle of Man: independent, but still part of five unions—everything changing, but nothing changing. In his statement, the First Minister said that it is better for us to make decisions ourselves than to let other people do so, yet he is happy to cede economic policy, fiscal policy and monetary policy to a Westminster Treasury team. He knows that that does not make sense, and the members who sit behind him know it even better. Over the recess, Alex Salmond made clear what his one priority is. It is not health, not education and not economic growth, but a referendum on independence— Members: Where were you? I will tell members where I was: I was listening—[Interruption.] You see, the difference is that when someone listens to people and understands what is happening in their lives, it informs their politics—not a project that they have been interested in for the past 40 years. It is not about talking to people, but about listening to their lived experience. The First Minister’s priority is just a referendum on independence. [Interruption.]

I know that that is the line that SNP members have been given and they have done very well at shouting it. Let us get on. Today was an opportunity for the First Minister to draw a line under that summer of woe and to show us that we could take him seriously as Scotland’s First Minister. He could have done that by bringing forward a legislative programme that met one crucial test: to put the interests of the people of Scotland before the Scottish National Party’s interests. With this unambitious, lacklustre and moribund programme, he has completely failed. This morning, Nicola Sturgeon described the programme as “radical”. I can think only that she has led a very sheltered life. I bow to no one in my interest in a bill on electronic signatures, and I am as interested in merging Historic Scotland as the next person, but nobody can pretend that such measures are “radical”. As the First Minister often reminds us, he won an unprecedented majority in May 2011, but he uses that power to put Scotland on pause. We no longer have a Government—we have a campaign. It is a campaign that will do anything not to rock the boat ahead of next year’s vote, despite the challenges that we face, as a country. As I have said, the First Minister made a series of speeches this summer. None of them spoke about the pressures on our health service and his plan to ensure that our care is not affected as a result of those. Indeed, listening to and reflecting on what the First Minister said in the passage in his statement on promoting fairness in the NHS and its safety programme, I was trying to work out whether he was totally insensitive, whether he was complacent or whether he actually lives in the real world at all. There was no mention of the concerns of staff and patients about hospital mortality rates—especially the concerns of the staff and patients in the constituency of his Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing. The First Minister waxes lyrical about his vision for Scotland, but he does not do the basic job of Government in addressing those problems. This week, teachers have warned us that pressure on school resources will impact on education standards—in particular for people from disadvantaged backgrounds. However, we know the Scottish Government’s solution; Mike Russell has told us that he cannot do a thing to improve our schools until after independence.

We want the Government to address the concerns of people in the real world—I point out to Mike Russell that he went to the University of Glasgow and said in a press release that he could not do anything about schools until after independence. He ought not to deny that now. On care, when I exposed the scandal of 15-minute care visits, the minister who is responsible, Michael Matheson, told me that it was an “old chestnut”. Since then, care workers have spoken out about the pressures that they face in being told to task and go, and not to speak to elderly people who are isolated in their homes. It turns out that Michael Matheson is partly right about 15-minute visits; in some areas, the visits are down to seven minutes. That is a scandal and an affront to all of us, and it should be the business of Government to address it. Instead of telling us that everything is fantastic, it should use the powers that it has to make a difference. When are we going to face up to this challenge? Not any time soon, by the sounds of it.

I will take Mr Mason in a moment. On childcare, although we welcome the move to 600 hours, we would also welcome money for local authorities to deliver them—or we would welcome, at least, John Swinney outlining for us what our councils will have to cut from their budgets to pay for that promise. However, we know that that will not be enough to make a difference to families’ lives. How do we know that? The First Minister has told us that we will get a childcare revolution, but only after—you guessed it—independence. We have to address concerns right now. On the bedroom tax, which was dreamed up by the Tories—[Interruption.]

Cue noises off. The depressing thing is that the SNP has not lifted a finger to help people. It would take only £50 million to protect the most vulnerable tenants in Scotland from that unfair and unjust tax, but again we must wait until after independence. We have offered to work with the Scottish Government on the matter, but it has rejected us. Today, Wonga has announced profits of £62.5 million. Where are the funds for a loan guarantee fund to stop people falling into the hands of the extortionate legal money lenders? Young people are looking for the skills and qualifications that are needed in a tough jobs market. Where is the plan for our colleges, which have been decimated by the Government over the past few years. For the young people who depend on it, it will ring very hollow that the First Minister believes that we have free education in Scotland. If a person does not have access to a place, there is not much at all that is free about education. Nicola Sturgeon said this morning that there is a programme for economic growth. I am sorry: the Government must do more than just say that for it to happen. A feature of the SNP Government is that it tells us that it is doing things, but it lives with a different world out there. There are unacceptable levels of unemployment, there is underemployment, people are stuck on low wages and there are zero-hours contracts. Where in the programme is the action to help people? What could the Government do now to make a difference to people’s lives, instead of spending all its energy, enthusiasm and commitment in persuading people to vote for independence? If its members were to remember that they are parliamentarians rather than nationalists, they might know where to start. Jenny Marra wants to produce measures to tackle the shame of human trafficking. Drew Smith is proposing an opt-out organ-donation system that could save many Scottish lives. Patricia Ferguson proposes to reform our fatal accident inquiry system to ensure that families are looked after when they lose a loved one. Iain Gray proposes to regulate our buses so that those who rely on public transport can get a bus when they need it. Richard Simpson is proposing a raft of measures to save lives by tackling Scotland’s unhealthy relationship with alcohol. Neil Findlay is taking steps to give people confidence in our politics again by reforming lobbying rules. Mark Griffin is proposing changes to help British Sign Language users. The First Minister, with Scotland’s devolved powers, has the ability to do so much more, but his Government turns the other way. He is always telling us what he cannot do, rather than what he can do. He talks positively about devolution but either does not understand it or does not want it. He wants to frame the debate as though the choice is between Scotland and the Tories. The First Minister denies that one of the great successes of devolution was when a Labour Government funded record levels of public services, which we were then allowed to deliver in our communities. He is a man who lacks even self-awareness. He tells us that Parliament listens to evidence and seeks consensus where possible. If only that were true. If it were true, his ludicrous, ill-thought-through and dangerous proposals for independence would have been flung out long ago. The First Minister says that his referendum will give the people of Scotland the chance to finish our home rule journey. He takes for himself—ironically—the successes of devolution, which were delivered by those who are committed to staying in the United Kingdom, not by those who want to leave it. The strange thing is that neither the First Minister nor the SNP were ever on that home rule journey. They would not sign the claim of right—I know because I was there. Alex Salmond stood outside the Scottish Constitutional Convention and had nothing to do with the Calman commission. I signed the claim of right; he absented himself from it. The truth is that Alex Salmond and the SNP refused to be part of the journey that set up the Parliament. They stood apart from the will of the Scottish people and those of us who fought for devolution. The irony is that those who are driven by a desire to take power closer to people through devolution are now witnessing a Scottish Government that pulls power to itself instead of empowering people. Why so timid on community empowerment? The SNP again stands apart from the will and ambitions of the Scottish people. If there was any doubt that the SNP does not believe in devolution and this Parliament, it is its legislative programme. There is nothing in it to address the real needs of the Scottish people, there is nothing progressive, there is nothing radical and there is no attempt to exploit the Parliament’s full powers. Why is that? It is because it is not in Alex Salmond’s interests to prove what the Parliament can currently do, or to show that our lives can be improved by devolution. We all know that week in, week out, minister after minister says, “Well, that’s a very interesting problem. We’ll solve it after independence.” They damn themselves with their own words. All Scotland knows that Alex Salmond will always put his own interests ahead of those of the people of Scotland. The First Minister puts his referendum ahead of Scotland’s needs. That is why the legislative programme is as thin as his case for separation. The First Minister has decided that Scotland must wait until after the referendum for any of our needs to be addressed. His back benchers must ask themselves whether they are parliamentarians or placemen and placewomen, because surely they can see that they are standing up for Salmond, rather than standing up for Scotland. The depressing fact is that Scotland is on pause while we wait for Alex Salmond’s referendum, and families across my constituency and across the country are having to wait for action until the referendum comes. That is a denial of the First Minister’s responsibilities. I remind him that this battle is Scotland versus Salmond, and Scotland is going to win.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01498)

I agree with everything that the First Minister said. I pass on our condolences to the family of Peter Fraser and acknowledge the very significant contribution that he made to public life in Scotland. John Swinney says that the choice for Scotland is between austerity and independence. Will the First Minister explain how a separate Scotland could possibly have a different economic policy from the rest of the United Kingdom, when the rest of the UK would decide what we could spend, what we could borrow and what our interest and taxation rates would be without any representation at all?

Like most of what the First Minister says in this chamber, that is completely ludicrous. This is the man who calls a deficit a “relative surplus”. He says that there is a distinction between fiscal policy and monetary policy, but his own adviser, John Kay, makes the point that, if there was an independent Scotland, “the rest of the UK would seek extensive fiscal oversight over the management of the Scottish economy and would be unwilling to concede analogous oversight from Scotland over the fiscal and other policies of the UK.” The First Minister needs to get serious, because the fact of the matter is that he plans even greater austerity in an independent Scotland. [Interruption.] Mike Russell thinks that that is silly, but it is his First Minister’s policy. The First Minister is planning a 3 per cent cut in corporation tax for bankers and big business. In the real world, that will cost us £385 million—which, according to the Scottish Parliament information centre, is equivalent to 7,000 jobs each and every year. When the First Minister says that he does not like George Osborne’s economics, is not that because he thinks that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has not gone far enough, as his own plan is to cut taxes deeper than the Tories have done?

Obviously the First Minister does not understand his own policy. With regard to the First Minister’s great radical policy, members will remember that Professor Joseph Stiglitz—the Nobel laureate and adviser to the First Minister—said: “Some of you have been told that lowering tax rates on corporations will lead to more investment. The fact is that’s not true. It is just a gift to the corporations increasing inequality in our society.” For the First Minister, the policy is a pretence and a game, but in the real world his plans involve cutting jobs in the Scottish economy at the very point when we need them more. Only the First Minister could take £385 million out of the Scottish economy and say that it will not affect anything. The rest of us know that it will have a direct impact on services. He says that, over 20 years, his tax cut for big business would create 1,350 jobs a year and that the economy would grow by a massive 0.07 per cent a year. What will the cost of that be? We would, over that period, have given bankers and big business a £7.7 billion tax break, which would cost the equivalent of 140,000 jobs. Only in the First Minister’s mind could that possibly be a credible policy. It is the kind of Reaganomics that even the Tories do not believe in. Is it not the case—[Interruption.] Members should do the sums and work it out. Is it not the case that Alex Salmond has said that Scots do not mind Margaret Thatcher’s economics, and that he wants to apply her economics to an independent Scotland?

I am proud to say that we, on this side of the chamber, do not agree with the First Minister when he wants to give “something for nothing” to big business at the expense of jobs. I have to say that 27,000 jobs pales into insignificance against the 140,000 jobs that would be lost. If we have a choice between the analysis of the First Minister—given his record with arithmetic—and the analyses of the Scottish Parliament information centre and Professor Stiglitz, I know what side I am on. The First Minister’s choice is one that would be deeply damaging to the people of this country. The fact is that the First Minister’s credibility is like his European Union advice: he will go to the ends of the earth to protect it, but we all know that it does not exist. The man who backed the plans that broke the Royal Bank of Scotland now asks us to trust an economic vision—[Laughter.] I am glad that Government party members think that it is funny that the First Minister used his office to encourage Fred Goodwin to do precisely that. [Interruption.]

The First Minister is asking us to trust an economic vision that looks more like an hallucination. However, we know that in private the First Minister and his colleagues know that a separate Scotland would have huge economic problems. In private, they even question the affordability of pensions, but they think that in public they can treat the people of Scotland like mugs. [Interruption.] Do they know that in the real world everybody understands that there is a real challenge and that we need to protect ordinary people? The First Minister and his gang behind him— Members: Oh! —are too interested in prosecuting a case that they have believed all their political lives to look at the consequences of their proposals for ordinary working people. [Interruption.]

The fact is that all of them—all of them—in public, no matter what they say in private, think that they can treat the people of Scotland like mugs. No promise is too nonsensical and none need be costed. The fact of the matter is, from the First Minister and his Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth down—[Interruption.]

They say anything, without ever doing the hard job of proving how those things would actually be delivered. Is not it the case that the First Minister—[Interruption.]

The First Minister’s back benchers are never going to say this to him, so let me tell him what ordinary people believe. The First Minister must be daft to believe that the people of Scotland might be daft enough to believe his independence plan.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01477)

Excellent. In private, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, in a paper to Cabinet—we remember that rigorous piece of work—questioned the affordability of the state pension in a separate Scotland. This week, in public, John Swinney promised not only a state pension, but one guaranteed to go up by at least 2.5 per cent a year—[Interruption.]

It is easy to say that, but he said nothing about the age of retirement. How did John Swinney get from questioning the affordability of pensions to that new policy? What is the cost of that policy? How will the costs be met?

If the First Minister wants to be credible, he could at least make an effort and answer the question. He says that this is the last question that I should be asking, but it is the first question that many pensioners and others across the country are asking. I remember that, when I was studying my O grade maths, I had to do the sums and show the workings before I reached the answer. This week, John Swinney simply ditched what he had said before and gave an answer with no credible workings at all. Whatever the real cost of the Government’s pension policy, we know that it has cost the credibility not only of John Swinney, but of the Government. We live in the real world. In private, the Cabinet doubts the affordability of the state pension. If its public words are to have any credibility, surely it must be able to tell us—today—how it can be afforded. I ask again: how did the Government move from questioning the affordability of the state pension to the new policy of guaranteed rises for all, and what will that cost?

On the bus pass, it helps to have a bus to go with it. There are people across the country who believe that next year we will have a serious debate about the future of Scotland. From that showing, the First Minister is incapable of convincing anyone that has he has even remotely thought about the things that really matter to families across the country. We know why the First Minister can be so relaxed about pensions. By my reckoning, he has five, and they are all backed by the UK Government. He has his civil service pension, his MP’s pension, his MSP’s pension, his First Minister’s pension, and we should not forget—[Interruption.]

I am very grateful for my pension, but we should not forget that the First Minister presumably has his Royal Bank of Scotland pension. He should thank Gordon Brown for saving that one. We know that the First Minister will be all right, but he is prepared to put everyone else at risk. If pensioners now and in future are to believe that the Scottish National Party is suddenly so certain that the state pension is affordable, will the First Minister tell us now how much money he will have to raise to fund it and where it will come from? Show us the workings and not just the answer.

Well, my goodness. We have asked a simple question. The First Minister says that this is evident, so share with us what it will cost. I think that any pensioner or any family worried about their children’s future who looks at today’s broadcast—as he calls it—will wonder how it is possible for a First Minister to offer a future that is no more than a leap in the dark on the fundamental issues that they face. It is no wonder that not even his SNP candidate in Aberdeen Donside believes that there is a chance of the First Minister winning the referendum. Not even his own economic advisers find the First Minister credible. His Nobel laureate Joe Stiglitz says that he is wrong on corporation tax. Only last night, Professor John Kay laid out why the First Minister has his policy on the currency wrong. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland says that there is a £170 billion hole in the First Minister’s plans for private pensions. The First Minister simply cannot tell us how he will afford the state pension. It is an absolute failure of office to be unable to answer those most basic questions. The reality is that the First Minister has no credibility—[Interruption.] I am glad that members have something to laugh about because, for the rest of us, this is far from funny—[Interruption.].

If politics was about slogans and shouting, the First Minister would do fine. [Interruption.]

The fact of the matter is—[Interruption.]

The fact of the matter is that on something as fundamental as the future of this country, the First Minister has no credibility, no detail and no facts. Is not the truth that the only way to protect people’s pensions is to pension off Alex Salmond next September?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01456)

Will the First Minister tell us what—apart from the pound, the Bank of England, the national health service, the armed forces, the monarchy and the welfare state—the United Kingdom has ever done for us?

It is very odd, in that case, that the First Minister wants to reassure everybody that everything will stay the same and that nothing will change. The mystery is this: if the UK has so much that we want to share, why would we leave it and then ask it to share the things that we have left behind? If the rest of the UK is so monstrous, I wonder why it would want to share those things with us anyway. The truth is that the First Minister’s current plan would only weaken Scotland. Now his plan is to enshrine a foreign Government’s economic and welfare policies in Scottish policy without Scots having any say whatsoever. My question to the First Minister is this: he used to say that the pound and the UK welfare state were bad for Scotland, so what has changed?

First, that is not what Ed Balls said, as the First Minister knows perfectly well. [Interruption.] We have all learned that just because the First Minister says it does not mean that it is true—[Interruption.]

The idea that it is possible for this Government to argue that it will have a greater commitment to social justice under independence, when it has said that it will be tied to UK policies on welfare until 2020, is completely ridiculous. Independent experts have said that it would be impossible to get rid of the bedroom tax on day 1 of independence if we continued with the welfare position as advocated by the UK. It is nonsense on stilts and everyone but this lot—Scottish National Party members—knows it. Many of us—maybe too many of us—remember a young nationalist rogue in Westminster, who was, when Tory chancellor Nigel Lawson announced a cut in corporation tax, expelled from the chamber for calling the budget “an obscenity”. Now, the all-too-rich irony is that the one thing that the First Minister wants control of—the one thing to which he holds firm and on which he will not shift—is corporation tax. In an independent Scotland, corporation tax would be 3p lower than whatever level the Tories set it at. The benefits? The First Minister reckons that there would be massive 0.07 per cent growth per year—and that is with a 3 per cent margin of error. I ask again: what happened to that young man who believed in independence, and who now advocates “independence”?

That is simply not true. [Interruption.] Only the First Minister wants a welfare system that is better and that will be funded by cutting corporation tax by 3p. That is completely ludicrous. If it were not for the fact that this is about pensions, people’s wages and the future of our children, we could just laugh at that ludicrous response from the First Minister. Well prepared as it was, it did not respond to the challenge that lies at the very heart of his proposals for an independent Scotland, which would rely on the good will of a state that we will have said oppresses us and from which we will have said that we have to free ourselves. The question that we face, on which I suspect the First Minister’s own back benchers and party members will also reflect, is this: has the First Minister lost his mojo on independence, or does he—this might be more accurate—simply think that the people of Scotland are mugs? His plans for the currency, pensions, benefits, jobs and mortgages now all hinge on the good will of a country that we would just have made a foreign country by voting to leave it.

I do not know why Mr Swinney is saying that that is rubbish. His First Minister and Deputy First Minister have reassured us that that is what would happen after independence. Perhaps the SNP back benchers might want to set up a breakaway group—“SNP for independence”—[Interruption.]

As we know, the noisier it is, the truer the accusation. The truth is—the First Minister acknowledges this; indeed he celebrates it—that the UK would control our currency, our economy and now our pensions. Perhaps he has another plan that he is not telling us about. It is all too evident that the current plan is neither independence—

Indeed. The First Minister must have another plan that he is not telling us about, because the current plan is neither for independence, nor is it credible.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01437)

Is Aberdeen Donside the only place in Scotland that will not benefit from independence? Is that why neither the First Minister nor his candidate are mentioning the I-word there?

Yes—but the First Minister is not talking about independence when he is in Aberdeen, although he spends all his life talking about it everywhere else. Is not it the case that the First Minister does not mention independence in Aberdeen because his case is falling apart? His economic advisers—with or without Nobel prizes—say that it is rubbish. Joe Stiglitz says that the First Minister’s corporation tax policy will not work and Jim and Margaret Cuthbert say that his idea of independence is not independence at all. John Swinney is exiled for saying in private—

Well, we live in hope—[Interruption.]

We live in hope that John Swinney will say in public what he has said to his Cabinet colleagues in private. If we remember, he said that an independent Scotland might not be able to afford the state pension— Members: No! He did say it. He did not say it to you, but he did say it. [Interruption.]

John Swinney said in public that the SNP cannot say what currency the state pension would be paid in if we had one. Is not it the case that, although independence is the First Minister’s passion, every time there is an election, it becomes the love that dares not speak its name?

That went down well. [Laughter.] That was an astonishing response from a First Minister who is to the right of George Osborne in giving cuts to big business. [Interruption.]

The last time I noticed, the First Minister was still saying that he would cut corporation tax by three points more than George Osborne, and he is the only person—he is unique in the whole United Kingdom—who, on the one hand, is offering tax cuts, but is saying that we will continue, on the other hand, to spend in the same way in public expenditure. That is simply not credible, and everyone knows it. The First Minister’s campaign started with a day at the cinema. A year on, he is going to the zoo. In our hearts, all of us know that his campaign is going nowhere. Scotland has a lot of sympathy for the panda, Sweetie. We know what it is to reject the unwanted advances of a big beast with only one thing on its mind. We also know that the Government has its priorities all wrong. That is why Mark McDonald asked more questions in Parliament about Japanese knotweed than about accident and emergency services in Aberdeen. Is not it the case that the Scottish National Party will not mention independence in Aberdeen because the yes campaign is not helping Alex Salmond to get his yes man back into Holyrood?

That lecture would have been a little more credible if the First Minister was not the last man standing arguing for Reaganomics in this country. [Interruption.]

The First Minister talks about his fantastic spending programme. Tell it to the would-be college student who cannot get a place. Tell it to the care worker who has a 15-minute visit on task and go. Tell it to the pensioner who cannot use their bus pass because there is no bus at all. The fact of the matter is that, bizarrely, on the doorsteps in Aberdeen, the First Minister does not talk about the obsession that brought him into politics. When he is here, he and his ministers tell us what they cannot do until they have independence, but when they face real people, such as the people of Aberdeen, they speak about anything other than independence. Members: No. Oh, yes. I think that SNP members will find that that is so, and that includes their own candidate. Is not that because the First Minister knows what the people of Scotland really think about his independence obsession? Perhaps the real reason why he went to see the pandas at Edinburgh zoo this week was to find out first hand from Sunshine how to deal with rejection.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01418)

Does the First Minister think that George Osborne has cut corporation tax enough or is he urging the Chancellor of the Exchequer to go further?

That answer sounded like one of Mike Russell’s bus trips from Campbeltown. Gordon Brown indeed said that he would cut corporation tax when it could be shown that we could afford it. The difference is that Alex Salmond says that, if we were independent now, he would cut corporation tax 3 percentage points more than George Osborne whether it makes sense or not. However much George Osborne cuts taxes for his mates in banking, Alex Salmond would cut them further. However deep Osborne could be seen to be in the pockets of corporate greed, Alex Salmond would be that bit deeper. He says to Google, Amazon, Starbucks and anyone who wants to evade tax that they should come to Scotland because there will be less tax to evade. If Alex Salmond would set corporation tax 3 percentage points lower than whatever rate George Osborne set, does it not follow that he would have to cut schools and hospitals deeper than George Osborne, too?

I think that we have come to a pretty pass when the First Minister imagines that he is in a strong position on the issue, given that response to the question that I asked him. If the First Minister is in a strong position, perhaps we should ask who agrees with his corporation tax policy. We know that he agrees with it and we assume, by their silence, that his back benchers also agree with it. [Interruption.] Yes—the only place where there never appears to be any debate is on the Scottish National Party back benches. However, we know that neither Scottish business nor the unions support the First Minister’s position. The Confederation of British Industry Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the nation’s accountants—the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland—do not support it. This week, we found out that the Scottish Council for Development and Industry does not support it. Not even the chair of the yes campaign supports it. Members will be glad to know that the First Minister does have one supporter—his tax exile Jim McColl. Does the First Minister agree with his one supporter, Jim McColl, that in an independent Scotland capital gains tax should be abolished?

The most important word there was probably “if”. The First Minister calls to his defence his own figures, which some of us might think do not really stand up to scrutiny. The fact of the matter is that the SCDI said: “There is no great desire to participate in a race to the lowest tax environment”. We know that the First Minister thinks of himself as a talented economist; not only that, he likes quoting real economists, too. How many times has he told the chamber about his adviser, Joseph Stiglitz, and all the Nobel prizes that he has won? What does Joseph Stiglitz say about the policy? Just a month ago, he said: “Some of you have been told that lowering tax rates on corporations will lead to more investment. The fact is that’s not true. It is just a gift to the corporations increasing inequality in our society.” I agree with the Nobel prize-winning Joseph Stiglitz and the businesses, the unions and the professionals, who all say that the First Minister is wrong. Will the First Minister tell us who is right? Members: Gordon Brown! I cannot believe that SNP back benchers are calling in aid Gordon Brown, when I am telling the First Minister that his own economic adviser said that the policy was wrong. [Interruption.]

Will the First Minister tell us who is right? Is it the First Minister, the ex-Royal Bank of Scotland economist and renowned adviser—nay, pen friend—to Fred Goodwin, or is it his Nobel laureate economic adviser, Professor Joseph Stiglitz, who says that he is wrong?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01394)

I fully agree with the First Minister. I believe that he speaks for all of us in the chamber and for those beyond, throughout Scotland, in condemnation of those terrible actions. We are determined to hold together in the face of that terrorism. Last week, I asked the First Minister about Maureen Fleming. Her immense dignity in challenging the unfair system of accessing cancer drugs captured the attention of the people of Scotland. We know that Maureen met the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, this morning, at the First Minister’s request. Can we presume that she is now getting the drugs that she needs to prolong her life?

Of course, we share the First Minister’s aim to get this right in the future, but it is the business of Government to address the problems that Mrs Fleming and others face right now. On Monday, the health secretary Alex Neil told a radio phone-in programme: “If the clinicians thought she would benefit from it, she would get the drug”. Mrs Fleming’s clinician believes that she would benefit from the drug, which is why he prescribed it, and so do many other clinicians who have been consulted about Mrs Fleming’s case. The people who have denied her the drug do not have the same degree of clinical expertise on her condition. The Health and Sport Committee was told this week that cost was the main issue. Since last week, we have been contacted by other people whose circumstances are similar to those of Mrs Fleming. Whom should they believe? Should they believe the doctors who are at the front line trying to keep people alive, or a Government that has form for misleading the public?

The point that we are making to the First Minister is that the system is not working. Examples such as Mrs Fleming’s case mean that it is simply not working, and we need to address that problem. We are seeking reassurance that such decisions are made on clinical grounds and not on ground of cost. The First Minister has said that Mrs Fleming has been refused the drug on clinical grounds. Let us look at the case. Last week, the First Minister told members in the chamber that Mrs Fleming could not get cetuximab because she had had chemotherapy, and the health secretary, Alex Neil, has repeated that. Alex Neil told the BBC that there were “a number of conditions suggested by the drug company Merck. One of those conditions is that anyone who has had chemotherapy will not get this drug.” Why would Mrs Fleming’s doctor prescribe the drug for her if she was precluded? Why would he appeal that decision? We contacted Merck Serono Ltd, and it issued, at five to 10 this morning, a statement that says: “Cetuximab has been proven to be effective and is licensed for use in bowel cancer patients previously treated with chemotherapy, and is widely used for such patients in England.” Whom should we believe—the clinicians who seek to prescribe the drug, the company that manufactures the drug, or Alex Neil?

I absolutely do not dispute that it should not be for politicians to decide whether someone gets a drug or not, but the cases should be clinically decided. I do not think that the First Minister listened to me. Clinicians in large number believe that Mrs Fleming’s case is suitable, and the drug company says that the drug is suitable. The only person who is now saying that it was somehow a clinical decision is the First Minister himself. His point that Mrs Fleming does not qualify because she had chemotherapy has been disputed and denied by clinicians who understand her case. Mrs Fleming’s case was first raised eight months ago and another letter was sent to Alex Neil six weeks ago, but she received a reply and was offered a meeting only after her case was raised in this chamber. People may recall that Ian Morrison was refused treatment until his case was highlighted in the chamber, but he is now getting the cetuximab that he needs, despite his having previously had chemotherapy. Maisie Black needed a rare drug, but it was not until she was on the front page of the Daily Record that a £21 million fund for orphan drugs was established. We recall John McGarrity, who was ignored on a trolley for eight hours, but once his experience made it into the papers, £50 million was conjured out of thin air to deal with a problem that we were initially told did not exist anyway. That is no way to run a health service. We all agree that the NHS should be free at the point of need, but is it not the case that, for too many patients, the health service becomes free only at the point that it embarrasses the First Minister?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01380)

A packet of paracetamol costs 19 pence in Tesco. To dispense it on a free prescription costs the national health service £3.10 per prescription. The NHS spends £7.2 million a year dispensing paracetamol. For that amount of money, 200 Scottish cancer patients could get cetuximab to treat their condition for free for a year. Although that treatment is free in England, Scots cancer patients have to pay about £3,000 a month for it. Does the First Minister think that that is fair?

Not everything in this world is an argument between the First Minister and me about manifestos—some things are more important than that. Government is precisely about the hugely challenging issues. Scots cancer patients are three times less likely to get on the Scottish NHS the drugs that they need than are patients in England, according to cancer charities. Scottish cancer patients have to pay thousands of pounds for vital life-enhancing drugs that are available free south of the border. That means that some Scottish cancer victims are planning to uproot their families from their homes and communities to move to England for treatment that they cannot afford here. We are in danger of exporting health refugees. [Interruption.] Members: Shame!

I absolutely agree that it is shameful, so I am asking—[Interruption.]

I agree that it is shameful that we in danger of exporting health refugees, so what is the First Minister’s advice to those families?

The extraordinarily difficult position that I am in is that I am not able to address the problems: I can only ask the questions. I am not in government and I have a responsibility to raise the difficult issues, so I am asking the First Minister not to retreat to the comfortable refuge of party politics, but to focus on what is happening in the real world. With respect, I say to the First Minister that what he said is not good enough for people like Maureen Fleming—a mother of three and a grandmother of 10 who has bowel cancer. Maureen has been denied the drugs that her consultant has said would improve her condition and extend her life. The Flemings are a proud family who are struggling to get together the £10,000 that is needed for the first three months’ treatment. However, they cannot afford to pay for any more treatment after that, so they are planning to leave their home of 27 years and to rent a flat in Newcastle because they can get the drug free in England. Time is short; Maureen Fleming has come to the chamber today to hear at first hand the First Minister’s advice to her and cancer victims like her.

I regret that, in all that, the First Minister did not address the question that I posed to him. Mrs Fleming represents a failure in the system. While we are deliberating about how we might address the problem in the future, it is the business of Government to address what is happening now to families who do not have time to wait. We are talking about the real lives of real Scots. I will engage in the policy debate, but I urge the First Minister to act now for the people who are being failed by the system. The First Minister and I agree that the NHS should be free at the point of need, but the reality in the First Minister’s Scotland is that if a person has a headache, their prescription is free, but if they have cancer, their prescription can cost £3,000 a month. Is not it the case that, in this Scotland, Scots with hay fever can get their prescriptions free, but Scots with cancer may have to leave their homeland for treatment to save their lives?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01368)

In February, I asked the First Minister about the case of 84-year-old John McGarrity who, having been admitted with chest pains, was left for eight hours on a hospital trolley in a corridor. At the time, the First Minister said that these things happen in the national health service and his Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing said that it was “not a true reflection” of the NHS. Can the First Minister tell me whether the number of people left on trolleys is getting better or worse?

I think that the First Minister did say that, but he has clearly not reflected on it. I do not dispute that we all love and care about the NHS, and the First Minister and I agree that it is a disgrace that pensioners such as John McGarrity wait for eight hours on a trolley in a corridor for treatment. I presume that when I raised the matter with him in February he investigated such occurrences, so I will try again. Can he tell me whether the situation is better or worse?

I have absolutely no doubt whatever that the First Minister can give me a long list of answers to questions that he was not asked, but he has not answered the question that I asked him. This is not about anyone running down the NHS; it is about taking our job seriously. I can only presume that the reason why the First Minister does not know the answer to my question is that he does not care. He has not even asked. [Interruption.] He has not even asked. Perhaps he does not like to ask in case the answer breaches his perfect view of his world. Let me tell the First Minister what is happening in the NHS that he is supposed to be running, while deciding what currency a fantasy Scotland will have in his fantasy world. In the real world, the number of people who are languishing in accident and emergency departments is increasing; we know that, thanks to a freedom of information request on our health boards. In John McGarrity’s area of Glasgow, the number of patients who waited over four hours to be seen has more than trebled—up from 10,100 in 2009 to 31,700 this year. Looking across Scotland, I note that in NHS Lanarkshire—the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing’s own backyard—the number of patients who are waiting more than four hours in A and E has also more than trebled and that in NHS Grampian, which is the First Minister’s own backyard, there was an increase of 1,300 in the number of patients waiting more than four hours in A and E, compared with last year. Now that the First Minister knows what is happening in the NHS on his watch, will he tell us what he is going to do about it?

We would settle for the First Minister answering the question in any sense whatever. That answer certainly does not qualify. The First Minister talked about Wales, but he is in power here. He is responsible for the NHS. I am sure that he understands that he has been in power since 2007, dealing with the national health service. On the point about winter pressures, the winter pressures this year were less than they were in 2010, so the explanation simply does not stack up. If the First Minister ever made it out of Bute house to the real world and met a patient who was waiting on a trolley for treatment, we can assume that he would say to the person who was lying in front of him, “Listen. You are more satisfied with the NHS than ever before.” He would tell the person on the trolley that things are better under his area of responsibility. The First Minister is simply not serious. When will he understand that patients need medical treatment, not slogans? He has been in charge of the NHS for six years—

It is not “Thank goodness” for the people who are lying on trolleys. [Interruption.]

The First Minister tells people that they should be grateful for that. It is not “Thank goodness”, at all. The number of people who wait more than four hours in A and E is increasing, but what does the First Minister do? Instead of cutting times—we can hardly believe this—he cuts the target. I have raised the issue with the First Minister time and again. Is it not the case that the reason why things have got worse, the reason why he has done nothing to improve the situation, and the reason why he does not even know, is that he does not care about NHS patients and cares only—[Interruption.] Scottish National Party members also care only about SNP slogans. [Interruption.] You might want to ask your own guy for an answer occasionally. That would be encouraging. [Interruption.]

Then we would really know that we were in a new place. Here is a phrase that sums up this country, and the First Minister should reflect on it: in this country, under Salmond, Scotland is lying on a trolley while his referendum is in intensive care.

1. On this day, when we are all thinking of the soldiers’ lives that have been lost abroad, and the families who are grieving at the loss of those brave men, I ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01332)

I thank the First Minister for what he said. He speaks for all of us in sending our sympathies and condolences to the families, and our very good wishes to those who are injured. After the past 10 days, is not it the case that the First Minister’s plans on currency and Scottish pensions are in exactly the same condition as his receipts for his half-a-million-pounds trip to the Ryder cup—completely and utterly shredded?

I am not sure that it was worth the First Minister’s while to hunt through his folder to find that line. Also, for the First Minister to talk about consistency and the currency in one sentence is bizarre for the rest of us. The First Minister said this week that he will bet his career and his house on a yes vote in the referendum. Is not that wonderful? Who else shares his confidence? Hands up those on the front bench who will bet their career and their house on a yes vote. [Interruption.]

There are obviously no takers there. Let us try the back benchers. Which members behind the front bench—who have no career, but have a house—would bet their houses on a yes vote? Will they put their hands up? No? How about hands up those who support a separate Scottish currency? Maybe they do that only in private, when the First Minister is not watching. Of course, the First Minister’s macho acclamation of his willingness to risk all, to show how much he believes in himself, is not the point. Is not it the case that the First Minister’s career and the First Minister’s house do not matter, and that what does matter is that he is taking a gamble with everyone’s house and everyone’s job, with a currency plan that he has evidently not thought through?

Meanwhile, back in the real world, all the people who thought that perhaps the First Minister had a case will now realise that he has no case whatever. The First Minister says that we will keep the pound; the chair of the yes campaign says that we should have a separate Scottish currency and then prepare to join the euro. To put it most kindly, that is a complete shambles. The First Minister said that the previous Chancellor of the Exchequer was responsible for the Royal Bank of Scotland nearly going under—the bank that the First Minister used to work for—[Interruption.] I am sorry; I thought that the SNP knew that he used to work for the RBS. Never mind. He now claims that the current chancellor has no control over the Bank of England. You simply could not make it up. The people of Scotland deserve honesty and clarity. This is not about the First Minister’s bravado and gambling, or about a smart soundbite for him; this is about people’s jobs, homes, mortgages, pensions and savings. Members: Same old, same old. It may be “same old, same old” to the SNP back benchers, but this is about people’s jobs, homes, mortgages, pensions and savings. That is not “Same old, same old”, apart from for the group of separatists; it is about the real world. For the sake of clarity, will the First Minister now rule out a separate Scottish currency?

I think that there were more squirrels there than you could shake a stick at. One would think that the First Minister had never argued for lighter-touch regulation of the banking system and that he had never written that letter to Fred Goodwin, saying “Go on yourself—that’s absolutely brilliant!” before he departed the Royal Bank of Scotland. However, one thing that we note from that response is that the First Minister did not answer the question. The fact is that although he is trying to break up Britain, the only things that are breaking up are his arguments and campaign. The currency union between the Czech Republic and Slovakia lasted just six weeks—if only the First Minister could hold on to a policy position for that long. Seriously—Scotland is on pause while he punts his fantasy arguments. Only one thing is consistent: we cannot trust the First Minister on anything. On apprenticeships, he took 10,000 people who were already in jobs and called them apprentices. [Interruption.] We all know it. He said that he had abolished hidden waiting lists when he had fiddled them, and then he told us that he was increasing college spending when he was slashing it. Is not it the most accurate answer ever given to any Parliament anywhere that we cannot trust a word that the First Minister says?

This is a sad day. It is a privilege to pay tribute to Brian Adam on behalf of Scottish Labour. We gather to remember Brian and to pay our respects to him. Our thoughts today are with his family, who must feel most sorely the loss of a beloved husband, son and loving father. Since his illness, Brian’s courage and strength of character in overcoming the challenges that his condition brought and continuing his work in the Parliament, speaking in debates while he could and contributing to the politics of Scotland, have been a source of admiration, inspiration and respect from us all. His bravery was evident as he faced up to an illness that saw a proud man fade before our eyes, its cruelty all too visible. We should honour and celebrate that courage. I want, too, to remember not just the hard battle that Brian had in recent years, but to reflect a little on his role and contribution to the work of the Parliament since he first became an MSP. Brian was, as I was, part of the class of 1999. That was a hugely exciting time; we were present at the birth of a new institution created to bring power closer to people. However, for those of us who remember it, it was also a turbulent time, when we felt, on occasion, as though we were under siege. A bond was forged between us that—despite our political differences—lingers even now. Brian was, of course, very much part of that group and that time. I remember Brian as a key SNP figure, strong in his views, articulate in making his case and someone we recognised as having real authority on his own side. Brian and I crossed swords many times—and those exchanges were often robust—when we served on committee together. Some more uncharitable observers might suggest that we fought like ferrets in a sack, but I believe that, while Brian was passionate and persistent in his views, those views were expressed without animus towards those with whom he disagreed. I never found him to be anything other than courteous. I am sure that Labour members who worked with Brian will recognise, as I do, that although we often disagreed with his argument, we could respect the toughness and energy with which he prosecuted his case. Equally, where there could be agreement, he worked constructively to make cross-party consensus effective. I know that he shared the passion of many members to tackle homelessness and create warm and affordable homes for those who need them, and that he worked where he could to build support on those issues. Brian will be missed as a parliamentarian. I know that many SNP members mourn him as a colleague and a dear friend, and our thoughts are with them today. However, ultimately, in remembering Brian, I reflect on this: he never seemed to me to be only a politician. Being a politician did not define him. No one could be in any doubt about his commitment to his party and his loyalty to its cause, but he also loved his land and the language and culture of north-east Scotland. He was proud not just of all things Scottish; he was proud, too, of the distinctive heritage of his own background. Even more than that, we were always aware of the importance of Brian’s family and his faith to him. In all things, he seemed to me to put the job of politician in its proper place and its proper context. What he did here mattered to him, but it was evident to all that his family and faith mattered even more. That should be part of his legacy. We offer our sincerest sympathies to Brian’s family, colleagues and friends. He was taken from them all too soon, having suffered more in his last years than we can even begin to imagine. We hope that they can draw strength in these bleakest and rawest of times from the affection and admiration that he earned beyond his own party and the recognition that his was a good life, lived in the service of others.

On behalf of my party, my colleagues here and indeed all those who have served in the Parliament since 1999 but are no longer with us, I say that we are deeply saddened by the news that Brian Adam has passed away. I have always recognised in him a man of strong conviction, decency and profound faith, and a man who cared deeply for his family, his party and his country. Our thoughts are with those who feel his loss most sorely. I know that this is a very sad day indeed for those here who not only had the privilege of working with him as a colleague, but who loved him as a friend. We share your sadness at the loss of a fine parliamentarian and a fine Scot.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01315)

If Scotland votes yes in the referendum, the first budget for an independent Scotland will be set in 2016. Who would the First Minister prefer to sign it off—Ed Balls, George Osborne or Angela Merkel?

We all know that that is not true, given what has been said in the past week. Despite the fact that the Government has deployed the First Minister, the Deputy First Minister and, indeed, John Swinney himself, it has been unable to answer the very simple question about the implications for Scotland of being in a sterling zone. I agree with the First Minister that George Osborne is a slippery, untrustworthy man; I just do not understand why he thinks that that will change after the referendum. I agree that George Osborne’s fiscal and monetary policies are wrong for Scotland and for the whole United Kingdom, but it is Osborne with whom the First Minister will do the deal if he wins the referendum. That is the difference between Alex Salmond and me. I want to get rid of the Tories and keep the union; he wants to get rid of the union and keep the Tories in charge of the economy. Can the First Minister explain to me—and perhaps some of his colleagues—why that would be independence?

Well, that felt like an infestation of squirrels, I have to say. We now seem to be in a position where we no longer cry freedom, we cry flexibility—whatever that might mean. The First Minister has yet to answer a simple question about the implications of his choice, with no plan B for the currency. John Swinney told the BBC that Scotland might leave the United Kingdom without paying any debts at all. It seems that while there are some who say that an independent Scotland might end up like Greece, John Swinney wants us to start off like Greece, by defaulting on our debts. Four weeks ago, I asked the First Minister what his plan B was if we could not agree on a currency union. Like George Osborne, he said that there was no plan B. So, is his strategy to say, “Let us into a currency union or we won’t pay our debts”? If that fails, would not Salmond’s Scotland start off life as an international pariah without a currency?

The First Minister talks about credibility, but he changes his position on the currency more times than I change my shoes. The only consistent thing about his position on the currency is that it is not consistent—he does not say the same thing from one week to another. In addition, the First Minister talks about building up liabilities. Yes, we remember how those liabilities were built up: saving the Royal Bank of Scotland, the bank that the First Minister used to work for. If the First Minister has no plan B, his position boils down simply to this: “Please, gonnae please, let us be in a currency union,” with no credibility about what he would take into the negotiation. It is clear from the First Minister’s last response that he does not understand why this matters. He thinks that it is a bit of a game or a bit of a knockabout, but it matters to families worrying about what currency their wages will be paid in and how they will put food on the table. It matters to pensioners, who are entitled to know how their pensions will be paid. It matters to the person who has saved all their life and who now wonders what those savings will be worth if there is a yes vote. It matters to anyone who is paying off a mortgage, anyone with a job and anyone with a business. What currency we have is a most basic question, and it is astonishing that the First Minister has been unable to answer it. But let us pause. What the First Minister is saying is that he wants a divorce but to keep the joint bank account. Is he not gambling with Scotland’s future on the basis of good will from neighbours we would just have rejected?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01299)

This afternoon, the Scottish Parliament will debate the legacy of Margaret Thatcher. Three months after Margaret Thatcher became Prime Minister, I became a teacher. I was a schoolteacher throughout her time in office. As a teacher, I saw first-hand how our young people had their hopes and aspirations extinguished by the decisions that she made. I remember the challenge of trying to motivate teenagers who thought that studying was a waste of time because there were no jobs for them anyway. No one in this chamber wants a return to those days. The First Minister pledged that every 16 to 19-year-old in Scotland would have a guaranteed place in education or training. Has he achieved that goal?

I am not sure whether that means that the First Minister has or has not achieved his goal, so I will ask him another question. The First Minister promised that no young person should be left behind—who could disagree with that? How many 16 to 19-year-olds who left school before March this year do not have a place in education or training?

First, and depressingly, we know that if the figures had gone in the other direction, the First Minister would not have taken responsibility for bad news. My second point, which is a serious one—I am thinking again about the young people whom I taught in the 1980s—is that long-term youth unemployment is disproportionately higher in Scotland than it is in the rest of the United Kingdom. That is why the issue of the offer—not the guarantee—to 16 to 19-year-olds is so important. The First Minister does not seem to know the answer to the question I asked. In private, though, he does know because, under freedom of information legislation, we have established that Skills Development Scotland has identified more than 7,000 school leavers who are known to be looking for a job or training but have yet to find a place. However, it is worse than that. SDS has also admitted that it has lost more than 17,000 school leavers: it does not know what 17,000 school leavers are doing or where they are. If we do not know where they are, how do we protect them and prevent them from becoming the long-term unemployed who we know have suffered over the past year? In that context, what are the First Minister’s pledges worth when a guarantee has now become an offer, and the offer has not been delivered?

It is interesting that, although the First Minister can find lots and lots of figures to trade with me, he cannot answer the question about the 7,000 young people without education or training and the 17,000 people whose whereabouts we do not even know. One of the lessons that I learned in the 1980s as a schoolteacher was that, when politicians talk to one another and trade figures, they ignore the reality of what is happening to communities throughout Scotland. We cannot allow that to happen again. I ask the First Minister not to trade figures about the bits that he is happy with, but to listen and think about what his own agency is saying, and what is happening to some of our young people. We know that one in every six school leavers is either out of work or out of training, or we do not even know what their status is. The problem for this Government is that it starts with a slogan, but it cuts careers officers and college places and then denies the truth. The First Minister thinks that politics is about process and good news stories, but it is not. It is about taking hard choices and changing people’s lives. He talks, to bolster his argument, about 25,000 apprenticeships, but he gets to that figure by calling 10,000 people who are already in work for six months apprentices. He cuts college funding—[Interruption.]

I am asking the First Minister to think about doing the hard stuff. He cuts college funding, but tells the Parliament that it is going up. Now we know what he knew: that 17,000 school leavers have simply disappeared—and that is according to the Government. Please, in this week of all weeks, will the First Minister learn that lesson, put down the slogans and start doing his job?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01285)

I welcome what the First Minister said and I hope that we can do our small bit to signal to people in Scotland that they should continue their generosity in supporting people in such terrible situations. On Saturday I met a young girl who is in her sixth year at a school in my constituency. She has eight grade 1s at standard grade and five As at higher, and she is studying for three advanced highers at school and a fourth at her local college. She wants to be a doctor, but she has not been able to get even one interview at a Scottish university to study medicine. Can the First Minister think why that might be?

That will be no comfort whatever to my constituent, or to students throughout the country who are facing problems. Simply to assert that a policy is working is not enough; the Government has a responsibility to create opportunities for young people. Let us look at the lived reality, rather than at what the First Minister asserts. We know that in Scotland just one in four students comes from the poorest backgrounds—for the rest of the United Kingdom, the rate is closer to one in three. We know that the drop-out rate at Scottish universities is 25 per cent higher than the drop-out rate in England. We know that although constituents like mine have to compete for a limited number of places with students from across Europe, English students can come north, if they have the money, to access unlimited numbers of places. Does the First Minister recognise that on access, on drop-out levels and on university places, this Government is failing young people in Scotland who want to make the best of themselves?

First, the First Minister is completely complacent. Secondly, it is one thing to talk about how to fund students who are at university, but the figures that I pointed out to him show that our access rates in Scotland are poorer than those in the rest of the United Kingdom, so it is nonsense for him to settle for a slogan rather than to find a solution for Scottish students. The First Minister denies what is happening to young people all over the country, but what do we expect from a First Minister who claims that college spending is going up, when it is going down? What do we expect from a Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning who claimed that there are no waiting lists, when colleges have said that thousands are being denied college places? What do we expect from an education secretary and a First Minister who brutally cut college funding at the very point when we needed colleges most? When colleges challenged him on waiting lists, did the First Minister say that that was something that the Government should investigate and get to the bottom of and ask, “Should we reflect on our spending priorities?” No. I will describe what the Government does. A private Government document that has been released under a freedom of information request says: “The sooner we can produce our own version of events and discredit the Scotland’s Colleges survey the better.” That is the Government’s approach—to get out its “version of events” rather than address the real problem. Once again, the Government says one thing in private and another in public. Does the First Minister understand why college lecturers have passed a motion of no confidence in Mike Russell?

I can live with the First Minister insulting my intelligence, but he insults the intelligence of every young person across Scotland with that nonsense. The issue of college places absolutely describes the First Minister’s approach, which is, “If you don’t like what people say, shoot the messenger.” It was not the Labour Party that said that there were college waiting lists; it was Colleges Scotland. How dare he show such disrespect to people who are living with the cuts that he is imposing on their sector? The First Minister boasts that “the rocks will melt with the sun”—[Official Report, 8 September 2011; c 1537.], as if everything in our education sector is perfect. He needs to recognise that, for too many Scots, the rocks will melt in the sun before they get a place at a Scottish university or college. He denies the existence of the young people who are waiting for college places when he should be helping them. He promises to turn our schools from good to great when half of teachers admit that they are unprepared for the new curriculum, maths examiners are quitting and teachers are voting to strike. Mr Russell sits there, and his only answer in his speech was that we need independence rather than to address the problems that young people face now. Is the truth not that, after six years of this SNP Government, the First Minister has failed to give all of Scotland’s young people the best chance in life and is now happy to hide behind soundbites rather than to create chances for students, with the promise of jam at some point in the future if the SNP ever wins the referendum question?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of this hugely historic day. (S4F-01266)

This week, John Swinney defied the First Minister in a key policy: he actually answered a question. John Swinney said that a separate Scotland would consider no currency option other than the pound sterling. That would, of course, put Scotland in a very weak negotiating position with the rest of the United Kingdom and the Bank of England if there was a yes vote, with nowhere else to go. Presiding Officer, you will know that I am an eternal optimist, and we all live in hope. [Interruption.] In fact, I am such an optimist that I even harbour the hope that, at some point, a Scottish National Party back bencher will do something other than shout to order. [Interruption.] Will the First Minister—[Interruption.]

Will the First Minister tell the people of Scotland what his plan B is if the deal that the Bank of England offers is bad for the country?

It is the First Minister who has form on misleading the chamber, not me. True to form, he did not, of course, answer the question that was asked. I agree with the First Minister that George Osborne is bad for Scotland, but I just do not understand why he thinks that George Osborne would be good to Scotland if we left the United Kingdom. Let us look at the First Minister’s negotiating skills. We should remember that, when Westminster offered to give him the power to hold the referendum, he said that that was an attack on Scottish democracy. He then backed down on having his own electoral commission, he backed down on having a second question, and he backed down on spending limits. He then called the climbdown “the historic Edinburgh agreement”. It is clear that the First Minister has shown his hand to George Osborne. Will he now tell the people what the Bank of England would control if there was a separate Scotland?

I found it astonishing last night that Stewart Hosie supported the Tories in cutting corporation tax. Yesterday, Joe FitzPatrick said that today was going to be a “historic” day, but that clearly does not reach as far as the First Minister ever answering the question that he is asked. The First Minister does not like George Osborne, but he is saying that, in an independent Scotland, George Osborne would have more power here than he currently has. Members: Oh! Of course he would, because the First Minister is relying—[Interruption.]

The First Minister has said that he will rely on sterling and has no plan B. That is not a strong negotiating position. Ultimately, the First Minister is saying that the people of Scotland just have to take his word for it that everything will be fine. Let us therefore look at the First Minister’s record on keeping his word—and I am not talking just about giving the most accurate answer ever given to any Parliament anywhere. Last year, at his party conference, the First Minister promised the best childcare package anywhere but, a year on, not one more childcare place has been created as a result of that announcement. Last year, he boasted about hospital waiting times, but we now know that the figures were fiddled. Do members remember when he told the people of Glasgow how they were going to vote weeks before the polls opened? That turned out well. Does the First Minister understand why an increasing number of people simply do not believe a word that he says?

The First Minister started to answer the question that I asked previously. I asked about his record on waiting times and childcare, but he started talking about something else. There is nothing more cynical in government than, when challenged about what is happening now, saying that it will all be right at some point in future if we could just have independence. That is cynicism. This afternoon we will find out whether the First Minister did tell Rupert Murdoch the date of the referendum first or whether he gave Rupert one of the most accurate tip-offs ever given to any newspaper proprietor, anywhere. We will find out how long Scotland is to remain on pause while the First Minister tries to sell Scots a deal that Scotland rejects. What we have now is Scotland on pause: a Scotland with 120,000 fewer students in our colleges, a Scotland with pensioners languishing on trolleys in hospital corridors— Members: Doom and gloom!

I will try again, because it is true. We have a Scotland in which pensioners are languishing for hours on trolleys in hospital corridors, without getting treatment. We have a Scotland that is suffering from Tory cuts, which the First Minister doubles—[Interruption.]

A Scotland that is suffering from Tory cuts—[Interruption.] I will just wait until you are quiet, and then I will say it so that you can hear it—that worked when I was in the classroom and there is no reason why it should not work now. I do not know what time the bell goes. [Laughter.] I will say it again: a Scotland suffering from Tory cuts that the First Minister doubles and passes on to our communities. When Scotland rejects him, how will the First Minister explain to the student, the pensioner and the patient why he wasted so many years concentrating on his obsession and not on their needs?

If “the hand of history” is on the First Minister’s shoulder, I do wish it would give him a shove, so that he would get on with it. This is the man who got into power by playing down his belief in independence. Many people who voted for the Scottish National Party but who do not believe in independence will breathe a sigh of relief—as I do—that the date is now in sight on which we can finish this constitutional debate once and for all and get on with dealing with the real issues and priorities of Scotland. Until then, Scotland remains on pause. What I do not understand is this: if leaving the United Kingdom is the key to Scotland’s prosperity, why does the First Minister want Scotland to languish for another year and a half before we get the chance to vote on that? The truth behind the delay is not that the First Minister is holding to a promise that was made to the electorate in a television debate; the truth is that Alex Salmond knows that if he held the referendum now he would not just lose it—he would be routed. All the self-aggrandisement of today is not just a sign of the First Minister’s usual pomposity; his making an occasion out of a delayed announcement is an attempt to con the people into believing that we have moved a step towards independence, when we have not. I believe that the truth is that we have moved a step down the road to cementing Scotland’s place in the United Kingdom. If today is the day when the debate starts in earnest, it should also be the day when the First Minister breaks the habit of a lifetime and starts answering questions. What controls would the Bank of England—which will by then be a foreign bank—have over the policies of the Government of a separate Scotland? [Interruption.] I think we had this problem this morning. [Interruption.]

What controls would the Bank of England—which would by then be a foreign bank—have over the policies of the Government of a separate Scotland? What would the deal be if Scotland became a new member of the European Union? Alex Salmond has avoided giving detailed answers to those questions and many others in the years past. In the months ahead, the people of Scotland will hold him to account. He plans to hold the referendum in the autumn of next year and to publish his white paper in the autumn of this year. Why the delay? If we are to have the transparent debate that the First Minister says he wants, why does he not publish his full independence plans now? If he wants a proper debate, he must disclose that white paper today. [Interruption.]

If he does not, the whole country will be asking, “What’s the plan, Alex?”

Will the First Minister give way?

The First Minister ought not to describe other people’s motives in relation to how they vote in this place. I say for the record that when I voted as I did, I voted on the grounds of listening to the evidence in front of me and my conscience. It does him—or anybody else—no service to suggest that when people disagree with him, it is because they are obliged to do so.

Listening to the speeches of John Lamont and Willie Rennie, I was struck by the seriousness with which they have engaged in reflecting after 10 years. I am deeply disappointed that the First Minister has chosen simply to turn this into an argument for independence. He made the point himself. He said that the argument for independence is that we would not have done what happened 10 years ago. The issues are far more serious than that. The 10th anniversary of the start of the Iraq war is an opportunity to reflect on many issues: the bravery and sacrifice of our armed forces; the impact of conflict on civilians; the role that our international institutions can and should play in tackling conflict in the world; and how we protect the world’s citizens from fascist and despotic rule. It must, too, be an opportunity to applaud those who now seek the reconstruction of Iraq and an opportunity for us in this Parliament to commit to do what we can to support our armed forces and our veterans, who too often bear the mental scars of time in conflict. Iraq is one of the most difficult issues that I have ever had to address and, frankly, I did not require a debate in this place to reflect on it. As a politician, someone interested in how political power is used and abused and someone who, like everyone in here, yearns for a more stable and equal world, I believe that we must reflect on the lessons of Iraq. I am genuinely disappointed that the First Minister did not take the option of a debate without a motion, so that we could come together genuinely to wrestle with the challenges that the Iraq war and the important issues of intervention and tackling human rights abuses and fascism present. The Labour party will abstain from the vote on the motion and the amendments. In preparation for the debate, among other things I read again the debate in the Scottish Parliament in early 2003. In reading my speech, I was struck by the troubled view that I had about what option should be taken. That uncertainty was reflected in debates across the country; it was not particular to this place. The debate at that time divided families—it divided mine; it divided parties, although not, apparently, the SNP; and it divided communities. That was a division not between the peace lover and the warmonger, the good and the bad, the pro-Blair and the anti-Blair, the pro-American and the anti-American; it was a division about what, on balance, people believed to be the better thing to do—not the right thing or the wrong thing, but the better thing to do in the most difficult of circumstances. I have always respected the views of those who did not agree with me then. I respected their views then and I respect them now. I ask only that people believe that those who in the end supported the war did so with the best of motives and not the worst.

My position ahead of the invasion was always under revision. I would describe it in this way. Having, as a young woman, opposed the first Gulf war and watched the slaughter of the Kurds by an emboldened Saddam Hussein when Bush stopped at the border, my thinking was focused on how we protected ordinary Iraqi people from torture, abuse and genocide. I found Ann Clwyd MP’s position compelling. Over a number of years, she fought internationally for recognition of the abuse of the Kurds and what was happening to them.

Ann Clwyd argued that the scale of the terror that the Kurds faced meant that international action was needed and could not wait.

I will never support and have never supported the kind of abuses that you describe. My point is that Ann Clwyd MP made the point 10 years ago that these people could no longer wait. She did not rush to judgment; she did not want the Iraq that you describe and she is deeply committed to human rights. It is offensive to suggest that we do not agree with you on what happened 10 years ago; we want such a conclusion now. The interesting thing for those who said that action should wait is that sanctions were not working. Many who opposed intervention also opposed sanctions. For me, the debate was never about weapons of mass destruction; it was about humanitarian action and the importance of addressing such concerns. [Interruption.]

I agree with you. It reflected the obscenity that Saddam Hussein was that he was prepared to take that approach against his own people. I believed that action needed United Nations endorsement and I was and am on record as saying that, if that endorsement had not been forthcoming, I would have voted against the war if I had been in the House of Commons. However, if I am absolutely honest, given that my argument was based not on weapons of mass destruction but on Saddam Hussein’s tyranny and what we did to the people of Iraq after the first Iraq war, I am still not certain what I would have done.

In the minute that I have left, I will comment on what the lessons are, if I am permitted to do so. I am not a pacifist, but I think that we should have a more honest discussion and a better understanding about the grounds for going to war—[Interruption.]

Willie Rennie’s comments on that were important. Whatever position we take on Iraq or any international conflict, it should never be shaped by any party’s judgment on its domestic political interests. The needs of those who are at the centre of the conflict must be the priority—not how it reads across international communities. We need to reflect more deeply on the international community’s role in policing human rights abuses. If the argument is that a nation’s boundaries cannot be violated—that was one of the most forcibly made arguments—what would or should we have done if Hitler had had no territorial ambitions?

We must ask the questions. What do we say about Kosovo, Chile and the Falklands? What do we say now about Syria? I will finish on a point that Willie Rennie made and which should be reinforced. How do we ensure that the result of the Iraq war is not that tyrants can rest easy and that the international community settles for paralysis because the most powerful nations always assess first their direct interest and retreat from their international responsibilities? If the message of the Iraq war is that the international community stands back from its responsibilities to tackle human rights abuses, that will be the worst lesson of all. I hope that, in our reflections 10 years on, we all understand the seriousness with which we must all tackle such grave issues of protecting the rights and dignities of individuals around the world.

I do not think that it helps the debate to say what you have just said. Many, many people in here and beyond fought Pinochet and fought the Scottish team going to play in Chile. Scotland has a very proud record on that. It does not help to suggest that somehow other folk in here have less compassion than you do.

Is the member seriously suggesting that somebody like Ann Clwyd had a retrospective explanation for why she supported the war? If he looks at anything that was said by her and others who raised issues in support of the Kurds, he will see that their decision whether to support the war was a very serious and difficult one. He might disagree with it, but it does not do him any service to say that the explanation was retrospective and somehow made up to match a desire to go to war.

I suggest that the minister look at what I said. I explained that what happened in the first Gulf war informed my view of what we should be doing in the second Gulf war. We abandoned people—indeed, there will have been people in the chamber who condemned George Bush for not continuing and who said at a later stage that he should have done so. It does no service to anyone to imagine that the decision was a simple one on either side. I ask the minister to reflect that what I told him in the chamber was genuinely my position and that we find out things now that we did not know then. That is the truth.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01241)

I join the First Minister in welcoming the new Pope and send him every good wish in the times ahead. We recognise the particular importance that the Pope’s election has for the Catholic community in Scotland. Last week, a document that the First Minister did not want the people of Scotland to see revealed that what he and his ministers say in private is different from what they say in public. It was revealed that his finance minister and his chief economic adviser think that forecasting oil revenues is so difficult that, privately, John Swinney questions the affordability of pensions. John Swinney’s private words holed the First Minister’s public position below the waterline so, after a feverish weekend and a hastily arranged press conference, the First Minister declared—from nowhere—an oil boom. Does the First Minister not think that we can see the join?

Our problem is that, too often, we listen but never hear an answer to the serious questions that the First Minister’s own document challenges us with. He says one thing in private and something else in public. Whatever he said on Monday does not address that problem. The oil boom that was announced on Monday drowned the credibility of the First Minister’s chief economic adviser, Crawford Beveridge, and of his finance minister. Let us move on to another of the First Minister’s advisers, Professor John Kay. He said: “Scotland should be ready to adopt an independent currency.” He also said that a new currency would have to be adopted quickly, or people could move their money out of Scotland before it was launched. Does the First Minister agree with his adviser, or will he now rule out a separate Scotland having its own currency?

It says quite a lot about what the First Minister thinks an answer to a question is if he imagines that what he said even began to respond to the question that I asked. We are arguing not about Scotland’s resources but about the First Minister’s risk-rich, assertion-rich and fantasy-rich plans for our country. I note that the First Minister has not ruled out the question of a separate Scottish currency, which he used to want. Then he wanted the euro. Now the line is that we will keep sterling. Professor Kay has made the point that any new currency would have to be launched suddenly; otherwise, wealth might flow out of Scotland before it was launched. It would be a gift for spivs and speculators. In a sense, perhaps it is something that the First Minister could not commit to publicly. Has he had any private conversations about a separate Scottish currency with Professor Kay or anyone else?

Despite the touch of amateur dramatics about that, the First Minister still did not answer the question. We know that Alex Salmond is known for his insults, but the problem—which is worse—is that he is insulting the intelligence of the people of Scotland. Let me get this right. In private, the First Minister and his colleagues question whether there will be a state pension; in public, he cannot tell pensioners—[Interruption.]

Obviously, Scottish National Party members have still not read the document that was leaked to the rest of us. In private, the First Minister and his colleagues question whether there will be a state pension; in public, he cannot tell pensioners what currency it would be paid in if it existed. He asserts—[Interruption.]

The First Minister asserts that we could keep sterling, but what would he do if the deal that was on offer from the Bank of England was unacceptable? What would he do if the fiscal constraints were too tight? What would he do if strings were imposed by London? [Interruption.] Would he go for a separate Scottish currency? [Interruption.]

It is astonishing that asking serious questions creates the degree of derision among SNP back benchers—[Interruption.]

Of course, we know that they are never allowed to ask any of those questions of their front benchers, even if they know in their heart of hearts that their front benchers are incapable of answering them. Would the First Minister go for a separate Scottish currency or join the euro? His own advisers say that he would need a plan B, and we are entitled to know what that is. He must have one in private; it is time that he made it public.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01223)

John Swinney told the Cabinet in private that the volatility of the price of oil “creates considerable uncertainty in projecting forwards Scotland’s fiscal position.” When was he going to share that with the Scottish public?

I am absolutely astonished by that response. It appears that the First Minister has not even read the document that his Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth wrote. Perhaps he was not paying attention because it did not say what he wanted it to say. When I called for a debate on facing up to long-term spending and services—[Interruption.]

The Scottish National Party is not on the best of grounds on this issue. When I called for a debate on facing up to long-term spending and services, the First Minister derided me. We now find that, while I was talking about how we saved services—[Interruption.]

The noise that is made by the SNP is in inverse proportion to its confidence in its finance secretary.[Interruption.]

We now find—the SNP has read the document—that while I was talking about how we saved services, John Swinney was talking to the Cabinet about cutting them. In private, he told his cabinet colleagues of pressure on budgets. In private, he said that that meant the need for “policy choices”. In private, he said: “We must drive these programmes forward now.” When were the other cabinet secretaries going to say in public what John Swinney had told them in private about cuts to their services?

I asked the First Minister a serious question, and he says, “Look! There’s a squirrel!” The fact is that his lack of self-awareness and his selective quoting of his own document tells us that there something very serious at the heart of Government—it will say one thing in private and deny in public the truth that we all know. I asked for honesty. Let us see whether we can manage some honesty about the troops who risk their lives for our security. The United Kingdom Government’s decision to renege on its promise to the Scottish troops who are serving abroad that they would come home to Edinburgh was a blow. We can both agree on that. The Deputy First Minister described it as an act of “betrayal”. We can agree on that, too. However, how do we describe the revelations in the leaked paper that, rather than increase the size of our armed forces, the SNP has “made clear to the Defence Workstream that a much lower budget must be assumed”? Should we now assume that it will be “a much lower budget” and that the Deputy First Minister was being dishonest with the troops?

It is astonishing what a difference a day makes. Yesterday, the document was the first draft of a discussion document that was overtaken by events. Now it turns out that it confirms the First Minister’s land of milk and honey under independence. It cannot possibly be both. In private, John Swinney says that, after separation, interest on our debt will be “a significant feature of Scotland’s budget”. In private—[Interruption.] They have read it; you might not have heard this. In fact, I know you will not have heard it. [Interruption.]

In private, John Swinney admits that, after separation, what we spend will have to be in line with policy that will be set by a foreign bank—that of the rest of the United Kingdom. In private, he asks for a study into something as basic as the affordability of the state pension in a separate Scotland. In public, he says that anyone who raises the same questions is “talking Scotland down”. We have heard a lot of numbers from the First Minister today, but the real deficit that should worry Scots is the one between what he says in private and what he says in public. Is not it the case that what the SNP claims in public is “scaremongering”, it agrees in private is the truth?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01206)

I thank the First Minister for that information. We will want to know, of course, what will happen in a year’s time. The decision was one of the most astonishing by any minister in this Parliament since 1999. If the First Minister is making a commitment to sort it, then of course we are very grateful to him. The latest figures on waiting times in accident and emergency units in Scotland show that the guarantee of treatment within four hours is being breached the length and breadth of the country. Does the First Minister agree with Margaret Watt, chair of the Scotland Patients Association, that the latest figures for accident and emergency waiting times are shocking?

We know that when the First Minister abandons his usual bluster for his wee quiet voice and calls for all of us across the Parliament to be concerned, the reality of what the Scottish National Party is presiding over must be absolutely appalling. We know that we have to plan for winter. If £50 million was available, why was it not made available earlier, rather than in response to a crisis? What the First Minister says is simply not good enough. Members will recall that we were told by Alex Neil that the case of John McGarrity, the 84-year-old man who spent eight hours on a hospital trolley after being rushed to hospital with a chest infection, was not a true reflection of the national health service under the SNP. In one way he was right. It turns out that last December alone more than 300 John McGarritys waited even longer than eight hours. The reason for a four-hour waiting target for A and E treatment was to guarantee quality care to those patients in the greatest need. Can the First Minister tell me, when was the last time that the four-hour target was met for Scotland as a whole?

There have been six First Minister’s question times since January this year. I can only assume that, on the other four occasions on which the First Minister shouted and bawled in defence of his NHS policy, he was not being serious about the challenges that were put to him. This is a really serious matter. What do you do in Government when reality confronts you? The last thing that you do—as we have seen again just now—is retreat to debating points rather than focus on what has happened to people. [Interruption.]

The First Minister is not serious if he continues to contend that the problem is that it is winter and that the miraculous appearance of £50 million will solve the problem. He has not listened to staff and he has not listened to patients. The First Minister did not answer the question, either. It would appear that he either has not read his own report or does not want to admit the answer in the chamber. The report says that “the last time compliance was met across Scotland was September 2009.” That is more than three years of letting patients down at one of the most vulnerable times in their lives. Yesterday, the Auditor General told us that Nicola Sturgeon ignored warning signs when it came to waiting times. Did she also choose to ignore the warning signs about A and E?

Whether the First Minister says it in a quiet voice or a loud voice, the same problem remains: he is entirely in denial about what is happening in the national health service. He may come and say, “Yes, I hear what you say, but actually everything is fantastic”, but that is not the lived reality of people in hospitals the length and breadth of Scotland and it is not what his staff in the NHS are telling him. Does the First Minister not realise how ridiculous he sounds, protecting his former health secretary and defending his record in this way? Apparently, to be like Nye Bevan, you have to get an amber warning from Audit Scotland, mislead the country on waiting times and ignore the warning signs of failing accident and emergency wards that are struggling to cope. Does the First Minister not realise that this is about policy, not slogans? It is not about him winning or losing votes but about saving people’s lives. Does he not see that, by denying the truth—

Does the First Minister not see that, by denying the truth of the scale of the problem, he is denying the sick and the vulnerable the treatment that they so desperately need?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01192)

In June 2011, the Scottish Government told us that only 3 per cent of patients had to wait more than nine weeks for an inpatient appointment. The truth was not 3 per cent, but 23 per cent—that is not three out of 100, but one out of four patients waiting. Why did the Scottish Government so mislead patients in need of hospital treatment in that way?

The people of Scotland might expect the First Minister to take what I said a little more seriously. It is not good enough for him to come here week after week and to say—this is his new defence—“It wasnae just me who did it.” The fact is that the figures represent real people waiting for real help from the national health service. However, the First Minister’s response is about something entirely different—his is a political game, which is not the key issue. If the First Minister took his job seriously, he would know that in March 2010 the then health secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, said: “no one—no one—is on a hidden waiting list.” Even after we found out that NHS Lothian was fiddling the figures, her replacement, Alex Neil, told the Parliament last December that “the waiting times that are published by boards are reliable and accurate.”—[Official Report, 20 December 2012; c 15052] The systems that Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Neil used to make those claims are described by the Royal College of Nursing as “inadequate for the job and ... letting patients down, time and again” Is not the truth that, far from abolishing hidden waiting lists, Nicola Sturgeon—for her own political convenience—reinvented and reinforced them?

The First Minister’s first defence is that there is nothing wrong; his second defence is, “A big bad computer did it and ran away”; and then he says, “However, we are changing things.” If he does not understand what the problem is, I am bemused about how he can work out what the changes should be. Let me make it simple for the First Minister. In June 2011, Nicola Sturgeon was given a set of figures that said that only 3 per cent of patients waited for more than nine weeks for hospital treatment when the truth was that it was 23 per cent. At the same time, she was given figures that said that the number of people who were too busy to go to get the treatment that they needed had tripled. She was told that one Scot in three on waiting lists had said that they were too busy to be cured. Nicola Sturgeon knew what was happening. Did she not have the wit to notice that waiting lists were being falsified or did it simply suit her purpose?

It is precisely because of the importance of the national health service that we deserve better than a Government that looks at health figures in order to gain political advantage rather than to serve the interests of patients. In December, Alex Neil said that there was nothing wrong. Today, the First Minister again says that there is nothing wrong. The rest of the world knows that the figures were manipulated to avoid the Government having to confront the failures in its own policy. Of course, one policy, one code and one belief runs through everything at the heart of the Government: the nationalists think that, whatever the truth, if they say something often enough, they can fool the people of Scotland into believing it. [Interruption.]

Alex Salmond believed that, if he compared his protégé Nicola Sturgeon to Nye Bevan often enough, we would see her in the same light. I have to tell members that Nye Bevan never put press releases above patients. [Interruption.]

We have found out from Audit Scotland that patients come second to propaganda with this Government. Someone should tell Nicola Sturgeon that false statistics and public perceptions do not cure patients, and they do not win referendums either. It has been said that, in politics—[Interruption.] It has been said that, in politics, there are two types of health ministers: failures and those who get out in time. Today, is not the truth laid bare that, despite the spin, Nicola Sturgeon did not get out in time?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day.

Indeed. Yesterday morning, the First Minister visited the technology company Clyde Space in Glasgow, where he said: “This is one small satellite for Clyde and a giant leap for their extraterrestrial export business”. In the afternoon, his back benchers applauded a £24 million cut in college budgets. Does the First Minister feel that he and his party are in touch with real Scots?

Scotland needs jobs. Last year, the Scottish Government said that it would spend £353 million on shovel-ready capital projects. In reality, it spent just £20 million. Of the £119 million that it said it would spend on new schools, it has spent nothing—not one coin. On Monday, however, the Deputy First Minister said that, within 15 months of the referendum, we could be like Namibia or Togo. Does the First Minister feel that he is in touch with the real priorities of Scots?

Even I, in my least charitable moments, did not imagine that the First Minister planned not to spend any money through the NPD programme on schools. It is not that I do not understand the project; it is that the First Minister said that the Government would spend the £119 million but has not spent one coin. The jobs have not come. The complacency is astonishing. I ask the First Minister to come back with us to the real world. This morning, we spoke to Ann Fisher, a 50-year-old mother of three who has cancer. She lives in Greenock. If she lived in England, she would be receiving drugs that could prolong her life. However, because she lives in Scotland, she does not get that treatment. The Government’s delayed drugs review will be too late for Ann. Her case, sadly, is not an isolated one. While Ann Fisher fights for treatment, the former health secretary Nicola Sturgeon had time this week to publish the words of Abraham Lincoln on, apparently, a written constitution. Does the First Minister believe that he and his Government are in touch with the real needs of people such as Ann Fisher?

I can assure the First Minister that I take this issue extremely seriously. What I ask the Government to do is to listen to what people are saying and to act. It has taken newspaper headlines to get Alex Neil to act, and I think that that is a problem. Even now what the First Minister says does not address Ann Fisher’s problems, so I ask him to look again. Whatever the First Minister is doing, he is certainly not addressing the real needs of Scots. He would rather play games, imagining where he might be in three years’ time, than face the reality of today. While he pretends, the needs of Scots seeking jobs are ignored, patients such as Ann Fisher go untreated and students miss out on a college education—all while the First Minister prepares the seating plan for our independence ball. The First Minister even seems to have given up on trying to make the case for independence and is instead trying to persuade Scots that they have already voted for it. When will the First Minister start addressing the real needs of Scots rather than continue his own game of let’s pretend?

The First Minister accuses me of making a political point and then goes on to do precisely that in complacent defence of what is happening in the national health service. All I ask is that he understands that the people of this country are not talking about constitutional platforms—they want a First Minister who will address the needs of women such as Ann Fisher now.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01153)

We must obviously welcome any opportunities for our young people. We would only hope that the Government had more of a focus on the issues of youth unemployment and the challenges that young people face. Some of the figures on young people being in jobs after an apprenticeship are because they were in those jobs before they got the apprenticeships. The process of the referendum is almost agreed, bar the date. Now we can get down to the substance of the debate, but how will the First Minister conduct that debate? The people of Scotland have made it clear that they want clear, honest information. When we have said that an independent Scotland would have to apply to join the European Union and that those negotiations could take time, we have been accused by the First Minister of scaremongering. When the Irish Minister for European Affairs says that an independent Scotland would have to apply to the EU and that the negotiations could be lengthy and complex, what is she guilty of?

I am not sure how positive it is to misrepresent what people say when they raise legitimate concerns and express a view on what the Scottish Government claims to be the case, because the Irish European affairs minister’s comments fall well short of Nicola Sturgeon’s definitive claim that Scotland’s membership of the EU would be “automatic”. In her clarification, Lucinda Creighton says: “I think it is clear that a newly independent state would have to ... negotiate the terms of membership.” She adds that those terms “would undoubtedly be somewhat different to the existing terms”. What part of that does the First Minister disagree with?

Anyone would think, to listen to the First Minister, that Nicola Sturgeon had never said that our membership of the EU would be—I quote—“automatic”. The problem with the First Minister is that he lives in a world in which we are never supposed to remember what he said yesterday and we are never supposed to expect that tomorrow will match what he says today. The people deserve better. If the independence debate is to be conducted in what he describes as positive terms, heaven help us all. When the BBC reported Lucinda Creighton’s comments, it was accused by the SNP of misconstruing what she said. Scandalously, one SNP member suggested that the report had been “heavily spliced”, yet what she said, and what was reported, is backed by the comments of the President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso, the Czech foreign minister, the Spanish Europe minister and anyone who understands the European Union. What was it that was misconstrued and provoked such a hysterical response from the SNP? Why could not the SNP just admit the truth?

This is the man who went to court to cover up the fact that he did not have legal advice. He has never been able to explain what he understands by the term, “terms of the debate.” We do not need a lecture from the First Minister about clarity; what we need from him is a degree of honesty. Everyone agrees that the people of Scotland have the right to the best, most accurate information in the run-up to the referendum, but how can they have faith—[Interruption.] I know that members are doing their job, which is to make a racket. It is the only internal communication that the First Minister requires from them. How can the people of Scotland have faith in the information supplied by the Scottish Government when so often—remember—it has been forced to admit that it is wrong and when those giving accurate facts are ridiculed, bombarded with complaints and pilloried by the cybernats? What does it say about Scotland when the minister of a foreign country is bombarded with abuse for telling the truth and news organisations from The Scotsman to The Herald to the BBC are traduced for reporting facts that turn out to be true? People want information so that they can make a judgment on what an independent Scotland would look like. So far, is it not the case that all we know is that it will be a land where no one is allowed to disagree with Alex Salmond?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01134)

Last week, the First Minister told the BBC’s “Today” programme: “we’re going into talks with President Barroso and the European Commission.” When will those talks take place?

I think that we can work out that the First Minister did not answer the question. Putting aside what he is asked and talking about something else might be an interesting thing to do, but it is not what he is supposed to do in this chamber. The First Minister said that he was going into talks with President Barroso. Since he made that assertion before the Deputy First Minister had even received a reply to her letter asking for talks, what was the basis on which the First Minister said that he was going into talks with the European Commission? Was it the same basis on which he said that he had legal advice when he did not—that is, he just made it up?

Forgive me for not allowing the First Minister his sound bite before moving on. Although President Barroso has not spoken about the specific issue of Scotland, he has said that current treaties do not apply to a new state. I can only assume that, although the First Minister has trimmed on the monarchy, the currency and the regulation of the banks, he still thinks that an independent Scotland would be a new state. He can correct me if I am wrong in that regard. Of course, President Barroso has said that he cannot comment on Scotland’s application to join the European Union, but the Czech foreign minister has done so. The Czech Republic will have a veto on an independent Scotland’s EU application, and Karel Schwarzenberg, the Czech foreign minister, has said that Scotland “would have to apply for ... membership” and went on to say that it would get “a worse deal” because “a much smaller country with much lesser economical importance has less weight”. Why is the Czech foreign minister scaremongering like that?

I know that it is the First Minister’s stock-in-trade to miss the point, but the Czech foreign minister’s point is not about whether the Czechs would block Scotland but the price that they would extract for Scotland’s membership of the European Union. The fact of the matter is that Alex Salmond and David Cameron are like peas in a pod. They will always put—[Interruption.]

They will always put—[Interruption.]

They will always put—[Interruption.]

They will always put their parties’ interest before the interests of the people of this country. There is nothing quite so negative as trying to mislead the country, which is perhaps why support for independence is at its lowest since devolution. Perhaps the people who hear the First Minister say that he has legal advice when he does not do not believe him any more; maybe the pensioner lying on a trolley in a freezing corridor does not believe him when the First Minister says that he is doing a great job with the national health service; and maybe when the First Minister says that he is doing everything he can to create jobs and then goes on a half-million pound trip to the golf, people do not believe him. The reality is that Alex Salmond cheered the Tories into Downing Street. [Interruption.]

He sees Tory welfare cuts as an opportunity for his party and celebrates Tory mistakes on Europe. In fact, is it not the case that he loves the Tories so much that he has taken—[Interruption.]

Let me try it again so he definitely hears it. In fact, is it not the case that he loves the Tories so much that he has taken support for independence down to Tory levels of popularity?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I have two brief points. The SNP’s position on Europe seems to have changed from, “Of course we would be a member,” to, “Why wouldn’t we be a member?” We need certainty. On the health service, it is not good enough for a First Minister to come here and say that everything is fantastic or for policy to shift and be driven by a newspaper and a journalist raising questions. [Interruption.]

It is about time that the First Minister got his health minister to ensure that the NHS is safe, rather than simply responding to scandal stories that have to get into the papers for action to be taken.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day.

We entirely agree with the First Minister on the conclusion that he comes to. Our thoughts are with the families concerned at this very difficult time. On 22 March 2010, the then health secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, said: “hidden waiting lists have been abolished.” She added: “no one ... is on a hidden waiting list.” On 21 March 2012, Nicola Sturgeon told Parliament that there were hidden waiting lists at NHS Lothian but assured us that there were none elsewhere in Scotland. Since then, failures in waiting times have been discovered at NHS Tayside, and questionable activity has been reported at NHS Forth Valley, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and NHS Lanarkshire. Yesterday, we learned of serious problems with NHS Grampian. In the light of that, was Nicola Sturgeon misleading Parliament and the country, or was she just incompetent and not on top of her job?

That answer was astonishingly complacent. I did not talk only about Grampian, although the First Minister might want to reflect on the fact that the Auditor General for Scotland said that there is a £1 billion repairs backlog and that £500 million of that might affect patient care. That might be part of the reason why there was a problem with the scanner in the first place. I talked about other places, too. I understand that the First Minister has a London life coach. It would suit him to make sure he understood what real life is for most people in this country. Simply denying that there is a problem and talking about what happened before he was responsible is not the job of the First Minister. Before the Scottish National Party’s hidden waiting times scandal broke, the figures across Scotland for patients missing appointments for treatment due to social unavailability peaked at almost 21,000, in June 2011. Now, those figures have fallen to just over 9,500. If the figures were not being fiddled before, how does the First Minister explain the patients who are suddenly available for appointments that they were not available for before?

The First Minister does not seem to understand something very basic. This is not the difference between the SNP’s position and Labour’s position; this is the difference between the SNP’s position and the real world that everybody else is living in. The First Minister can give us all those figures about Grampian, but I asked him not only about Grampian but about the whole of the country. He should also reflect that his own internal audits tell us that there is insufficient data to tell us what the scale of the scandal is, and he might want to address that problem, too. We seem to be in a situation in which Nicola Sturgeon was right when she said that waiting lists were abolished, right when she said that the only problem with hidden waiting times was in Lothian and still right when it turns out that there are problems with hidden waiting times the length and breadth of the country. According to the First Minister, the system that Nicola Sturgeon presided over was working well. Why, then, is her successor, Alex Neil, having to change the system because it is not transparent enough?

If I were the First Minister, I would listen back to that. I think that he might find it a little more than embarrassing, because I am asking him about a very serious issue. The First Minister says that Nicola Sturgeon called the investigation into NHS Lothian. The problem is that she did not then look at what the answers were and she did not look beyond NHS Lothian to find out what was happening in the rest of the country. It would appear that Nicola Sturgeon was the health secretary for the good bits but that the bad bits are nothing to do with this Government whatsoever. The trouble is that it is the bad bits and the difficult bits that patients and staff across Scotland have to face every day of the week, and it is about time the First Minister took responsibility. The First Minister has this week been talking about the rights that Scots could have under a written constitution in a separate Scotland. Let me tell him some rights that all Scots should have now—and he might need to write this down: the right to a Government that tells the truth; the right to a First Minister who will be straight with them; the right to be treated by the NHS within 18 weeks; and the right to be told the truth when the Government cannot deliver. Is it not the case that whether it is the First Minister on Europe, John Swinney on the Bank of England, Mike Russell on colleges or Nicola Sturgeon on NHS waiting lists—[Interruption.]—the people of Scotland cannot trust a word this Government says?

1. I wish everyone all the best in 2013. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01090)

I thank the First Minister for that and of course we, too, would wish to send condolences to Jimmy Halliday’s family. In the first week after summer recess, the First Minister moved his deputy, Nicola Sturgeon, from health and put her in charge of the referendum and economic recovery. Four months later, it is becoming increasing clear why she was so keen to move on: a children’s ward threatened with closure at St John’s in Livingston, Borders general put at risk, surgery provision cut at Perth royal infirmary, the scandal of hidden waiting lists at NHS Lothian and beyond, and people with terminal illnesses being denied life-prolonging drugs that are available in other parts of the country. Nicola Sturgeon proclaims herself “the yes minister”. Can we start calling Alex Neil the clean-up-the-mess minister?

Perhaps the First Minister might not have been so fulsome in his praise of Nicola Sturgeon when she moved if he had realised what we are hearing now about what is happening in the health service. There is a real-terms cut and whatever the First Minister says about free prescriptions, we know that that service is under phenomenal pressure. His denial of that is a denial of his responsibility as the First Minister of this country. No matter what gloss the First Minister wants to put on it, on November 7, the Auditor General for Scotland, Caroline Gardner, put our health service on “amber warning.” When I challenged the First Minister about that, he said that the “national health service is performing in outstanding fashion”.—[Official Report, 8 November 2012; c 13224.] However, the Audit Scotland report highlighted Nicola Sturgeon’s real legacy to the health service: a £1 billion repair backlog, health boards having to borrow to keep services up and running—[Interruption.] That is what the Auditor General said, not what I said. There have also been thousands of staffing cuts, which have left us with fewer nurses than we had when the SNP came to power. Given the new revelations on a daily basis about the mess that Nicola Sturgeon has left the Scottish health service in, does the First Minister still think that the Auditor General is wrong?

First of all, the First Minister says that he thinks that I am wrong. I work on the assumption that the First Minister thinks that I am wrong; the problem for him is that the Auditor General is saying something very serious and he is saying that that is wrong. Staff across Scotland are raising concerns about the pressures that they are under in the national health service. This is not an attack on staff, who are doing a phenomenal job; the charge is that this Government is not supporting them, which is making their job more difficult. It seems that every week we get another damning report on the health service. In 2008, Nicola Sturgeon said that she had “made tackling health inequalities” her “top priority”. However, the Auditor General, Caroline Gardner, told the Public Audit Committee that, in terms of life expectancy, “the gap is still increasing.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 19 December 2012; c 1050.] The chief medical officer, Dr Harry Burns, has also acknowledged the lack of progress in tackling health inequalities under this Government. Now we are told that we are having a rethink of the approach to health inequalities. Is that an admission that Nicola Sturgeon and the SNP have completely failed to deliver their top health target?

The problem for the First Minister is that saying it does not make it so. The difficulty for the First Minister is that we understand the challenge of health inequalities. We understand the challenge of inequality across our communities. The challenge in government is to test what the Government does and what it spends against the outcomes. When I said that, the First Minister said, “No, we will not have that debate at all.” The fact is that Nicola Sturgeon was health secretary for five years. In the 127 days since she left office, her successor has had to deal with review after review. He has had to deal with a review into the full extent of the hidden waiting lists in health boards across the country, although Nicola Sturgeon had told us that NHS Lothian was an isolated case. He has had to deal with a review of access to groundbreaking drugs for people who are terminally ill, because under Nicola Sturgeon we went from being the best in the United Kingdom to the worst on that issue. He has had to deal with a review of health inequalities and the resuscitation of a task force, five years after Nicola Sturgeon made the issue her top priority. How many reviews do we need? How many independent reports do we need before the First Minister realises that his Government is failing to deliver for the health of the people of Scotland?

1. For the last time in 2012, I ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01073)

We on this side of the chamber always welcome good news in relation to opportunities for people to work. [Interruption.]

Over the past year, the First Minister has told us that he had legal advice on the European Union, when he had not; that college funding was going up, when he was cutting it; and that we would have a seat on the monetary policy committee of the Bank of England, when he had not even spoken to it. Which one of those answers was the most exact ever given to any Parliament anywhere? [Laughter.]

The First Minister has obviously not been attending the same First Minister’s question time as I have for the past year. [Interruption.]

I am, of course, ever an optimist about the First Minister’s reflecting at some point on the gap between what he says and what he does. However, I think that we can all agree that this has been a tough year for everyone—money has been tight almost everywhere. Some of us might ask “What could we do with half a million pounds? Maybe 60 nurses or 40 teachers?” However, in Alex Salmond’s world, half a million pounds gets you five days watching golf in Chicago. What was the First Minister’s preferred foreign investment opportunity visit of the year? Was it his half a million pound trip to the Ryder cup or his trip to the pictures in California?

I am not sure that the First Minister’s half a million pound trip to the Ryder cup was what brought those jobs to Scotland. If we were concerned about bringing jobs, perhaps we would not be attacking the very colleges that create the skills and, therefore, the opportunities for people. Of course, the First Minister has moved this year—I am not talking about his proposed flit from Bute house to St Andrew’s tower. We may recall that when David Cameron called for talks on the referendum, the First Minister said that it was “an extraordinary attempt to bully and intimidate Scotland”. Then he signed the timetable and said that it was an “historic” moment. Who has been the First Minister’s favourite visitor to Edinburgh this year: is it David Cameron, or is it Rupert Murdoch coming round for a Tunnock’s teacake? Does he now regret not getting the Dalai Lama round for a caramel wafer?

Of course, the First Minister’s problem is that John Swinney wanted to have that debate. That is why he asked Campbell Christie to commission a report. That report said that we need to deal with competing demands. The reality is that the price—which the First Minister denied—of his education choices is cuts in college places and our schools having a growing gap between the rich and the poor. He knows that; perhaps in the new year he will want to confront the reality of it. However, we are now in the Christmas spirit. [Interruption.]

What I say does not need to be written down, because it is in my very heart. It is in my very heart, First Minister, because we are, of course, approaching Christmas. After such a historic year of success, “in terms of the debate”—[Laughter.]— I presume that the First Minister will want to hand out Christmas presents to his successful team. Perhaps there will be a congratulatory abacus and spell-checker for Mike Russell, a talking doll for John Swinney, so that he can learn what “dialogue” actually means, or even a shovel for Nicola Sturgeon so that she is always shovel-ready to clean up the First Minister’s next bit of mess. [Interruption.]

May I wish everyone in the chamber and everyone in the country a happy Christmas and a peaceful and more prosperous new year. [Interruption.]

In the First Minister’s case, may I wish him as good a year next year as he has had this year. [Interruption.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01052)

I thank the First Minister for that reply. Last week, The Scotsman reported that the European Commission had written a letter making it clear that an independent Scotland would have to apply to the European Union to be a member. Nicola Sturgeon’s spokesperson accused the paper of “fabricating” the story. Indeed, the First Minister said that it had been “duped by anti-independence people”. The paper was even forced to print a partial apology. We now know that the story is true. A fortnight ago, I asked the First Minister when he last complained to a newspaper about its coverage and he answered me with an email today at 11.19. Does he now need to update that answer, and would he now like to apologise to The Scotsman? [Interruption.]

I have been in this job nearly a year and I have worked out that the First Minister does not intend to answer questions very often at all. To just keep saying something does not make it true. On the letter, the problem for the First Minister is that his defence seemed to be that it was not sent. We all know that it has now been sent and he has to deal with what that letter says. In 2007, Nicola Sturgeon told this Parliament that “Scotland would automatically be a member of the European Union upon independence. There is legal opinion to back that up.” —[Official Report, European and External Relations Committee, 11 December 2007; c 231.] Not only do we now know that to be untrue, but it transpires that Nicola Sturgeon had not even asked for the legal advice that allowed her to make that assertion. Of course, that ministerial habit of assertion is viral. On Tuesday, John Swinney told the House of Lords that he had been having a “very helpful dialogue” with the Bank of England on keeping the pound after independence. What does the bank say? It says: “We have not entered a dialogue”. What does—[Interruption.]

What does it say about the Scottish Government when the people of Scotland have to go to the European Commission and the Bank of England to hear the truth?

I suppose that, in the fantasy world that the First Minister now inhabits, that is meant to be a stout defence of his position. The First Minister’s problem is that he claims that he wants to have dialogue with all those people, yet he asserted that we would be in Europe and be part of a sterling zone without ever asking anybody and without ever having a conversation. When Mr Swinney goes to London, he says that we are having a dialogue, but the Bank of England says not—[Interruption.]

I am not sure if they are suggesting that the Bank of England is being misleading; perhaps we can clarify that later. I go back to the interview in which the First Minister said that he had sought legal advice from the law officers when he had not. Members will remember that Andrew Neil did not ask the First Minister just about that. Andrew Neil asked him: “Can we clarify whether an independent Scotland would have to reapply for membership of the EU?” Alex Salmond said: “Well, no we wouldn’t.” However, we must bear in mind that that was the same interview in which the First Minister’s words “Yes, we have”, meant “No, we haven’t”— “in terms of the debate.” The man in charge of the European Commission, José Manuel Barroso, has told the BBC: “if there is a new state, of course, that state has to apply for membership”. What part of that statement does the First Minister not understand?

The First Minister really has to reflect that the President of the European Commission may have some authority in this matter, on balance. [Interruption.]

Mr Barroso has said that a new state would have to apply. I had thought that the aspiration of SNP back benchers and, indeed, front benchers was for Scotland to be a new state; otherwise, what is the point of what we are going to be debating for the next two years? I do not want to dwell on private grief, but I would say this to the First Minister: does he not realise that he has a bit of a credibility problem when he comes to the Parliament and gives an answer that he describes as “as exact an answer as anybody has given in any Parliament”—[Official Report, 15 November 2012; c 13513.] and a few hours later has to admit that he was entirely wrong? Does he not see that when he says he has sought legal advice when he has not, people doubt the next words that come out of his mouth? When the finance secretary says that he is in dialogue with the Bank of England and the bank says that that is not so, what does that say about the First Minister’s Government? Is it not the truth that John Swinney, Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond—all of them—are not leading Scotland but misleading Scotland?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01050)

The only word that I would dispute there is “becoming”—maybe we can discuss that later. I welcome the First Minister’s comments about jobs and about John Park’s decision to stand down. I am sure that we all wish John Park well. Labour members will miss him very much, but we know that in his new job he will continue to engage with the struggle, the battles and the values in which he believes as well as he has done in the past. This week, doctors called for honesty from politicians on cancer treatment. Alex Neil has announced a review of access to new medicines, which I welcome. Of course, under Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland went from being the top nation in the United Kingdom for using innovative drugs to being the worst. Will the First Minister explain why Scots do not get access to the latest cancer drugs on the national health service?

I did not ask the First Minister for a critique of what is happening elsewhere; I asked him about his responsibility. He said that a cancer drugs fund might create a postcode lottery. Is he not aware that there is currently a postcode lottery in Scotland? There is no test of cost-benefit for my free hay fever tablets, but such a test is applied to cancer drugs. Let us look at the reality. This morning, we spoke to Iain Morrison. He is 56 and suffers from bowel cancer. He has to pay £1,700 a fortnight for the drugs that he hopes will prolong his life. What is astonishing is that part of that cost is an administration charge from the NHS, so that he can get the drugs that the NHS will not give him for free. As patients suffer, doctors despair. Dr Tim Crook told the Parliament this week: “As an Englishman looking after patients in Scotland, I think that there is an inequality that, to my mind as a simple doctor, is unacceptable, in that I cannot offer my Scottish patients the same medication with which I could treat my English patients. As a human being and a doctor, I do not see how that can be right.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 4 December 2012; c 2988.] Does the First Minister think that that is right?

The First Minister ought to stop accusing me of doing things that I am not doing, and he ought to stop arguing about something that I am not arguing for. I do not need anyone to tell me how serious an issue this is—nobody in here does. What I am saying to him is that there is a postcode lottery in Scotland, and I have described a particular case. This is a very serious issue, but the First Minister’s response seems to be that what we have is very good. I am not promoting a particular model to solve this; I am asking the First Minister to confront the fact that there is a major problem. The issue affects not just those people whom I have already described. The inequality is not just between Scotland and England; there is an even greater inequality within Scotland. Dr Noelle O’Rourke of the Beatson cancer centre told the Parliament’s Health and Sport Committee this week that middle-class, articulate patients are more likely to get the cancer drugs that they need than vulnerable patients from deprived backgrounds. She said that patients in less need receive treatments that are denied others in greater clinical need because they are more articulate. Dr O’Rourke described that as “inequitable”. Does the First Minister agree?

Of course, the doctor referred to was talking not about the SMC but about the individual patient treatment request, into which a review was conducted. My point is that the review needs to be broader than the remit that has been given to it because of the huge challenges. The First Minister says that we should have an open and honest debate about this. When I questioned his priorities in health spending, I was accused of wanting to tax the sick and that debate was quickly closed down. This is all part of the same serious process because it is not just about patients getting the latest drugs. The NHS in Scotland spends only just over half the European average on cancer drugs. Cancer specialists do not want to work here. Dr Richard Casasola told this Parliament—[Interruption.]

Dr Richard Casasola told this Parliament this week that every Scottish cancer centre is at least one specialist short and that the most gifted doctors do not want to work here because they cannot prescribe the latest drugs. We are not able to be at the cutting edge because of the choices that the First Minister has made about the way in which drugs are accessed. Will the First Minister please be honest with cancer patients and specialists and confront the reality that this is the result of choices that he has made and it is about his priorities for spending in the NHS? [Interruption.]

Will the implementation group consider the possibility of working with the United Kingdom Government, through the use of a legislative consent motion, to have one new regulator that meets the demands of Scots law but which operates across the United Kingdom? Will we be allowed to look at that?

I confirm that I am willing to work on a cross-party consensual basis to try to progress the debate, but I hope that the First Minister is not pre-judging the outcome. It did rather feel, on Thursday last week, that he had set a course that was not to be moved from. Building consensus is not simply about getting other parties to agree with the First Minister’s view of how we stand up for the people of Scotland on this issue, but about working together in that regard. Today’s debate is entitled “The Way Forward”, but before we can be clear on that, we must remember how we got here. We do not have to look far for examples of how important a free press is to the democracy that we enjoy. Watergate, the MPs’ expenses scandal and the thalidomide victims are just three examples of journalism that would not have been possible without a free press. As Opposition leader, I am all too aware of the need for the press to hold the Government to account. Even in the past few days, media pressure has forced multinational companies to review their tax arrangements. The press is an essential pillar of our society, and it has shaped the way in which we do politics in this country. It is a prism that informs people’s views, opinions and politics. We all agree that we need a free press, but we must recognise the impact that comes with that power, particularly when media ownership is overly concentrated. That has resulted in relationships between the media and politicians that have gone beyond what is appropriate, and it has meant that their common interests have been pursued before what is best for the people of this country. We now have an opportunity to change that, and to make our politics better. I was a Labour activist in the 1992 general election—I know that it is hard to believe—when we failed to overturn John Major’s Government, and I watched with great frustration as the right-wing press turned on and traduced Neil Kinnock. I understand why some people in my party decided that they would do their best not to let that happen again. I understand why Tony Blair hired Alastair Campbell and Peter Mandelson, and why he flew to Australia to meet Rupert Murdoch. I understand why Gordon Brown tried in vain to maintain those relationships with the press barons. I also understand why a nationalist party that was keen first to convince the public that it was worth taking a chance on as a Scottish Government, and later that independence offered a better way for the people of Scotland, would also try to build those relations with the media and make those compromises. Politicians are in the business of ideas and if we are to communicate those ideas to the public, it will largely be through the prism of the media, no matter how ferocious or friendly they might seem. We find ourselves in difficult territory. Where people stand should not be about black or white, or about being for or against state intervention—which is a cartoon debate about the politics. We need to wrestle with some very difficult issues. It is important that we inform our thinking through the debate that is going on across the country and the fascinating views that are coming from all sides of the press industry and beyond. I hope that in the future, we will recognise that we need to take steps together in a difficult area. The world changed in July 2011. Although it was clearly wrong, many of us could not get angry about celebrities complaining about their phones being hacked. Maybe we should have done. However, when we heard the allegation that the voicemails of Milly Dowler had been accessed, we knew that it could not go on. Milly was just 13 when she was abducted on her way from school near her home in Surrey. Her body was found in woods almost six months later. The horror that the Dowler family went through every day during that time, and have gone through every day since, is beyond anything that we can comprehend. The idea that a mother and father who are facing up to every parent’s worst nightmare were given false hope because a reporter hacked into and deleted Milly’s messages, knowing that she was probably dead, made us all sick to our stomachs. I am sure that every parent, every family and every decent-minded person shared that feeling. That was the point at which the dam broke and the public was given an insight into some of the practices that were used by some parts of the media, and the public were rightly sickened. It became obvious at that point that change was needed, and that it was inevitable. It was why Lord Justice Leveson undertook such a significant inquiry, and it is why we are here for the debate today. As we debate how to move forward with Leveson, we must be clear about why we need to move forward. That must be our test, and we cannot miss the opportunity. I have asked the First Minister to reflect on what Leveson said about him and about how he has conducted his relationships with the media. On Sunday, the First Minister told the BBC that he was completely vindicated by Leveson, but he knows that he would have needed to edit more than 27 words out of the Leveson report to be able to draw that conclusion. The First Minister and everyone else knows that there are lessons in the report for him, and it is for him to decide whether he can proceed, with humility, to recognise the challenge that has been made to him. Lord Leveson was also given a challenge: how do we balance the freedom of the press—which we all should enjoy—with protection for the victims of the media’s excesses? How do we ensure that when the media get it wrong again, there will be consequences for them? How do we support and protect the majority of honest and hard-working journalists who are just trying to make sense of the world? How do we allow for polemic, debate and—dare I say it?—the media’s wonderful role of prodding a stick at pomposity wherever it is found? In his report, Lord Leveson has set out sensible ideas that tread that difficult balance. It has brought about a lot of debate during the past few days from political leaders, the media industry, and the victims through the hacked off campaign. It is worth remembering that Leveson is the one independent voice in all of this. He was the one person who was tasked with picking a way through the minefield without having any vested interests. He has not rushed it, and his report speaks of measured consideration. I commend him for setting out a road map to which we can all work. Despite the divisions and rancour since the Leveson report was published on Thursday, I am struck by how much agreement there is. It seems that political leaders, press and victims have all agreed that the status quo is not an option and that an independent self-regulatory body is required in order to bring about change. There is also agreement that the freedom of the press is too important to leave in the hands of politicians. We might argue about how we will implement the report and what constitutes state regulation, but those problems are not insurmountable and we can work together across political lines, with the industry and with the victims to find a way of implementing the ideals that Leveson has proposed. Surely it is not beyond us to find a way of setting up a system in which everyone can have confidence. We have managed it with the General Medical Council. In Scotland, no one questions the independence of the Auditor General or the Scottish Information Commissioner—well, almost no one. The media practices that we are talking about do not appear to be as widespread in Scotland, and they are certainly not as high profile. However, we must understand that what happened to the Dowlers, the Hillsborough victims, and Christopher Jefferies was symptomatic of a culture of unchecked power and arrogance in some sectors of the press that also exists in Scotland. The First Minister has tried to make the case for a separate system here in Scotland. As he is a nationalist, that does not surprise me and it is inevitable. It is worth remembering that, even though regulation of the press has been devolved since 1999, we have had a unitary authority across Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. The problem with that authority was not that the same rules were applied in England and Scotland, but that they were not applied robustly enough, if at all. Let us not make this another proxy debate about the constitution. We have the critical job of responding to those who feel provoked in the face of the press.

Equally, the First Minister says that, regardless of what happens in Westminster, there should be a Scottish regulator with Scottish responsibility, despite the fact that it would be difficult to manage that. The First Minister drew a comparison with Ireland, but of course Ireland’s relationship with London is not the same as Scotland’s relationship with London. Those are different matters, altogether.

The first thing to point out is that the Labour Party has said that it will bring forward legislation. [Interruption.]

My point is that the First Minister ought not to rule out something on the basis of his political views about where decisions should be made. His decision should be on the basis of how best to serve the needs of victims. If nothing happens at Westminster, that clearly creates a different context here. Members: Ah!

However, the First Minister ought not to presume. Anyway, his argument has not been that, in the absence of action at Westminster, we need a Scottish regulator. He has said, starting from first principles, that it is the Scottish Parliament’s job to create a Scottish regulator. I will go into talks with the First Minister if he makes a commitment that he rules nothing out at this stage. Those of us who believe in devolution understand that, just as some matters need to be devolved to give people more control over them, some things are better done at UK level.

We do not devolve for the sake of devolving; we understand at what level power works best, and that is where we place it. Given how closely the media across the United Kingdom are interlinked, it is difficult to see how we would be better served by an ombudsman for Scotland. The decision will be taken in the context of what happens in the rest of the United Kingdom. I believe that we should have an ambition for better media and better politics across the United Kingdom; I will make the case for that. Leveson has presented an opportunity to put right something that was not working. We cannot afford to get it wrong and we cannot allow the debate to be manipulated for anyone’s interest, because it is too important for that. The main message that comes from the debate should not be about how we define ourselves against each other, but about how we propose to make progress to serve the interests of the people of this country—in particular those who have for too long been victimised by some sections of the press.

If the UK Parliament proposed an Irish-type model that covered the whole of the UK, would Mark McDonald support it?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-01012)

Indeed. I look forward to reading the report myself. As the First Minister mentioned, Lord Leveson will publish his report on the regulation of the press in the next hour and a half. After the excesses of phone hacking, including into the phone of Milly Dowler, there has to be change. However, as we try to restore the public’s confidence in the press, we also need to protect press freedom, and we need to know that those who implement the Leveson recommendations will do so in the interests of the whole nation, not just themselves. In that context, when did the First Minister last personally complain to a newspaper about its coverage?

There was a great deal in that, and I wonder whether it might have been more beneficial if, post Leveson reporting, we had had a full statement from the First Minister in that regard. I also note that the First Minister did not answer my question. Politicians and press owners having an unhealthily close relationship is a big issue. I have no doubt that the First Minister will be able to give us a list of examples of various people in my party and others who have attended events that have been hosted by the Murdochs. We know that there was an unhealthily close relationship, but we also know that the First Minister is the only leader of a mainstream political party to host Rupert Murdoch since the stomach-turning revelations that one of his newspapers hacked Milly Dowler’s phone. Does the First Minister understand that his relationship with Murdoch undermines any confidence that we can have in him to set up a regulatory system for a free press?

Perhaps in deference to the victims of all those horrific activities and in an attempt to rise to the occasion, the First Minister might have apologised for being the only mainstream politician to meet Murdoch after the revelations came to a head. The First Minister says that he does not want to pre-empt Leveson, but he then does exactly that by saying that he wants Scotland to have a separate regulatory system with a separate Scottish ombudsman. Considering that he would ultimately be responsible for their appointment, and given his track record, can he understand why the rest of us might fear that he sees Leveson as a chance for him to exercise control over the Scottish press on an unprecedented scale?

I am keen to urge the First Minister to recognise that, in considering any regulatory system, he should not imply that, somehow, the problems in Scotland are different from those in the rest of the United Kingdom and that there cannot be a United Kingdom-wide solution. The First Minister alludes to the Irish system. We need rigorous scrutiny of that option and any other options. As he knows, and as we agree, the Leveson process has been an attempt not just to regulate the press better but to restore the public’s faith in the press, which has been severely dented after the horrors that the Dowler family, the families of the Hillsborough victims and countless others went through. I am sure that we can agree that this cannot be a debate in which politicians just talk about our relationship with the press and that there must be an understanding of the deep anger and concern that ordinary citizens feel, right across the United Kingdom. It is important that we get this right, not just for this Parliament but for Parliaments to come. The First Minister has invited us to all-party talks. Will he commit himself, first, to building consensus throughout the country on how we regulate the press and, secondly, to being bound by the conclusions of the all-party talks?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00991)

We certainly hope that ministers are doing their job. In February 2011, more than 18 months ago, John Swinney, as Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, made an announcement on college funding that still left a cut this year. On Tuesday, Mr Swinney said that he was always on top of the figures, as is his duty. He confirmed that he knew at the time that the First Minister was giving the wrong figures on colleges, despite nodding away along with the rest of the front bench. When in the past 18 months did John Swinney inform the First Minister that college funding was to be cut this year? How often did he update him?

Whatever that was, it was not a gracious recognition of the mistake that the First Minister made. Last week, I was accused of being a puppet. It turned out that there was only one puppet in here and it was Pinocchio.

The fact of the matter is that, last week, we were able to hand the First Minister the document that was written by his own cabinet secretary that proved that we were right. Despite that, he chose not to be honest with us. The First Minister did not answer the question that I asked him. Are we honestly expected to believe that the issue was not discussed at Cabinet? It surely cannot be right that levels of investment in Scotland’s colleges were not discussed at Cabinet, or at least by the finance secretary, the First Minister and Mike Russell. Did such discussions take place? If so, will the First Minister spell out when they took place? If they did not take place, why was that the case? Does that explain why he got the maths wrong last Thursday?

It does not take the First Minister long to get to the alibi when he is under pressure. Please take responsibility for something. [Interruption.]

When the First Minister accidentally read out the wrong figure from a briefing paper, why did his finance secretary and his education secretary, who knew that the figure was not true, start nodding in agreement with him? That goes to the heart of the Scottish Government’s pretence of competence—the approach is to keep people in the dark, assert the opposite of the truth and hope that no one notices. The worrying thing is not that the First Minister allegedly got one specific figure wrong but that, if we are to believe him, he did not know whether spending on Scotland’s colleges was going up or down. Which is worse—that the First Minister is so incompetent that he does not know when spending is going up or down or that he deliberately misled the people of Scotland and denied the impact of his choices on the workforce in colleges and on communities across Scotland?

For what it is worth, my body language says, “What on earth was all that about?” The questions are about the First Minister’s choices in education and his inability to be honest about what he chooses to support and not to support. This is a man who, at 12 o’clock, can give the most exact answer ever given to a Parliament at any time, anywhere, but who has to admit by 5 o’clock that his statements were the opposite of the truth. That is because we provided the information, not because he offered it. Whether we are talking about Europe, Doosan investing in Scotland or the number of jobs in the renewables sector, the First Minister just makes it up. Does he honestly expect us to believe that he, his finance minister and Mike Russell did not agree college cuts in the months before they came to the chamber to deny them? I ask the First Minister again: which is worse—that he does not know what his Government is doing to the colleges of this country, or that he is prepared knowingly to mislead the people of Scotland? [Interruption.]

This goes to the heart of the problem with the Scottish Government. The idea that that was an answer to the question that I asked is complete nonsense. I asked the First Minister which is worse—that he is so incompetent that he does not know that his spending choices are leading to cuts in colleges, or that he thinks that he can get away with misleading people? I have said that we need to be honest not just about what we choose to spend money on but about the consequences. What the First Minister has done is deny those consequences. I ask him to reflect again on the choice that he is making to cut spending on colleges at the very time when our young people need them most.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00974)

That was eloquently put by the First Minister. We, too, send our condolences to the family at this saddest of times. On 28 June, Mike Russell, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, told the chamber: “There is no reduction in funding for colleges in financial year 2012-13.” He repeated—to applause from Scottish National Party members, unsurprisingly— “Presiding Officer, there is no reduction in funding for colleges in financial year 2012-13.”—[Official Report, 28 June 2012; c 10776.] Was he right, or was he misleading the Parliament?

Although Mike Russell was famously—or perhaps, notoriously—grasping the thistle, it seems that the First Minister was grasping for an answer. Unfortunately, it was not a correct one. [Interruption.]

The truth is, as we have found out from the Auditor General and from the independent Scottish Parliament information centre, that the cabinet secretary was, in fact, wrong. College budgets have been cut this year. In the light of those independently sourced facts, was Mike Russell right, or was he misleading the Parliament?

That was this week’s white noise. The First Minister’s pre-prepared defence of his minister was ill advised. In weeks past, we have seen the credibility of the First Minister’s back benches burned in defending him; he is ill advised to burn his credibility in defending his education minister. No matter how big the briefing in front of him, I must tell him that not even Mike Russell believes Mike Russell anymore. The Official Report of this Parliament records Mike Russell as saying: “There is no reduction in funding for colleges in financial year 2012-13.”—[Official Report, 28 June 2012; c 10776.] However, yesterday, he denied it. He told the Parliament: “I take the opportunity to say that I have never said that there were no cuts”.—[Official Report, 14 November 2012; c 13463.] Mike Russell is saying—[Interruption.]

Mike Russell is saying that he never said what he said. Thank goodness it was being recorded on both occasions because, of course, those two statements by him cannot both be right. The reality is that college budgets are being slashed. It is no longer a question of whether Mike Russell misled Parliament; the question is when he did so. Is misleading Parliament not the kind of offence that should cost a minister his job?

In the world of the SNP, where you can say whatever you like, whenever you like, regardless of what you said yesterday and what you are going to say tomorrow, presumably— Members: You, you, you.

Presumably that qualifies as a credible answer. In the rest of the world, it makes no sense. [Interruption.]

I remind the First Minister that Mr Russell said there were no cuts in 2012-13. [Interruption.] I will repeat it. He said that there would be no cuts in 2012-13. Yesterday, he said that he never said that there would be no cuts. Those two things do not match. [Interruption.]

The First Minister is well aware that the Auditor General has said that no case has been made for regionalisation. It would be serious enough if Mike Russell had misled only the Parliament, but he has also misled the people of Scotland, including the 100,000 young people who are out of work and would benefit from the college sector being funded and invested in rather than being cut. This week, we found out that Mike Russell told a college chair—[Interruption.] We know that, if the SNP back benchers are noisy, it is because they do not like hearing what is being said to them. It would suit them better to ask the hard questions themselves from time to time rather than be background noise. [Interruption.]

This week, Mike Russell told a college chair that he should resign because he no longer had any trust in him. No one can have any trust in Mike Russell after this week. This week, we found out that Mike Russell told a college chair that he would sack him if he had the power.

Mike Russell has misled the Parliament and the First Minister has the power to sack him.

Why will the First Minister not sack a minister—[Interruption.]

Why will the First Minister not sack a minister who denies our young people an opportunity to go to college and, when challenged about it, misleads the Parliament? [Interruption.]

The First Minister is responsible for addressing the needs of the unemployed young people in this country. The idea that a juvenile trawl through the tweets of this world is any kind of response is a complete disgrace to anyone in this place or anywhere else who believes themselves fit to represent the people of Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The statement that the First Minister has just made is, frankly, astonishing and cannot be left to lie. The politics of this is that the contempt that Alex Salmond shows every day for the Scottish people and our Parliament is breathtaking. Every day, truth seems to give way to the soundbite, facts come second to the put-down and the interests of the Scottish people come second to the interests of Alex Salmond’s career. Can we be clear? When we had our debate this afternoon, Alex Salmond did not happen to mention a figure; he accused me of being wrong when I established that Mike Russell had misled the Parliament when he said that there were no cuts in the relevant period. Alex Salmond did not accidentally go from one column to another—

He went from one column to another to establish his contention—

He wanted to contend that his Government had not cut college funding. We hear a lot about the First Minister’s position on education, but the substance of what we were being told today was that there were no consequences for his position on education.

Our contention is that it is his position to attack further education. We have a problem, because the back benchers—

I am coming to my point.

We are coming to the point.

I ask the Presiding Officer to understand how serious this is. SNP back benchers do not allow the committees to scrutinise what is said. The First Minister said something in direct contradiction to what his education minister said. The reality is that the Presiding Officer must act. I ask him again to look at this, because after the debacle on Europe, how can we ever again believe a word that Alex Salmond says?

The point of order is this: how will the Presiding Officer act to protect the democracy of this Parliament against the arrogance of the Government?

Does the minister think that it is acceptable that the level of care that an elderly person receives in order to be sustained in their own home is a 15-minute visit, for which the carer is told to “task and go”?

Will the member take an intervention?

What is the cabinet secretary’s estimate of the comparative benefit of a council tax freeze to Fred Goodwin as opposed to somebody in a band A house in my constituency?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am the leader of the Scottish Labour Party and its priorities will be to meet the needs of the people of Scotland. If the minister wants to reflect on what the Welsh Labour Party is doing, he may reflect on the point that it does not have a policy of free tuition and that it is making different choices and persuading people on that basis. The minister must confront a simple thing in this debate, which is not that there are good policies, but that there are competing demands and that there is a gap between rhetoric and the reality in our communities. Two months ago, I called for a debate about what Scotland’s priorities should be. That debate was endorsed by leading public finance experts concerned by the lack of Government action in the face of the worst financial crisis for a generation. Whether it was Crawford Beveridge, the chair of the First Minister’s council of economic advisers; Robert Black, the former Auditor General for Scotland; or Bill Howat, the former chief executive of Western Isles Council, who chaired the independent review of Scottish Executive spending, they agreed that there was an urgent need for a serious debate. Frankly, to suggest that the minister is the only member here who is concerned about older people, the national health service and concessionary travel simply does not serve the people of this country well. There is a serious debate to be had, but of course the Scottish National Party did not want that. They tried to close the debate down through a mixture of name calling, denial, distortion and outright falsehoods. Ministers failed to debate in public and I am disappointed that John Swinney still refuses to engage in this debate, despite the fact that in commissioning Beveridge and Christie he acknowledged that there is a debate to be had. When I heard that the SNP had called for this debate, I had hoped that it had been forced to address these issues, which concern hard-working people up and down the country. However, given what has been said and given the motion, it is clear that the SNP is not there yet. It is clear that it is only capable of viewing this issue through the prism of the referendum and that this is yet another proxy debate for independence.

I will make this point. Last year, the Christie commission report said: “Contentious issues such as the continuation of universal entitlements must be considered openly and transparently, rather than in the current polarised terms.” What we have is a debate between competing good things, not between a compassionate minister and someone who he alleges will ask people to pay for visits to their general practitioner. It is a diminution and a distortion of the debate for the minister to conduct it in those terms.

The minister refuses to listen. We are saying that there are good policies; let us look at their cost, their benefits and the opportunities.

No, the minister has not, and I will say why. He says that free personal care is important to sustain people in their own homes. I am saying that the reality is that old people are being contained in their own homes, receiving 15-minute visits and being tucked up in their beds at 6 o’clock. Their carers are being told to focus on tasks, not the individuals. That is not free personal care, that is a slogan. We know that this is not an easy debate to have. The easy option for me would be to sit back and pick off the Government when it makes difficult decisions, but I care too much about Scotland for that. The fact is, the debate that I called for is not about universality versus means testing, but about what we can and cannot afford. It is about what is sustainable in the long term. It is about priorities and choices and engaging the Scottish people as adults. If we choose to spend money on one thing we cannot spend it on something else. For too long we have been happy to tick the box and ignore the connection between the soundbite and the delivery of policy. Indeed, that gap is widening. The minister said that what we need to do is increase taxation, but every time the Scottish Government sees a tax, it cuts it. The underfunded council tax freeze disproportionately benefits Fred Goodwin, not the poorest people in our communities. That is self-evident.

This will be good.

So there is no benefit to them, you have the benefit and they feel good about you getting the benefit—that does not make any sense—[Interruption.]

Everyone knows that a council tax freeze disproportionately benefits people who are better off. When it is underfunded, people pay in terms of public services as well. We know that there is an issue about the council tax and its unfairness, but if the council tax is regressive, a council tax freeze is also by definition regressive. We must face up to the consequences of our policy decisions and ask ourselves whether things are still being delivered to the standards that we expect and whether we are right to prioritise them over other areas now under attack. The Government has made a policy commitment to free university tuition fees, free prescriptions, free concessionary travel and free personal care for the elderly. However, the contention is that none of those things is free; the truth is that the money comes from elsewhere in the budget and the issue then is about budget choices, not cuts. We know that there are huge costs from free personal care, prescriptions, health and social care and travel concessions—

The member should listen to this. All those things are desirable, but the truth is that if we want to keep them we must be honest about how they are funded. If that does not happen, we will have a cynical slogan, not a policy. The Scottish Government often talks about its balanced budget, but the reality is that it is a fixed budget. Every pound that goes on these things is a pound less for other public services.

It could be that the SNP Government has got its priorities right—

The idea that we cannot debate those priorities is an outrage. I would have been happy to engage with the First Minister, the finance minister and other ministers on the subject of the real world, the things that actually matter and the things that are more important than others. That engagement did not happen.

We know that the SNP’s position is to spend on defence all the money that would have been spent on Trident. That is not about providing services. I am more than happy to test any public spending commitment against its benefit to the people of this country, but what do we get from the SNP? Last week, the First Minister denied the Auditor General for Scotland’s position that the health service is on an amber warning. We are not even allowed to say that there have been cuts to the further education sector, never mind have a serious debate about their impact. We know that the situation is hurting people now. The First Minister’s choice to slash funding for colleges has helped to lead to 70,000 fewer students studying in our colleges and thousands of college places have been sacrificed so that he can claim that university tuition is free. That is not fair; it is not a progressive beacon; and I think that it is wrong. Perhaps the First Minister has got it right, but he should make the argument and present his evidence that investing in university tuition fees is better for the economy and for fairness than investing in our colleges. At least we can have the argument. He says that no such choice is being made, but we know that such choices are being made across the country.

The price of the First Minister’s university tuition fees policy is not being borne by no one; it is being borne by every young person who wants a college place, who is sitting on a waiting list or who, having lost their job, cannot retrain. The fundamental insult is that they are not even allowed to say that it is happening as a result of Government choices; it is happening by accident somewhere. If that choice is being made, those who are making it should at least have the courage to face up to the consequences and explain to people why they are making it. Only two years ago, John Swinney was keen for us and the public to have “the widest possible debate about the range of options ... contained” in Crawford Beveridge’s review. The Government needs to understand that this is not about parliamentary knockabout between me, Alex Neil and the First Minister or about degrading people’s positions; it is genuinely about saying that if we want good public services that people can rely on and that ensure that our older people are not isolated or living in fear we need to stop sloganising and start working together on the consequences of the decisions that are being made. The SNP has forced students to top up their budgets with loans by cutting college bursaries by £900—

Those with the most limited means are now financing the best off. Those are the First Minister’s values, not mine. The reality is that, although this Government pretends that it is not making choices, it is. It is choosing to pretend that we have free personal care, when we have elderly people who are vulnerable in their homes. It is pretending that we have free education, when people are denied college places and young people in our schools are being denied the basics to learn. There are important issues about the quality of services and about protecting vulnerable people, but we will do neither if we settle for the approach of the SNP Government, which is to pretend. It is in denial about the reality that everyone across this country knows: we have a fixed budget, we have choices to make, and the test of those choices must be about fairness, equality and ensuring that those who are most vulnerable get the services that they need and deserve. I move amendment S4M-04778.4, to leave out from “that Scotland’s” to end and insert: “Scotland’s public services and the vital role that they play; is concerned that the Scottish Government’s spending choices are having a detrimental impact on public services; notes that the Auditor General for Scotland has put the NHS system on an amber warning; is concerned that older people are facing increased charges and a deteriorating level of care; is dismayed at the cuts to the college, housing and local government budgets; is concerned that it is families and the most vulnerable who are bearing the brunt of these cuts, and calls on the Scottish Government to take action now to protect public services and the people who rely on them instead of putting Scotland on pause until after the referendum on independence.”

Will Aileen McLeod give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

If the member gives way, I will tell him.

Will the member take an intervention?

Yes. Does the member agree with his minister’s decision to means test the central heating programme that used to be universally available to anyone over 60?

Does George Adam share the concern of the Auditor General for Scotland, who says that the NHS is on an “amber warning” and that we have a billion pounds-worth of repairs backlog, of which half is deemed to be a high or significant risk to the services that we would all rely on if we were ill?

Will the member take an intervention?

I believe Christine Grahame when she says that she does not want to see colleges competing against universities, but her education minister is making precisely that happen. If someone is a part-time student, they pay tuition fees; if someone is a college student, they are getting their courses cut. That is the choice that Christine Grahame’s minister is making; he is making that conflict, and we are asking the Parliament to deal with that.

Will the member give way?

Does the member think that having carers, who are now on poorer wages than they were before, make a 15-minute visit to someone they are not supposed to speak to—they do a task and then head off—is a price worth paying for the theoretical view of the world that she presents? That is what is happening in our communities. Does she think that it is preventative spend for someone who is isolated and lonely to get a 15-minute care visit?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member explain how somebody progresses from college to university education if they cannot access a college place because of his Government’s cuts?

Does the minister believe that free personal care is properly and fully funded? If so, why are people across the country getting 15-minute visits and why are care workers having their terms and conditions reduced?

1. If I may, I will depart from protocol for a second in this very important week. I have often disagreed with him and, frequently, I have complained about his tactics and his way of going about things but I do not doubt his commitment to Scotland, which we all share in different ways. So, I ask the whole Parliament right now to pay tribute to Craig Levein. [Laughter.] I also congratulate the First Minister on his longevity. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00953)

I have absolutely no difficulty in agreeing with the First Minister on those two counts. According to Audit Scotland, the national health service has an outstanding £1 billion repairs bill. We have also lost more than 2,000 nurses and the First Minister has imposed real-terms cuts to the NHS of almost £200 million. Yesterday, the Auditor General, Caroline Gardner, said that the NHS in Scotland is on “an amber warning”. Does the First Minister agree with the Auditor General?

The First Minister’s breathtaking complacency in the face of a serious warning from the Auditor General that the NHS is on “an amber warning” does him and his Government no service whatever. The people of this country deserve better. It is clear that the First Minister does not agree with the Auditor General on the NHS. When we said that the Scottish Government had cut spending on colleges by a quarter, both he and his education minister said that we were wrong and that we were scaremongering. The Auditor General has now said—not once, but twice—that college budgets have been cut by 24 per cent in real terms. Is she right or is she scaremongering, too?

If I was being charitable, I would say that that is just white noise between the end of one question and the beginning of the next one. The First Minister wants this to be a theoretical argument between him and me, but it is not. This is the independent voice of the Auditor General saying that there is a serious problem in the NHS and a serious problem in college funding, and he denies it. Let me get this right. When Campbell Christie, Crawford Beveridge and the former Auditor General Robert Black say that we need to face up to a public spending crisis, the First Minister says that they are wrong. When the current Auditor General says that there is a cut in college funding, he says that she is wrong. When the Auditor General then says that the NHS is in crisis, she is wrong again. If the First Minister will not listen to the people who count the numbers, maybe he will listen to the people who treat patients. Theresa Fyffe, of the Royal College of Nursing, says: “Not being frank about the pressures on our health service, or transparent about how money is being spent, is storing up problems for the future”. When will the First Minister face up to reality and be straight with the people of Scotland?

First of all, acknowledging pressures on funding is not the same as doing something about it, which is the First Minister’s job. Secondly, I am not edging towards anything; I am asking the First Minister to listen to what the Auditor General, nurses and doctors and people in public services are saying now about what is happening to their services. This is not an argument for an election; this is about understanding what is happening in the real world to ordinary people at this very time. We know that the First Minister does not believe the Auditor General or her predecessor. He does not believe the experts that he himself appoints. Does he believe himself when he, Alex Salmond, said: “politicians should have a higher duty and the duty is more to the economic cycle than the political cycle”? I read that to mean that politicians should always put the interests of their country before the interests of their party. [Interruption.]

When will the First Minister come and join the rest of us in the real world? When will he face up to the cuts happening now in the real world and the £3 billion-worth of cuts that he is delaying until after his referendum? Does Alex Salmond still believe Alex Salmond, or has he joined the rest of Scotland in not believing a word that the First Minister says?

1. In welcoming the First Minister back to his place, I ask him what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00932)

I am sure that in that letter, our sensibilities and sympathies go, too, to the people of America in these difficult times. Last week, the Deputy First Minister’s spokesman said that there was a “cast-iron position” that an independent Scotland would retain the pound. I congratulate the First Minister on gaining such unequivocal agreement. When was the agreement with the Treasury and the Bank of England reached? When and where was it signed? When did negotiations start?

In the First Minister’s own words, that was a very, very convincing response “in terms of the debate”. There is not a legal bar to a lot of things, but that is a different point altogether from a cast-iron guarantee. Hope, expectation and, “It would all be great if they could just agree with it,” are not the same as a cast-iron guarantee. Surely even the First Minister understands that. Let me recap. According to the First Minister, we will be in the European Union, without having to apply, and we know that without asking any other member state or asking anyone for legal advice; we know that we will not have to have the euro, and we do not need to ask about that either; and we know that we will keep the pound, and we do not need to ask anyone about that either. I ask the First Minister: without looking at the long-range forecast, what will the weather be like in an independent Scotland? [Laughter.]

In the interests of a serious debate, the First Minister ought to stop finding someone that he alleges agrees with him and quoting them in this place. There are many different positions on the matter, including that of the First Minister’s back bencher John Mason, who said on Tuesday that “all these things are subject to negotiation”—[Official Report, 30 October 2012; c 12703.] and they are not definite. The charge at the First Minister’s door is that he asserts things for which he has no evidence. It is about time that the First Minister got serious about the future of Scotland. The First Minister thinks that he can treat the people of Scotland like fools and that we will believe everything that he says when, after last week, no one trusts a word that he says. I understand why the First Minister did not turn up to Tuesday’s debate to defend his reputation. It was because even he knows that he no longer has a reputation to defend. What is it that the First Minister is so scared of that he cannot ask the Bank of England about the pound and cannot ask other EU members about Europe? Is it just that he cannot face the truth when he is presented with it?

In the debate about Scotland’s future, I stand with Campbell Christie in saying that, in tough times, we should look at competing good demands and ensure that those of us with the broadest shoulders are the ones who take the heaviest burden. The First Minister says that he is setting up his fiscal group. However, surely it would have been an idea to pursue the matter of whether we are going to have the pound with the Bank of England and the Treasury. They are the people who will decide that matter. Of course, the First Minister has long sought international profile and, my goodness, he has got it. The Washington Post, the newspaper that exposed—[Interruption.]

Members may have read it. The Washington Post, the newspaper that exposed Richard Nixon’s corruption, knows a chancer when it sees one—[Interruption.]

It has made a serious charge. The Washington Post said—[Interruption.] I am sure that Scottish National Party members have read this quote; I would like to share it with others. The Washington Post said: “Mr. Salmond’s cheerful assurances that Scotland could quickly join the European Union while retaining the British pound as its currency remain to be tested; London would have a veto over both. EU states might demand that Scotland commit to the wobbly Euro; if the pound were split between two nations, it could become subject to the same troubles that have afflicted the European currency.” These are serious matters being addressed by serious people. If The Washington Post can see that from Washington, why can the First Minister not see it from here?

In speaking to the Labour motion, I emphasise that we have lodged it for debate precisely because we have respect for this Parliament and its role in holding the Government to account. Our expectation is for Government to seek not to finesse questions, but to confront and answer them. All of us in this Parliament—in this country—are entitled to our own opinions. What we are not entitled to are our own facts. We called for the debate this week because nothing about what the First Minister and his deputy told us last week about Scotland’s future in Europe was satisfactory. They tried to convince us, but they did not say that what they were offering were their opinions. They came to chamber and revealed that for months—possibly years—they have been trying to convince us with their own facts, without ever establishing them. Before last Tuesday, the First Minister was on the record as saying that he had sought advice from Scotland’s law officers on Scotland’s status in relation to the European Union, were we to choose to leave the United Kingdom. The First Minister said that; he often implied it. He even went to court to keep that legal advice secret. Then the dam burst when the Deputy First Minister told Parliament that the advice that the First Minister was seeking to keep private did not in fact exist. No one could make that up. What followed was a week of contradictions and contortions, smokescreens and bluster, references to opaque rules, and baseless assertions. The only thing that is clear about this sorry mess is that the people of Scotland cannot expect the First Minister to be honest with them when it comes to fulfilling his lifelong dream of breaking up the United Kingdom. The people of Scotland can no longer trust their First Minister to tell them the truth. Why is this debate important? It is important because the people of Scotland deserve to know what the consequence will be if they vote yes in 2014. Will we still be a member of the European Union? Will we have to adopt the euro as our currency, with all that goes with that? Will a border have to be erected between Scotland and England? The First Minister does not try to find the true answers to those questions; whatever the truth is, he starts with the answers that he wants and then works backwards. Last week he boldly proclaimed to the Parliament again that yes, of course an independent Scotland would be a member of the European Union. That was backed up by his loyal deputy, whose spokesperson told the media last week: “The cast-iron position is that an independent Scotland will retain the pound”. We have heard such assertions many times, but that was the first time that they had been repeated since Scotland finally found out that in five years of being in government the Government had not bothered to get any legal advice to determine whether its grand plan had any basis in reality. What basis does the Government have for its claims? It seems that the basis is simply that that is what the Government wants to happen. Last week, the First Minister again cited Lord Mackenzie-Stuart. Lord Mackenzie-Stuart was a fine man, I am sure, and a successful judge, but it seems that all that we have to go on is a throwaway line that he gave to Scotland on Sunday 20 years ago. He did not offer unequivocal advice but merely said that he was “puzzled at the suggestion”—and that was before the European Union was formed, before the single currency and, significantly, before the Treaty of Lisbon, which for the first time allowed countries to leave the EU. Alex Salmond backs up his position with the words of Eamonn Gallagher—another fine man, I am sure, but one who was a member of the Scottish National Party branch in Brussels. I am sure that the opinions of those men are relevant, if slightly dated, and that they add to the debate. However, it is complete nonsense to hold that they are definitive opinions while ignoring the views of José Manuel Barroso, the President of the European Commission, and José Manuel García-Margallo, the Spanish foreign minister. Such selective hearing exemplifies the hollowness of the nationalists’ position. Deep down, none of that matters to them. All the consequences, should they come to pass, will be worth it as long as the nationalists have what they view as self-determination. As long as they can get over the line of the referendum, all else is grist to the mill.

When that is relayed to the First Minister, I am sure that he will wish that he had come to the Parliament to defend his position himself. The First Minister did not say, “Oh well, it’s all subject to the lawyers.” He said, “We will be in Europe and we will have sterling.” None of that has been proven. It is all grist to the mill. That is why we have a First Minister who gets his advisers to write letters for referendum experts and cites those experts in the chamber before they have agreed to sign. That is why the First Minister even offered to extend his penmanship to the Trump, to get his backing over the release of Megrahi. That is why we have a First Minister who proudly announced investment from the Korean company Doosan, but, when Doosan pulled out, claimed that it was not his place to tell people, even though he had included Doosan in budget documents that the Parliament voted on. That is why we have a First Minister who lobbied the UK Government on behalf of his favourite discredited newspaper proprietor, Rupert Murdoch, claiming that he was good for Scottish jobs, although he is still unable to provide a shred of evidence to back that up. What happened last week was not a one-off but part of a pattern of behaviour that the people of Scotland are getting sick of, as are many people in the First Minister’s party. We will remain in NATO, somehow, with no nuclear weapons. We will keep the pound and a place on the monetary policy committee, but there will be no restrictions on borrowing. We will remain in the EU, but we will not have the euro. I call on the First Minister to bring an end to the assertions and boasts. If he comes forward now with the true position of an independent Scotland, questions over his character will disappear and this Parliament and the people whom we represent can have a real debate. In two years, the people of Scotland will come together to decide our future.

As I said last week to the House of Lords committee and in this chamber, we owe it to the people of Scotland to scrutinise the proposition that has been put forward so that they can make the decision with full knowledge. All the evidence thus far from the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister is that they think that simple assertion is enough. That demeans the debate, it demeans this Parliament, and it denies the people of this country the opportunity that they require. I make that commitment because, as I have said, in two years the people of Scotland will come together to decide our future. That will be an historic moment and our fellow citizens deserve to know exactly what they are going to vote for. Trust is key to the debate because the day after the referendum we will need to come together to unite behind that result. As First Minister in Scotland’s Government and the leader of the chief proponents of one of the two options on the ballot, Alex Salmond has a responsibility to ensure that we have an honest and open debate. We cannot do that in this climate, where any concern or question is explained away and every debate is closed down. What does the First Minister mean when he uses the word “debate”? Can his definition of it restore any of our trust? Let us remember what the television presenter Andrew Neil asked him on 4 March. The First Minister was asked, “Have you sought advice from your own ... law officers”. His answer was, “We have, yes”. What words does he then use, which he now claims change the phrase “We have, yes” into the truth, which is, “No, we haven’t”? The words that he believes produce that magic transition are “in terms of the debate”. When does yes mean no? In Alex Salmond’s world, yes means no when we are having a debate. What chance do we have of an honest debate when we have a First Minister who believes that? It is time that the SNP has the courage of its convictions, lays out its case—backed by real facts and real evidence—and, for better or worse, lets the people decide. There have been authoritative statements from the European Commission that may not fit with the SNP’s argument, but they are clear and straightforward. If I may, I will quote: “In response to a question tabled by Eluned Morgan MEP, in 2004, the commission replied: ‘When a part of the territory of a member state ceases to be part of the state, e.g. because that territory becomes an independent state, the treaties will no longer apply to that territory. In other words, a new independent region would, by the fact of its independence, become a third country with respect to the Union and the treaties would, from the day of its independence, not apply anymore on its territory.’ The commission explained further that the new state could apply for membership, but for the application to be accepted it would require the unanimous agreement of member states.”—[Interruption.] If Mr Neil wants a debate he has to listen to it as well as shouting from a sedentary position. Let me continue: “The commission confirmed that position on 11 September 2009, saying that the application ‘would have to go through every country’s parliament ... One can legitimately expect the Spanish politicians in Madrid would want Scotland to have a bumpy ride ... The notion that Scotland becoming a member state is seamless is highly optimistic.’” I know that those opinions from the Commission are authentic and so too does the man I was quoting: the former deputy leader of the SNP, Jim Sillars. If the SNP will not listen to me, they should surely listen to one of their own. Jim Sillars went on: “It is the commission, the body with the political power, not any private person however exalted in the legal world, which is the decisive voice.” He added: “On this core EU issue, of importance not just to the business community but to the people who work for it, we have had a demonstration of amateurism; and along with it, thanks to the bungled FOI request, a loss of trust.” What is to be done when there has been, in the words of the former deputy leader of the SNP, such a devastating “loss of trust”? What will not restore trust is the humiliating sight of the First Minister hiding behind the ministerial code, hand picking a new judge to look into the case, refusing to look at the substance of the scandal and then crowing, “It’s okay, these guys have never found me guilty so far.” This is not about his future; it is about the future of Scotland, and Scotland deserves better. That is why, today, I am calling for a judicial inquiry into the First Minister’s handling of this affair from the beginning—an inquiry into the basis upon which the First Minister ever asserted that Scotland would automatically be a member of the EU, and what it was that made him say that this separate Scotland would not have to adopt the euro. I am calling for an inquiry into why he said that he had sought advice from the law officers when he had not. No amount of bluff and bluster will stop us seeking the truth. He cannot hide behind the section 30 order that he signed with the Prime Minister because, as he made clear when it was first offered, he did not think that he needed one. Indeed, when the offer of a section 30 order was first made, the First Minister told the UK Government to butt out. We need to restore the public’s confidence in the way that we do politics. If the First Minister does not care about that, if his Cabinet colleagues are too frightened to challenge him and if his back benchers do not worry about burning their credibility in TV and radio studios up and down the country, we in the Scottish Labour Party will take action to restore confidence in our political system. In June 2004, Alex Salmond was asked whether he would stand again for the leadership of his party. He said: “If nominated I’ll decline. If drafted I’ll defer. And if elected I’ll resign.” Well, he did not decline and he did not defer. If he does not take the urgent action that I have outlined and apologise to the people of Scotland for misleading them on this and on so many other vital issues, perhaps that third option will be taken from him. I move, That the Parliament notes with grave concern the confusion caused by the contradictory comments of the First Minister and Deputy First Minister as to whether or not legal advice had been sought regarding an independent Scotland’s status in respect of EU membership; considers that clarification of the situation is still required and calls on the First Minister to make a full statement to the Parliament providing such clarification, and urges the Lord Advocate to inform the Parliament what advice he has provided to the Scottish Government, believing that the credibility of the First Minister and the Scottish Government are at stake and that nothing less than full disclosure is required.

I repeat the point that, in January, the cabinet secretary’s Government said that the actions of the UK Government in offering her Government the relevant powers were not necessary, so why would the Scottish Government not have taken advice on these matters when it did not need the context of the UK Government to determine its position?

Will the member give way?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00911)

I would like to ask the First Minister a familiar question about whether a separate Scotland would be a member of the European Union. It is a question that Andrew Neil asked him on 4 March: “Have you sought advice from your own Scottish law officers in this matter?” Starting his answer with the words, “We have, yes,” could the First Minister get to, “No, we haven’t,” in 27 words?

In among all that, the First Minister astonishingly asserted what Scotland’s position would be in Europe post independence. That is despite the fact that in five and a half years he has not asked the question and that he now tells us that, when he gets the answer, he will not share it with us. The First Minister talks about the interview and the 27 words. I have the transcript here. The First Minister seems to be asking the people as Marx—Groucho Marx, that is—asked before him: “Are you going to believe me or the evidence of your own eyes?” I suppose that you cannot expect a straight answer from a First Minister who is as straight as a corkscrew, but let us try again. Why did the First Minister—[Interruption.]

Why did the First Minister say that he had sought advice from the law officers when he had not? Why did he give that impression to this chamber and why did he go to court at our expense to stop the release of advice that he knew did not exist?

I have to say to the First Minister in the gentlest of terms that, given the seriousness of the charges that have been made to him, the idea that that constitutes any kind of answer is completely ludicrous. The people of Scotland need to trust what he says and, on that performance, they certainly do not. He says, “We can’t say that we are even asking for advice”—but the Deputy First Minister stood here on Tuesday and said that she was asking for that advice. Why does it have to be secret? This is the reality about what is a serious issue. The First Minister wants an honest debate about what is going to happen to the future of Scotland so he starts it by asserting—and he did it again today—that we would be in the EU but would not have to join the euro. However, the First Minister does not actually know that because in five and a half years he has not asked. Yesterday, the Spanish foreign secretary said that Scotland would have to apply to be in the EU and would be at the back of the queue. The First Minister says that he is wrong, but he does not know because he has not asked. The First Minister says that we would keep the pound, but he does not know that either, because he has not asked. The reality is that the First Minister will say anything to get through the moment and then ask us to take his assertions on trust. Does he not realise that after this week nobody trusts him?

I am asking for the information that the people of Scotland require to make the decision in future. The First Minister says that the difference between him and the Deputy First Minister is that she asked permission to tell us that she was going to get advice. Could he not have asked permission to tell us that he had not asked for any advice? Members might find this hard to believe, but I actually feel for the First Minister. All his life, he has fought for this and now he knows that his argument does not meet the times. Now he knows that it does not make sense for Scotland, so he makes things up instead. No one wants the euro, so in his world he pretends that we would not have to have it, even though he knows that we would. Before now, Alex has always got his way. His need for a place in Scottish history comes before the needs of the people of Scotland. As I said, I feel for the First Minister. His argument is falling apart in front of his eyes, and his own back benchers know it. His deceptions are being found out and no one believes him any more. How can this country have an honest debate about our future when we cannot trust a word that Alex Salmond says?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00891) I welcome the First Minister back to his place. I am sure that he and others will want to join me in congratulating Paul Lawrie and the whole European team on their stunning victory in the Ryder cup. [Applause.]

Absolutely. How is the First Minister going to make the almost £3 billion of cuts that are to come without anyone noticing?

The problem with the First Minister is not just that he is surprised when he leaves for America, but that, when he is in Scotland, he is in denial about what is happening in the real Scotland outside this chamber. He talks about securing public services and says that we have free everything, but he has already brought in £2.7 billion of cuts, and the poor, the vulnerable and the hard-working families in this country have noticed. They have noticed the pensioner who needs help to wash, to dress and to feed themselves suffering the indignity of having just 15 minutes of care visits in a day; the family paying more for childcare than for their mortgage; the 18,000 Scots who are being denied a place at college; and the thousands of working-class students who have had their bursaries cut by £900 a year. They see his cuts; they do not see his Scotland where everything is free and everything is fantastic. Who is going to pay when he delivers the next £3 billion of cuts?

I do not think that the First Minister listened to what I said about what is happening to people throughout the country. He says that nothing changes, but the question that we should be asking is: who is paying the price for the benefits that we all get from his spending choices? The First Minister says that we tried to outbid the SNP. One lesson that we have learned is that it is impossible to outbid the SNP on recklessness. Instead, we will demand a serious Government that makes the hard decisions so that people do not pay the price. It is no wonder that the First Minister thinks that he needs to spend £1 million on spin doctors to try to spin his way out of this. That tells us all we need to know about him. Care workers are losing their jobs or getting their wages cut, but more SNP spinners are hired. The cuts must be brought in by 2016. Already, John Swinney has delayed half the cuts that he must make. Will we know more before the referendum in 2014 about where that £3 billion-worth of cuts will be made or will the Government continue to try to con the people of Scotland and treat us all as fools?

The First Minister loves having straw men to cut down. The reality is that a much more serious debate is going on. He says that we should have a debate and then insults every family in the country that is worrying about its children in school, its young people in college and the care of its older people. He talks about debate but forces his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to come to the chamber and recant a position that he held five years ago. We want to have a debate and test the evidence on where the balance, which the First Minister knows is needed, should lie. I understand why the First Minister thinks that everything is free: he is on £130,000 a year, spends almost £2,000 a week on hospitality and then gets taxpayers to spend £1,300 a year for a television package to enable him to watch the films and sports events that he then gets them to pay for him to attend. The First Minister does not live in the real world. He lives in a world in which it is fine to spend £400,000 to rent a gentlemen’s club in Pall Mall, but not to worry about the care worker who has had their wages cut by £4,000 a year. He is not an economist—he is a fantasist. No wonder that, from Hampden Park to the Ryder cup and from George Square to the Edinburgh tattoo, he is roundly booed wherever he goes.

Presiding Officer, I note what you say about the debate being oversubscribed. It is our aspiration that this be a serious debate for the whole of Scotland. The noises from the Scottish National Party benches to my right suggest that those members have no intention of having a serious debate about these matters. Life in opposition could be very easy: sit back; do not say anything controversial; criticise the Government’s weaknesses; and hope that, come the election in a few years’ time, people will think that we can do a better job. However, a few weeks ago, I met a group of carers and, for me, it was the final straw with regard to things that have been worrying me for many months. The carers were home helps—kind and compassionate people who support our elderly in our homes, providing meals and helping them to wash and to do other day-to-day tasks that most of us take for granted. While talking to them, I learned of the concept of task and go. I heard about carers who have to fit in four visits in an hour. I heard about carers who are instructed not to talk to their clients, because they simply do not have the time. We know that there are elderly people in our communities who see a different face every time they are due a visit. We remember all too well the powerful testimony of the widow of the late Ken Maitland, who had the indignity of having more than 106 carers through his door in a year. We know that there are elderly people who opt out of the care support because it is no longer working for them. Is this really the kind of care that we want for our grandparents, our mothers and fathers, and—when the time comes—ourselves? I decided that enough was enough. Every week, we are told by the SNP Government how wonderful life is in Scotland and that any overhanging problems can be swept away with one magic solution. The presentation that we hear from the First Minister every Thursday bears no resemblance to what I am hearing in my community and across Scotland every other week. We are not playing the game anymore. We cannot tell these women that everything is going to be fine. We cannot finesse something that is not delivering for people. We will refuse to have respect for a Scottish Government that claims to care but refuses to acknowledge those women and their concerns—a Government that refuses to acknowledge what is going on in the real world. The Scottish Government does not like to be confronted with reality. In March, the First Minister accused my colleague Jackie Baillie of telling scare stories about the shortage of blankets in Scottish hospitals. It took a visit to Parliament by 92-year-old Helen Macbeth and Jack Barr, a grandfather, to tell him about their experiences before he was prepared to admit that old people were going without blankets at night.

I would hazard a guess that some of the women I met in Glasgow come from Mr Mason’s constituency. It is no comfort to them to tell them that things are fantastic when they know, every day of their lives, that that is not the case. They asked me, “How can this go on? How is it allowed that we create these kinds of circumstances in our communities?” The member might want to hide from it, but he should listen to people across our communities who are telling us something different. The First Minister told his party conference last year that “the rocks will melt with the sun” before he allows tuition fees for Scottish students. He did not say, “unless you are a part-time student or a graduate.” He did not say that the rocks would melt with the sun before he cut the bursaries of Scotland’s poorest students by nearly £900. He did not say that the rocks would melt with the sun before he let the number of people going to college drop by 18,000. He said none of those things; he let Michael Russell go ahead and make all of those things happen in what is probably the single biggest betrayal of Scotland’s young people. It cannot be finessed, wished away or spun, and it cannot be explained with the selective use of statistics; that is what is happening in the real world and the SNP Government refuses to acknowledge it.

I would ask the NUS: is it right that students who cannot get a place in a further education college are to pay the price of Mike Russell’s policies? We do no students a service and we do them a grave disservice by implying that one set of students is more important than another. Mike Russell is the man who penned that great work “Grasping the Thistle”, in which he tells us of his plans to privatise the national health service and informs us that Scotland’s real problem with the union is that we get too much money out of it—he says that it is literally killing us with kindness. We do not agree with Mike Russell on many things but, for those members who were not watching the Labour Party conference this week and going on Twitter, let me read this passage from Mr Russell: “Put bluntly universality now drags down both the quality of service to those most in need, and the ability of government to provide such services. However, our political parties do not have the courage to address the issue for fear of losing votes.”

I think that the real difference is that Mr Russell opposed Alex Salmond when he wrote the book but now relies on his patronage. It is illogical to say that we would spend less on the poor in a time of recession than in a time of plenty—it makes no sense whatsoever. [Interruption.]

Unlike Mike Russell, I am not against universality. I just want to know how we are going to pay for it. We know that such concerns exist at the heart of the Government, but those who have them are too cynical to voice them. I will quote another one of the SNP Government’s front bench, our Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, who said: “It would be inappropriate to use scarce resources to provide free central heating systems for some of our retired bankers, for example, who receive substantial pensions.” —[Official Report, 14 May 2009; c 17481.] That is a perfectly reasonable proposition, but it is at odds with the view of the Deputy First Minister, who claims that she does not believe in means testing, even though she was the cabinet secretary in charge at the time of Alex Neil’s statement. If Nicola Sturgeon is serious about universality, I look forward to her reversing the means testing for the education maintenance allowance, which cuts off at £20,000; I look forward to her extending universality to dental treatment; I look forward to her ending hotel charges in care homes; I look forward to her withdrawing the bill that increases means testing for legal aid; and I look forward to finding out where she is going to find the money to pay for it all. We have a Deputy First Minister who decries anyone who challenges her definition of universality and we have a First Minister who has never met a tax that he does not want to cut. We know that those things are not consistent—they are incompatible—and yet this dishonest Government continues the myth that in an independent Scotland we could have Scandinavian welfare while cutting tax to a level that would make Mitt Romney blush. Alex Neil is right about one thing—that we have scarce resources, with £3.3 billion still to be removed from the Scottish budget. I agree with the SNP that the Tory Government is cutting too far and fast, but the reality is that those cuts will have to be addressed. Last week, Nicola Sturgeon invented a Labour cuts commission, but what precisely did she imagine that John Swinney asked Crawford Beveridge and Campbell Christie to do? He asked, “What do we do in tough times?” and Beveridge said that we should ask not whether something is desirable but whether it is affordable and whether, in tough times, we expect those with the broadest backs to carry the heaviest burden. Of course, Nicola Sturgeon is in complete denial, but the reality is that people out there are facing the consequences of SNP cuts every day. [Interruption.] SNP members might think that it is funny, but to care workers, mothers who are worried about the quality of their children’s education or young people who cannot access college, it is not funny or imagined—it is the real world. How will the SNP protect people and on whom will it put the burden? Last year, the Christie commission report, which was commissioned by John Swinney, warned that “Contentious issues such as the continuation of universal entitlements must be considered openly and transparently, rather than in the current polarised terms.” I urge the SNP to listen to the man who responded to its request and set up that commission. It seems that, in Scottish politics, it is just not possible to consider those issues openly and honestly. The debate has been closed down because it suits some people to keep it polarised.

The fact is that the people whom I described who are living with the consequence of SNP cuts are paying the price for the SNP’s pretence that everything is dead straightforward. Everybody pays a price but, in tough times, it ought not to be the weak and the vulnerable—it should be those of us with the broader backs. I believe that my approach is in the national interest. The easy option for me as leader of the Opposition would have been to sit back, put my fingers in my ears and pretend that we can afford to pay for everything for evermore. However, I care too much about Scotland to do that and I care too much about public services to let them bleed to death. The debate that I called for is not one about universality versus means testing; it is about what we can and cannot afford. It is about affordability and sustainability and how we protect the most vulnerable in these tough times. What the SNP has to say about universality will be of little comfort to young people from poor backgrounds who cannot get a place at college, older people who are faced with declining standards of care, and people who lose their jobs.

The reality is that the SNP does not have a basic understanding of fairness. In my remaining time, I can give only one example. Is it fair that a mother has to pay £5 a day for breakfast club and £11 a day for after-school club just so that she can get to work? We want and need an open and honest debate. As long as the SNP closes down the debate, makes a false argument about the challenges and remains in denial about the cuts that it is implementing, the people who pay the price will be those across Scotland who do not have the power of sitting at the table with Alex Salmond and having his ear. The poor people in our communities and working families are concerned. They have the right to have their voices heard and the Government has an obligation to respond to them. I move, That the Parliament notes that cuts are currently taking place at both national and local level and having an impact on people’s daily lives; recognises that it is those most in need that are often acutely affected by these cuts; notes that the Centre for Public Policy for Regions has calculated that over three quarters of the real-terms decline in resource spend has still to come; recognises that, at the same time, demographic and social pressures are increasing; agrees with the Commission on the Future Delivery of Public Services that “Contentious issues such as the continuation of universal entitlements must be considered openly and transparently, rather than in the current polarised terms”, and calls on all members to consider how to fully fund and sustain high quality public services in Scotland that best support the needs of Scots now and in the future.

First, does the cabinet secretary think that Campbell Christie was a Tory? Secondly, the responsibility of Government, regardless of the size of the cake, is to ensure that the cake is distributed fairly. By any test, her decisions and those of her Government have not led to a fair distribution. It is not good enough to say that we do not have the powers; the Government still has the responsibility. The cake is the size it is and the Government needs to answer why it has not distributed it fairly.

I wonder how Stuart McMillan feels about his leader saying that the people of Scotland did not have a problem with Thatcher’s economic policies.

The next meeting of our economy group will take place next Monday. When will Mr Swinney start acting on what Campbell Christie and Crawford Beveridge said?

I will tell the member what I mean—I mean us getting free prescriptions, the price of which is paid by somebody who cannot get the care that they need in our community, and I mean the women who spoke to me last week. Nobody gets anything for nothing—somebody somewhere bears the cost. I am happy to pay through taxation, but the reality is that, under the SNP’s budgets, what is happening—

The SNP’s policies—

Alex Salmond said that he would cut corporation taxes in an independent Scotland. How would that improve the public purse?

It is not 9,000.

Does the member think that it is part of the common weal to deny people with learning disabilities the opportunity to learn to live independently by attending college, which was a cornerstone of the quiet revolution that emptied our long-stay hospitals and gave people dignity and the ability to achieve their potential? The member’s Government is cutting those places in further education right now.

John Swinney could perhaps address what we are discussing in the debate. In 2010, he said that the Beveridge report would be a critical platform to build consensus within the Parliament and across Scotland about how we deal with the pressures on our finances. When I raised those issues, the Deputy First Minister impugned my motives and said, “nothing will change.” When will John Swinney build consensus by having a serious debate about what Beveridge and Christie said?

1. To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day (S4F-00876)

The late Campbell Christie was one of the finest trade unionists that this country has ever produced. He fought uncaring Tory Governments at every turn and helped to deliver the Parliament to protect the people of Scotland. His commission report on the future delivery of public services, which was written for the Scottish National Party Government, said: “Contentious issues such as the continuation of universal entitlements must be considered openly and transparently, rather than in the current polarised terms.” This is about the kind of fairness that we want to achieve for our communities. Spending is projected not even to get to 2010 levels for another 15 years, and Scotland’s population is ageing. I agree with Campbell Christie and believe that the debate about how we make spending choices fair for people throughout Scotland must happen before the referendum. Does Nicola Sturgeon? [Applause.]

Nicola Sturgeon needs to understand that this is not a game about dividing lines. Nor is it about her electoral future. It is about what is happening in our communities throughout Scotland. She ought not to believe what her spin doctor tells her about what I said—I said that we need an open and honest debate, just as John Swinney said in 2010. If Nicola Sturgeon does not want to agree with Campbell Christie and me, perhaps she will agree with one of her own. In another report that her Government commissioned, her chief economic adviser, Crawford Beveridge, said of free services: “concessionary travel, prescription charges, eye examinations, free personal and nursing care and tuition fees” are “commendable, but simply may no longer be affordable.” Critically, he added: “A debate needs to be had on whether those who can afford to pay might be invited to do so, thus allowing better targeting of those in most need.” When Nicola Sturgeon’s own minister, Alex Neil, got rid of the universal provision of central heating systems, he said: “It would be inappropriate to use scarce resources to provide free central heating systems for some of our retired bankers, for example, who receive substantial pensions.”—[Official Report, 14 May 2009; c 17481.] What Nicola Sturgeon says is not about the principle of universality; it is an electoral calculation. Why will she not have the debate that Campbell Christie and Crawford Beveridge demanded and ensure that we have it this side of the referendum?

The Deputy First Minister might think that that sounds good in here, but in the country, it sounds like a lot of nonsense. The fact of the matter is—[Interruption.]

I agree with the Deputy First Minister that the budget has been cut, but if it has been cut, why does she stick with the same priorities that she set out in 2007? The dispute is not about whether there are cuts, which is how Nicola Sturgeon wants to present it; it is about which cuts should be made in tough times. Let me explain what real people think. [Interruption.]

Nicola Sturgeon lives in a household with an income of more than £200,000 a year. She gets free prescriptions. Free prescriptions cost £57 million a year. How many nurses is that? Like me, Nicola Sturgeon will have saved more than £400 from the council tax freeze, but my children’s school and schools across the country are getting to the stage at which they cannot even do the basics, such as photocopy materials. If spending cuts threaten the kind of free care for the elderly that we want to deliver, is it fair that a woman such as her on 200 grand should get free prescriptions? Is it fair that the Sturgeon household, on £200,000 a year, gets universal benefits when families on average earnings pay more for childcare than for their mortgage?

We know that the Government’s council tax freeze is underfunded. I have been to too many meetings at which I have listened to care workers describing their lives and terms and conditions now, and I have listened to too many carers who are mopping up due to the fact that budgets are being cut, to stay silent on the issue. Talk about not opening the gas bill but putting it in the drawer—that is what Nicola Sturgeon is doing with the nation’s bills. As every decent household knows, that never ends well. These are serious times. She said that she wants a debate: have one and let the people of Scotland choose. [Interruption.]

If Nicola Sturgeon shuts down the debate in the way that she has started to do this week, she had better explain to the carer who is told that they can care for the pensioner for only 15 minutes why that is happening; to the son why that is the only care that his mother gets; and to the parent why their child cannot have the classroom support that they require to maintain them in mainstream education. A public spending crisis is happening now and it is going to get worse. Nicola Sturgeon should face up to that. The Tories are cutting the budget, but within that budget we will all be judged on the choices that we make, whether it is our benefits or the needs of the people of this country. She could get that and she could change her mind now.

1. To ask the First Minister—ministerial code permitting, of course—what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00858)

The First Minister said that last time, of course, and the evidence in that budget proved that that was not the case. We know that we will hear John Swinney’s budget this afternoon. Last year, he presented a budget that outlined engineering giant Doosan’s investment in Scotland but by the time we voted on the budget, John Swinney and the First Minister both knew that that company had changed its plans. When did the First Minister find out about Doosan’s decision? Why did he not tell Parliament?

That is very interesting, but it is not the answer to the question that the First Minister was asked—so nothing new there. The First Minister knows when he was told about Doosan’s decision and he knows that it was wrong not to tell the Parliament about Doosan’s cancellation, but he just does not want us to know the truth. That is why he has refused to answer any freedom of information requests on the issue. The refusal to answer questions is not just the First Minister’s style every Thursday at First Minister’s question time; it is increasingly the style of his whole Government. That is why the number of appeals against ministers refusing to release information has risen by 175 per cent in the past year. Why is that? Is the First Minister getting even more secretive, or does he have even more to hide? [Interruption.]

All of that is very interesting. [Interruption.]

However, the First Minister is always interesting, creative and enthusiastic, until we go back and look at the figures later. What the First Minister has to explain is why Rosemary Agnew, the Scottish Information Commissioner, has said that we are in a worse position in relation to rights to information than we were when the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 was passed. It is not me who is saying that; it is the Information Commissioner who is saying it. I suspect that I would trust her figures before those of the First Minister. Of course, this is a First Minister who cannot be straight with or have respect for the Scottish people. He refuses to tell us what advice he has on an independent Scotland’s place in Europe. Incredibly, he has even today taken the Information Commissioner to the Court of Session to try to shut her up, just like when he spent hundreds of thousands of pounds of taxpayers’ cash—our cash—against official advice to stop the public knowing the truth about his tax plans. At a time when families across the country are paying the price for his budget cuts, why is he spending hundreds of thousands of pounds of Scottish people’s money to stop the people of Scotland finding out what he is doing?

Can I advise the First Minister not to judge his success in that answer by the cheering from his back benchers? He might want to get out a bit more, head for George Square and ask people there what they think of that as an answer to the question. Of course, the First Minister could resolve the problem this morning in the court—he says that the Government agrees with the commissioner and wants to speed things up—because all he needs to do is ask his law officers’ permission to give the information to the people of Scotland. Then the Government would not need to be in court at all. It is no wonder that the Information Commissioner said this week that it is simply not acceptable that citizens’ rights continue to be eroded. The fact of the matter is that the First Minister says that spending on colleges has gone up when he has cut it; Audit Scotland is investigating the national health service because it does not believe his figures; and he uses taxpayers’ money to go to court to stop the public knowing the truth not just about Europe but about anything that he finds an inconvenient truth. The First Minister wishes that I would ask him the right questions. The people of this country wish that he would start answering questions. We have to ask him a question that people across the country are asking: why cannot this First Minister be straight with the Scottish people?

1. I know that, like the rest of us, the First Minister will tomorrow celebrate with all of Scotland a wonderful summer of sport, which culminated in Andy Murray’s fantastic victory in New York. [Applause.] However, my question is about today. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00849)

Is there anything about independence that the people of Scotland should not know?

Yesterday, the President of the European Commission said clearly: “A new state, if it wants to join the European Union, has to apply ... like any state.” That means that the new state of Scotland would first have to apply to be a member of the European Union. If it succeeded, we would have to adopt the euro as our currency. The First Minister has no legal advice that contradicts the President of the European Commission, does he?

I listened carefully, but I did not detect an answer to my question. The Scottish National Party’s position seems to be predicated on the fact that Scotland would not be a new state. I wonder for what the SNP has been arguing for the past 100 years. If the First Minister has advice that contradicts what President Barroso said, why does he not remove all doubt and publish it? “Dialogue between the people and their representatives is essential in a genuine democracy.” Those were the wise words this week of Alex Salmond’s old deputy and friend Jim Sillars. Instead of telling the people of Scotland what advice he has received, the First Minister is using our money to fund a court action to stop us knowing what he knows. The Scottish Information Commissioner has ruled that “it is in the public interest to know” what information is being taken “into account in developing policy in ... such a significant issue as independence.” Surely the First Minister believes that it is in the public’s interest to know the consequences of voting for independence.

I am not sure who the First Minister imagines would refer him under the ministerial code, in relation to giving us information that it is costing the state £100,000 to keep away from us—[Interruption.]

It is costing £100,000 to keep the information out of the public domain. When I was a minister, I think that I made a bit of a difference, but in all that time I never posed a question that we have decided is the most important for 300 years. We are in those circumstances, and I suggest that in such circumstances the information could usefully be revealed. Otherwise, one has to ask what the First Minister has got to hide. We have to get this right: President Barroso is wrong; the Scottish Information Commissioner is wrong; Jim Sillars is wrong. Only Alex Salmond is right, all the time. No doubt he will soon be blaming Mo Farah, Ellie Simmonds and Chris Hoy for unemployment going up in Scotland—oh, he did that yesterday. Meaningless assertion on the pound has descended into deliberate deception on the euro. While Alex Salmond fails to provide a single shred of evidence, President Barroso provides evidence. Scotland would have to reapply to join the EU and would have to adopt the euro, with all the disastrous economic consequences that that would have. Alex Salmond has to understand that although, when he says something, his back benchers agree, we expect more than simple assertion. He refuses to tell the people of Scotland the truth. When is he planning to tell them—now, never, or when it is too late?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00822)

It is astonishing that the Government’s definition of “unwavering commitment” is the cutting of colleges’ budgets by 20 per cent. So, Nicola Sturgeon is the new minister for shovel-ready projects and Alex Neil gets a hospital pass. As I look round the chamber, I can see that not everyone is smiling—not Jamie Hepburn, who was passed over for the crime of sticking to party policy on NATO, and not Kenny Gibson, who is never the bridesmaid and is not even invited to the evening reception. The First Minister is not so much rearranging the deckchairs on the Titanic as swapping the mop heads on the Vital Spark. It is not just the First Minister’s back benchers who are unhappy. Anyone in the country who is looking for a full-time job and any business that is looking for opportunities is unhappy. Why has the First Minister reduced the ministerial responsibility for economic recovery to a part-time post? Why is running the national health service less important than running his referendum?

I will never, ever apologise for drawing on the expertise of ordinary people across this country, including students, who know what the First Minister is doing to them. The reality is that the gap between what the First Minister says is happening and what is actually happening on the ground is growing wider by the day. Ask any college principal, and that is what they will tell you. Let me get this right. In the morning, Nicola Sturgeon will deal with Scotland’s biggest decision for 300 years. In the afternoon, she will deal with the greatest economic crisis since the depression in the 1930s. What on earth will she do over lunch? Will she split the atom? On Tuesday, the First Minister said: “There has never been an economic recovery without a recovery in the construction sector”—[Official Report, 4 September 2012; c 10899.] This is the man who cut £86 million from the housing budget. Now he has downgraded the post of minister for construction to a part-time job. How does he explain to someone who is looking for work that the issue is on Nicola Sturgeon’s to-do list—that it is for some point when she gets past what she really cares about, which is the constitution?

The First Minister makes my case for me. If the Tories are attacking Scotland in the way that he says they are, why, in the face of that, does he not have a minister actively focus on protecting the people of Scotland, rather than focusing on the referendum? If the First Minister wants to talk about working with the Tories, perhaps he had better speak to his Westminster colleagues, who I hear are saying that they will back the Tories on cutting the number of Scots MPs we send to Westminster. That will be a case about representation.[Interruption.]

The fact of the matter is that the First Minister’s problem is that his priorities are not those of the people of Scotland. We know that he is fond of quoting opinion polls. Let me quote from one that was published this morning. When asked what subject they would raise with the First Minister, 68 per cent of young Scots said that they would raise jobs and the economy. Only 5 per cent said that they would raise the constitution, which came behind jobs, crime and the health service, yet the First Minister has downgraded jobs and the economy and has placed less importance on hospital care—all because of his obsession with breaking up the United Kingdom. Does he not see that he is out of touch and that he does not care about jobs, other than his own?

The First Minister might want to reflect on the fact that the people of this country do not think that his obsession—the referendum—is their priority. That is the biggest gap that he has to deal with. If I was concerned about the health service, I do not think that I would be putting in charge of it a man who, in his previous job in relation to the economy, presided over a slash in the housing budget and exported £700 million to boost the economies of China, Spain and Poland. Last May, Nicola Sturgeon was in charge of another campaign—a campaign to take over Scotland’s biggest city. She made her campaign not about the priorities of the people of Glasgow, but about Glasgow being a stepping-stone to independence, and she got roundly thumped. It is clear that the First Minister has learned nothing from that. The people’s priorities are jobs, paying their bills and putting food on the table when, in Salmond’s Scotland, thousands of families now need food parcels. The First Minister cannot keep Scotland on pause for the next two years. When will he realise that it is not independence that Scots families care about? It’s the economy, stupid.

One thing that we can always say about the First Minister is that he is never knowingly undersold. However, we have also learned the importance of going behind the assertion to look at the detail and reality of what his Government is doing. It is not good enough for the First Minister to display so little self-awareness, as he does when he says “We do wonderful things on the economy, we are committed to using procurement and we believe in the construction industry” and then spends £700 million bolstering the economies of Spain, Poland and China. This is a programme of few surprises, bar one major surprise. Nothing in it addresses the problems that face families the length and breadth of Scotland. There is much that we can agree on in it, in much the same way as a magnolia paint chart fails to engender much opposition. Is it a radical Government? It is radically conservative in its ambitions for changing people’s lives for the better. It is radical only in Alex Salmond’s ambition to change his title from “First Minister” to “Prime Minister”. Since last May, the First Minister has lauded his landslide result over us. Let me tell him about landslides. A Labour landslide in 1945 led to the creation of the national health service and a Labour landslide in 1997 led to the creation of this Parliament. An SNP landslide in 2011 led to a referendum that he really does not want to hold and to a country being put on pause while the First Minister dithers. Is the Government’s programme radical and reforming? I think not—unless members think that in 50 years people will be waxing lyrical about the great Salmond better regulation reforms of 2012. What a wasted opportunity. There he is—the First Minister with an overall majority. What an opportunity he has to change Scotland for a generation, radically to overhaul education and to set our NHS on a new footing. If he had been prepared to be radical, we would have been prepared to work with him, but when it comes to the big issues—[Interruption.] Let me go back. We would have been prepared to work with him—we offered to work with him on the referendum question, but he has since stoically refused to meet us. When it comes to the big issues that affect people’s lives, the poverty of his ambition borders on destitution. Here is a man who glories in his own powerlessness. He says that he cannot change Scotland because he does not have enough power, so he does not use the power that he has to change Scotland for the better.

I assure Kevin Stewart that our commitment is to making devolution work, not to breaking up the United Kingdom. By the Scottish Government’s figures, every family in Scotland is worse off by £1,200 a year, so what do we have in the programme to protect families? Nothing. When asked about Tory cuts, the First Minister acts like a second-rate presenter of a daytime cookery show—he pauses only to open an oven and present us with another cut that George Osborne prepared earlier. Speaking of the Tories, perhaps David Cameron is not the only one who should look at a reshuffle, when we see the tired and jaded set of priorities that are the best that the First Minister’s front benchers can come up with after five years in government. Perhaps the First Minister should look for a hungry back bencher to take over the NHS before nursing numbers fall even further. Perhaps Mike Russell should be shown the door and replaced by someone who is not intent on doing more damage to our colleges. Perhaps Alex Neil should look elsewhere, so that someone who is prepared to tackle fuel poverty can take his place. The legislative programme is a mixture of the late and the far too late. It contains the First Minister’s unnecessary bill to provide at some point after 2014 the childcare that he promised five years ago. He could deliver that promise with the stroke of a pen. Instead, there are parents who voted for that measure in 2007 whose children will be at secondary school before it is delivered. Mind you, those children will probably be at university before the curriculum for excellence comes in. As I said, a year after he gave the Chinese, Polish and Spanish economies a kick start with the £700 million Forth road bridge contract, the First Minister has decided that we need to look at the procurement rules. That is too little, too late. Do not get me wrong—there are things in the First Minister’s programme that can be commended. Members: Ooh! It is good to be back among the SNP back benchers, who make Pavlov’s dog look joyously spontaneous, in comparison. The problem with the programme is that it is like a 1970s Lada: it is fine as far as it goes. If only the First Minister had the ambition of Falkirk Council, whose Labour-led administration ensures that council contracts include training or employment for local young people. Unlike Labour in Wales and Labour in Falkirk, the Scottish Government has so far refused to prioritise the use of community benefit clauses to benefit the country. If the First Minister has come round to that way of thinking, that is good and we will welcome it, but we will wait until he walks the walk rather than simply talks the talk. The one issue that dominates the thinking of every family in the country is the economy. Hard-working people fear for their jobs and worry about how they will make ends meet, pay their way and put food on the table. The challenge for the First Minister is to test his policies against how they will create jobs and growth in the economy, and not against how they will further his referendum campaign. The programme fails to ask the right questions—let alone to provide any answers. We have a Tory Government in Westminster that is deepening and prolonging the recession by cutting too far and too fast. What is the response from the Scottish Government? The problem when the First Minister talks about the Westminster Government is that it is a Tory Government that he celebrated coming in when he said that he wanted to see the end of the Labour Government. He argued for people not to support Labour in the previous election, and the Tory Government was the consequence. The SNP has nothing new to say and has not even kept to what it promised to do. In the previous parliamentary year, the First Minister took time out to attend the premiere of “Brave”. This year, I hope that he will take time out to be brave for Scotland. The First Minister said: “There has never been an economic recovery without a recovery in the construction sector”, so why did he slash the housing budget? Why has he—consistently over time—ended or had an unconscionable delay in bringing forward infrastructure projects such as the Glasgow airport rail link? The SNP promised to deliver 100,000 training opportunities for young Scots each year. However, Mr Salmond’s fine words on youth unemployment will be little consolation to young Scots who are on the dole queue. The Scottish Government’s latest figures for 16 to 24-year-olds show that the youth unemployment rate increased over the year. More than one in five 16 to 24-year-olds are unemployed. The SNP’s promise of 25,000 modern apprenticeships was nothing more than an exercise in fiddling the figures to mislead the public. More than 10,000 publicly funded apprenticeships that were supposed to help the unemployed went to people who were already in work. This is the First Minister who says that the rocks will melt in the sun before he will introduce tuition fees. The price of that boast—from this man who dares to say that the further education sector will benefit from his policies—is that we have seen opportunities for thousands of young Scots melt away as he has slashed funding for further education colleges by 20 per cent. Why is the SNP Government attacking the funding of our vital further education colleges? Is the First Minister aware that 25 per cent of school leavers in Fife go to Adam Smith College and Carnegie College, while a mere 2.5 per cent go to his alma mater, the University of St Andrews? That is a disgrace, and today’s legislative programme has nothing to say to the thousands of young people who will be affected by his draconian cuts. Student debt has not been abolished, as he promised. What about clearing places for Scottish students? Sorry—the quota was full. In those circumstances, what is an Alex Salmond promise worth? Not much in education and even less when it comes to the national health service. He promised to protect the NHS budget, yet the health budget will be slashed by £319 million in real terms, and there are all sorts of additional financial pressures. There are now fewer staff in the NHS than there were when he became First Minister; more than 5,500 staff members have been cut from the payroll, almost 2,500 of whom are nurses. The SNP promised shorter waiting times, then we heard of NHS Lothian’s practice of using so-called social unavailability—of offering patients appointments for operations that they could not possibly attend. That is cynical manipulation of waiting times under the SNP. Nurse numbers have been cut to a level that is lower than it was when the SNP came to power in 2007, with more than 2,000 nurses having been cut since 2009. A growing list of inspections shows deterioration in care standards as nurses and other staff struggle to cope with increasing pressure. All the denial in the world cannot hide those figures and the reality for people in their experience of the NHS. Accident and emergency department waits are worsening, with more than 5,000 Scots waiting longer than eight hours for treatment in A and E departments in 2011. We know the First Minister’s record of being in denial, even when evidence comes to him of the treatment of patients. Those are the problems of Alex Salmond’s Scotland, and nothing in this legislative programme does anything to address them. In recent days, the political pages of the press have been filled with stories of his spin doctor moving on and new spin doctors being hired. Funnily, there is never any copy on his head of policy. The reality is that this is a Government that is bereft of policy and ideas—it has full-fat slogans, yes, but calorie-free policy, definitely. There is nothing for jobs and nothing for those who are in need, except slogans and soundbites with the promise—the threat—that you are on your own if you disagree. However, reality is beginning to creep in as the spin doctors creep out. The country knows the lived reality of Salmond’s Scotland, behind the spin. There are record numbers of drug deaths, which are up 76 per cent on the 2001 figures. There is no record of the number of drug addicts who have successfully completed their treatment and there has been no refreshed drug policy since 2008. We have called on the SNP for a full inquiry into drug treatment policy. Will the First Minister now agree to one? What happens when Alex Salmond does keep a promise? In 2007, the SNP proposed to entitle three and four-year-olds to a minimum of 600 hours of free nursery care a year. Five years on, still nothing has been done. Now, we will get a bill to do what the First Minister could do in a moment. Why has it taken so long? Is it because the Government is underfunding local authorities, perhaps? Even the current SNP Minister for Children and Young People said in the chamber, in 2007, about investing in pre-five children: “we must not waste any more time.”—[Official Report, 31 October 2007; c 2870.] What has the Government been doing, other than wasting time and opportunities? That rehashed 2007 policy will not address the childcare problems of 2012. What is the SNP doing about childminding costs, which are higher in Scotland than in England? What is the SNP doing about out-of-school care costs, which are higher in Scotland than in England and Wales? What about wraparound childcare for children who are at primary school and which makes such a difference to working families? The answer in the bill on all those issues is clear: nothing. On two-year-olds, the bill does not go far enough, either. There are about 60,000 two-year-olds in Scotland—enough to fill Hampden and more. The bill would entitle approximately only 700 looked-after two-year-olds to nursery provision—just over 1 per cent. In England, even the Tories and Lib Dems are aiming to give nursery places to 37 per cent of two-year-olds from the most deprived backgrounds from next year. The First Minister is planning to entitle just 1 per cent. Is that the “progressive beacon” that he talks about when he lectures in London?

We need to allow those members to be comfortable with what they enjoy most—rather than thinking and listening to the debate. The truth is that on childcare costs and nursery provision, what the First Minister says is simply not the case. We would have liked the Scottish Government to have introduced its community empowerment bill, and the possibility of decentralising power into our local communities. That is in stark contrast with a First Minister whose every instinct is to centralise to this place where we all know he has absolute control. The programme should be an opportunity to build on the progress that Labour made on land reform. The First Minister will know that Scotland still has one of the most concentrated patterns of land ownership in Europe. Vast areas of Scotland are still controlled by a tiny number of people. I was informed over the summer that the First Minister has never visited a community buyout since taking office. I had the privilege of doing so when I visited the Isle of Lewis this summer. Community buyout schemes have halted or even reversed decades of population decline, as jobs have been created and more houses have been built. I will never apologise for visiting islands such as Lewis, which represent so much of our heritage of which we can be proud. Such measures are of economic importance as well as being about social justice. They should be at the heart of our economic policy, as well as our social policy commitments to supporting fragile and remote communities. Perhaps the First Minister will find time to look at how he can further support the land buyouts that are revolutionising communities. They are a form of devolution that can make a difference to the lives of real people in real communities—not political parties. In this year of great triumph for Scottish athletes, which we all hope will be followed with similar success in Glasgow in 2014, Alex Salmond could today have announced measures that would improve provision of sporting opportunities for Scots. He could not even do that, which is symptomatic of this Administration’s total lack of ambition for the people of Scotland. Just saying that one is ambitious does not make one ambitious. Instead, as all too often, the First Minister went for gimmick over substantive policy. First, he announced that a DVD of the film “Chariots of Fire” will be played to every school child in the autumn term. That is not good enough. We need policies to get children on to the playing field, not in front of the television. We need a legislative programme that addresses Scotland’s needs. There is common ground here; we are proud of our record of delivering on equality when we introduced civil partnerships, so Nicola Sturgeon has my support with her equal marriage proposals. I note that the children’s bill will contain measures to safeguard vulnerable children—something that the First Minister knows will be welcomed on this side of the chamber. The challenge is to ensure that schemes are practical, not theoretical, and that they deliver to protect vulnerable children. Let us ensure that any new measures have the resources to guarantee that they can be properly implemented. We will do all that we can to prevent harm to children who are living with the consequences of addiction in the family home. The problem with this programme is not what is in it but what is not in it.

If the Government makes proposals that increase participation by our young people, I will happily support them—I say that as a mother who was at the swimming pool at 5 o’clock this morning with my son. We know how difficult it is for young people to participate—particularly for those who do not have parents who can take them. If the Government will come forward with proposals to be more inclusive in relation to sport, I assure Margo MacDonald that I will support the Government all the way. However, as I have said, the problem with the programme is what is not in it. There is not one measure that will create a job in Scotland, there is nothing to promote investment, nothing to defend Scotland from Tory cuts—[Interruption.] I emphasise again that just saying it does not make it so. I also welcome the First Minister’s referendum bill. Let us pass it as quickly as possible, but be clear that the First Minister has a mandate to ask the question and the people of this country are entitled to answer it, and to decide once and for all whether they want to stay inside the United Kingdom. Let us have a single-question referendum on whether to stay in the UK, as soon as possible. The First Minister talks about negotiating with UK Government ministers. He should talk to the parties in this Parliament about how to ensure that we can have a referendum that is not a fix and that has conditions that are reasonable for any democratic country.

Then, we can end the First Minister’s dithering and distraction and focus on Scotland’s real priorities—how we create jobs and growth; how we fund world-class public services in a time of scarcity; and how we make Scotland a just and prosperous land. I may disagree with Alex Salmond on the constitution. That can be an honourable disagreement. What depresses me is that he will not use the powers that he already has to help Scotland now—today. The legislative programme might be a nationalist one, but it is not the programme of a patriot who cares about Scotland’s needs.

I am sure that the member will welcome and celebrate the £1 billion of housing investment in our city. He had the courage to support our policy of stock transfer and investment in Glasgow’s housing, unlike his friends in his own party.

1. I welcome the First Minister back to his place. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00801)

Of course, I wish the First Minister well with those plans for a man who is an inspiration to all of us who believe in equality and justice across the world. In the past few years, the First Minister has befriended Fred Goodwin, Rupert Murdoch and David Murray. Since then, a bank has gone down, a paper has folded and a football club has closed. In that context, was the First Minister’s decision not to meet the Dalai Lama an act of mercy? [Interruption.]

Last week, the Deputy First Minister quoted Robin Cook. This week, I will paraphrase John Smith. Here is the First Minister with the non-Midas touch. He holds his party conference in Glasgow, and in the local elections the city “sent him homeward Tae think again.” He went to the cinema to launch his independence campaign and only yesterday announced that there will be a remake—[Interruption.] Did his pandas mate? No. They got the colic. How does the First Minister—[Interruption.]

How does the First Minister explain his sudden loss of form?

That is just taking it too far. [Interruption.]

I would hazard a guess that, if the pandas had mated, the First Minister might have struggled to take credit for it. I know that the First Minister is pleased with himself—it is a defining characteristic of his nature. However, I sometimes think that the firebrand First Minister’s gas is at a peep. Let us look at his radical plans. We are keeping the Queen and the pound, and keeping London in charge of interest rates and banking regulation. We are keeping the Union Jack and—oh—in an independent Scotland, we will all be British. That is what his party members all joined the SNP for: to remain British. Is not the real reason why the First Minister is asking for a second question in his referendum the fact that he knows that he has lost the first?

First, we recognise that the First Minister has a mandate to ask whether Scotland wants to leave the United Kingdom. The people of Scotland have the right to answer that question. Secondly, the First Minister mentioned people who want a second question to be asked, but his own Deputy First Minister has said that she wants one question to be asked, and I suspect that the members behind her want that, too. When the First Minister was a nationalist, my complaint was that rather than focusing on health and education, he just obsessed about independence. He still does not focus on what really matters to people, and it now appears that he does not even believe in independence any more. Yesterday, he abandoned the economic case for independence, outsourced his campaign and declared that the real nationalist Margo MacDonald is incompatible with it. Is not it the case that this is not about Scotland’s future, but that the country has been put on pause while the First Minister gropes for his place in history?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Is the minister seriously suggesting that a body of which 80 per cent are men reflects the talents and abilities of the people of this country? It is incredible to suggest that men forming 80 per cent of a body entirely reflects merit. What an attitude that shows to the women of this country.

1. I welcome the Deputy First Minister to her place and ask her what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00782)

It is a pity that the First Minister cannot be here today, but I am glad that at last he has been able to make a trip to the pictures without it ending in farce—although in those trews he could give Jack McConnell a run for his money in the fashion stakes. Of course, I say that as something of a fashion icon myself. [Laughter.] I know that this is a word that the Deputy First Minister cannot use, but how does she explain the fall in support for independence?

The First Minister is not here, but his spirit lives on in that response from the Deputy First Minister, which simply did not answer the question. Support for independence is falling. Is it not the fact that independence is becoming more and more unpopular because of airy and meaningless assertions from the likes of the Deputy First Minister, such as, “Scotland will have a seat on the monetary policy committee of the central bank of a foreign country”?

The problem for the Deputy First Minister is that she did not go on television and say, “David Blanchflower thinks it might be a good idea”; she said that it would happen, and she repeated that in the Parliament, without even asking anyone. That is what I mean by meaningless assertion in a serious debate [Interruption.]

Indeed. I felt for the Deputy First Minister when she had to defend her boss’s love-in with Rupert Murdoch, but her defence of her boss’s banking plans is even more risible. We can imagine Wallace’s address to his troops at Stirling Bridge if Nicola Sturgeon had written it: “Don’t worry boys. If we win, we’ll still keep Edward as king. We’ll send him homeward with a seat on the monetary policy committee.” [Interruption.]

Presuming that the Scottish Government is doing anything to prepare for independence—there is that naughty word again; maybe we should call it the “i” word—can the Deputy First Minister tell me how the discussions are going with the European Union about, shall we say, an independently-minded Scotland being a member?

Again, the Deputy First Minister simply asserts something about the European Union. She does not ask anybody or check her facts. It is a simple assertion. She says that it would be absurd to suggest that an independent Scotland would not be on a monetary policy committee. In forty years I have not heard that argument being made by anybody in the Scottish National Party until this year. There is another option that the SNP will not talk about, although Jim Sillars talks about it. It is, of course, an independent currency of your own. This is Monty Python’s “Life of Nicola”. What has being British ever done for us—apart from the pound, the monarchy, the Bank of England, financial regulation and the union jack. The only—[Interruption.]

The only dead parrot in the sketch, as the First Minister would have it, is independence. The reality is that the SNP—under its current leadership, on Nicola Sturgeon’s watch—is not even prepared to make the case, because Nicola Sturgeon knows that the Scottish people will not buy it: compromising the monarchy, compromising the currency, compromising the second question; we will still be British, but not nationalists; and the final humiliation of SNP members not even being allowed to say the word that they have campaigned for for their whole political lives. Is there anything that Nicola Sturgeon will not sell out on? [Interruption.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00774)

There were fun and games at Leveson yesterday. I am pleased that the First Minister managed to get through the whole day without telling Robert Jay that he was not asking the right questions. The First Minister said yesterday that the only reason why he backed the Murdoch takeover of British Sky Broadcasting was for Scottish jobs. Can he confirm how many jobs would have come to Scotland if the Murdochs had taken over BSkyB? Will he say what the civil service and Scottish Enterprise assessments were of the deal?

First, that compelling case would have been interesting if, when the First Minister was first asked about the matter, he had not dismissed out of hand the fact that he was going to make a call to James Hunt. Secondly, my question was about what assessments the Scottish Government and Scottish Enterprise had made, not about what James Murdoch told the First Minister or anyone else that the deal would mean. The fact is that the First Minister did not make the case on jobs. At the Leveson inquiry, Robert Jay QC put forward a compelling case that the First Minister appeared to be lobbying on Rupert Murdoch’s behalf in return for the support of The Sun. The First Minister admitted that he was prepared to lobby—in secret, bizarrely—for Murdoch because a takeover would have been good for Scottish jobs. How many jobs did the Murdochs tell him would be created in Scotland if they had taken over BSkyB—or did they threaten to pull jobs out if he did not back the bid?

Everybody knows that those jobs have nothing to do with the BSkyB takeover. If the First Minister believed that, he might have shared the information that it was about those jobs rather than being prepared to make secret phone calls on behalf of Murdoch. The First Minister tells us of the importance of BSkyB to Scottish jobs, and he is right. [Interruption.] Indeed, that is a novelty, but he is right. BSkyB was a major employer in Scotland before the bid and it remains a major employer after the withdrawal of the bid—so what was the benefit to Scotland of the Murdochs taking over BSkyB?

The difference between me and the First Minister is that if I met Rupert Murdoch, I would ask him how many jobs the deal brought with it. The First Minister seems to have taken him entirely at his word. The First Minister did not ask Scottish Government officials or Scottish Enterprise to assess things. Apparently, if Mr Murdoch says it, it must be true—meaningless assertion after meaningless assertion. If the Murdoch bid would have created jobs in Scotland, why did the First Minister not ask Scottish Enterprise to assess the plan? What did the civil servants say about the bid and when did his Cabinet sign off the Government support for the deal? Why has he not answered the more than 40 questions that we have put to him about his dealings with Murdoch? As Robert Jay QC said yesterday, “at the very least, there was a perception of cosiness” between the First Minister and Rupert Murdoch. Nothing the First Minister has said changes that fact. Is it not true that Alex Salmond became Rupert Murdoch’s lackey not to create Scottish jobs but in an attempt to keep his own?

The First Minister has the cheek to accuse me—[Interruption.]

He has the cheek to accuse me of using a script, when he has prepared abuse that has nothing to do with the question that I asked him. [Interruption.]

The First Minister has to confront the contradictions between the fact that, on 11 February 2011, Fred Michel said that the First Minister “will call Hunt whenever we need him to” and the fact that, according to written evidence to the Leveson inquiry, the Scottish Government had not expressed a view in early 2011 on the takeover. The First Minister must explain why he supported a takeover when it was self-evidently not about jobs. Everybody knows that it was not about jobs, so he needs to answer the question.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00744)

I join the First Minister in hoping that he has very constructive and useful discussions. Last week, the First Minister advised me that I had made the mistake of not asking the right question. I think that I am going to do it again. Last Thursday, the First Minister said: “The Bank of England is an independent central bank that does not take direction on policy”.—[Official Report, 31 May 2012; c 9629.] Does he stand by that statement?

The First Minister now knows that the statement that he made is not true—or perhaps the First Minister is again struggling with the definition of “independence”. The only independence that the Bank of England has is to set interest rates to meet the inflation target that is set by the United Kingdom Government. When it comes to printing money, it needs the Treasury’s approval. Indeed, the Bank of England does not have any money—it is all taxpayers’ money, through the Treasury. The First Minister’s spokesman is quoted as saying: “The UK government has had no say over monetary policy since the Bank of England was made independent in 1997.” He was wrong, was he not?

The First Minister’s problem is that he said: “The Bank of England is an independent central bank that does not take direction on policy”. That is simply not true. The First Minister also cited David Blanchflower, but Professor Blanchflower was talking about whether there should be a Scot on the current monetary policy committee; that there is not is the First Minister’s objection to it, as it stands. He was not making an observation on the First Minister’s and the Deputy First Minister’s assertion—and absolute statement—that an independent Scotland would have representation on the monetary policy committee. That is not true, because he has not even asked the Bank of England whether that would be the case. Let us see what the Treasury says. It has said that “Scotland using the pound through a sterlingisation mechanism”— last week, the First Minister called it the “sterling zone”— “would have no say over its own monetary policy as set by the Bank of England.” The First Minister wants to leave the United Kingdom, remove Scotland’s representation at Westminster and have less say in the formulation of monetary policy. Why does the First Minister plan to lessen our influence over our own economic policy? [Interruption.]

The First Minister would require his colleagues with the Nobel peace prize—or whatever kind of Nobel prize—to explain the answers that he has just given. They are entirely incomprehensible to us. On the question of Scottish influence, we had a Scottish Chancellor of the Exchequer making policy for 13 years, but that was not good enough for the First Minister. Now, we are hoping that, in an independent Scotland, we might possibly have representation on the monetary policy committee—but, of course, that has not been confirmed. The truth of the matter is that the First Minister’s plans for leaving the United Kingdom will leave Scotland with less control over our economy, not more. Either monetary policy is handed over to a foreign Government under sterling or it is handed over to German bankers under the euro. All the assertions in the world will make no difference to that. [Interruption.]

If the First Minister had the courage of his convictions, he would be alongside his old deputy Jim Sillars, arguing for a separate Scottish currency. We can only presume that he has worked out that no one would vote for that. Is he just coming up with an incoherent assortment of assertions in the hope that he can hoodwink the Scottish people for long enough to win his referendum?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00725)

We of course support Scotland working in partnership across the world on these very important issues. On Sunday night, on BBC Scotland, the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, assured viewers that an independent Scotland would have a seat on the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee. Will the First Minister confirm that that is the case and provide us with the details of the agreement? If that agreement has not been finally signed off, will he at least tell us when negotiations started?

Even by the First Minister’s standards that was an astonishing response to what was a very simple question. I think that the response to the question was that Nicola Sturgeon was wrong when she said that, and that it is about assertion, belief and hope. Of course, the problem is that the First Minister thinks that an independent Scotland would have influence on the monetary policy committee—although we do not have influence now, we will somehow have influence when Scotland is a foreign country. That simply beggars belief. Of course, crucial to the First Minister’s plans to keep the pound after Scotland leaves the United Kingdom is that the Bank of England and therefore the UK Treasury agree to be Scotland’s lender of last resort. A deal like that would come with a lot of conditions attached. Clearly, the First Minister has not spoken to the Bank of England about the monetary policy committee, but can he confirm that he has at least spoken to it about being our lender of last resort?

I have always told my children that it is not grown up just to cross your fingers and hope for the best. It is not grown up for the First Minister to be incapable of arguing for something that he has believed in for 40 years. Never mind a script, he cannot answer basic questions about simple economics in an independent Scotland. We know that the First Minister has not asked the question about the MPC or the question about the banker of last resort. If he gets his way, we are less than four years away from leaving the UK on a wing and a prayer, yet on the currency and our interest rates and how much we would be able to spend, how much we could borrow and how much tax we could raise, he has done nothing. He asserts that an independent Scotland could rely on the Bank of England, but he has not even asked the bank; it is just meaningless assertion after meaningless assertion. If he wants the Bank of England to back a separate Scotland, why does he not at least ask it what it is willing to do?

I did not realise that there was a right question for me to ask the First Minister, given that the only right question that his back benchers are allowed to ask is, “Just how good are you, First Minister?” This is a serious issue. Given the First Minister’s response today, it is no wonder that he flopped at the box office last Friday; it is no wonder that his deputy bombed on the television on Sunday night; and it is no wonder that, this week, some supporters have started backing away from independence. If he is going to put the country through another two and a half years of this constitutional quagmire, he could at least do some work so that his words have some meaning. When will the First Minister realise that just saying something does not make it true?

Given what the coalition Government is now doing in Westminster, does the First Minister regret advising people in England to vote Liberal?

I never thought that the First Minister had self-esteem issues, but reading out the number of followers that he has on Twitter to prove how good he is is a whole new level of anxiety for the First Minister. The First Minister started by talking about the importance of working together on climate change. The message from that is that, in the world that we live in, the more we co-operate and the more we come together to identify the key problems and act on them, the better, rather than making our prospectus one of separation. The First Minister also raises the issue of the reconvened Scottish Parliament. This is not a reconvened Scottish Parliament. This is the first Scottish Parliament that is elected under universal suffrage, which allows women as well as men to be here. It is not an exclusive club for the landed gentry in Scotland. It says everything about the First Minister that he imagines that there is any connection between that Parliament and this body, which was created to make a difference to the lives of people. The fact of the matter is that, as someone who passionately believes that sovereignty lies with the Scottish people, I also believe that we have an independence whose proof does not require the First Minister to be given a new title. We, as a nation, were never conquered. The United Kingdom has not been imposed on us. It is the choice of Scots to share power with our neighbours on these small islands, as we are stronger together. Indeed, had Scotland been a separate country right now, I believe that we would be seriously looking at creating the type of union that we currently enjoy—the type of social, economic and political union that has brought us 300 years of peace and stability and allows us to weather the worst economic crisis of our lifetime, following the collapse of the banking sector. I believe that, without Scotland, the United Kingdom would cease to exist, because we built the United Kingdom with our neighbours.

I was making a more important point, which is that this Parliament—a new, modern, thriving place where the people’s priorities are decided—is what we should celebrate, rather than misrepresenting what the last Parliament was about. As I was saying, I believe that, without Scotland, the United Kingdom would cease to exist, because we built the United Kingdom with our neighbours. That is why I disagree with the First Minister when he says that we are “surly lodgers” in the UK. He might be surly, but someone cannot be a lodger in a house that they have built themselves. I believe that there are two reasons why the First Minister’s campaign to separate Scotland from our neighbours has stalled—two self-evident truths. The first is that it is not what most Scots want; the second is that it is not all that he was elected to do. I believe that, when he whispered, in the last days of the election campaign, that he would hold a referendum in the second half of the parliamentary session, he did so to reassure voters that separation would not be the issue that would dominate this Parliament, because he knew that that is not what most Scots want. However, dominate proceedings it has. What the First Minister failed to say is that he would spend the first half of the session not governing Scotland but trying to sell us a bill of goods that the majority of us do not want. It means days, weeks, months and now years of endless debates over currency unions, NATO, EU membership and oil prices, of campaign launches and relaunches and of declarations and registers. Today, yet again, we have a debate on separation—this Government’s single obsession; its one and only prescription for all our lives; the eternal answer, no matter what the question.

I know that I raised it at First Minister’s question time. I did so because I was optimistic that I might get an answer. Evidently, I did not.

I absolutely accept that, but I say to Patrick Harvie that, while we conduct that debate, we should also be getting on with the business of challenging the key issues of the day. We know that, across the portfolio areas, everything is on pause until we have a referendum. That is a problem.

That is simply not true. I suggest that Mr Swinney looks at what I said—[Interruption.]

We need a plan for business; we need to be working and talking to the banks; we need to stop cutting housing; and we need to invest in the further education sector. The problem with the Scottish Government is that, instead of understanding the real debate in which we should be engaged, it is continuing to trade in assertion, not fact, and ambiguity, not precision. Instead of a national vision, there will be an attempt to entice all of us into a communal hallucination. Our vision for the future of Scotland starts with a vision of social justice, a Scotland where everyone can realise their potential, where we have individual rights and collective responsibilities and where the qualities of industry and community are interdependent, not mutually exclusive. It starts with that vision and then asks about the political, social and economic machinery that we need to achieve it. The starting point is not a border drawn on a map. Social justice does not have a flag; equality does not need a passport. We ask what world we want to build and then ask what tools we need to build it.

I think that I have taken enough interventions for the moment. The nationalists judge their strength by their tools, not by the quality of what they can build. The SNP’s case for leaving the United Kingdom has changed over the years. Policies change for all political parties, but the fact is that the SNP cannot build a logical case for Scotland leaving the UK because the foundation of its argument is blind faith. People in this country have great sentiment, but too many families know that they cannot feed their children on sentiment and that a school, university or hospital cannot be resourced solely by blind faith. The best choices for our future are rational, logical and rooted in reality. What does the SNP say about the currency of a separate Scotland?

No. It appears that the pound is no longer the millstone around our neck that it was just a few years ago; it is now the currency of choice, so we will retain it. The First Minister says that that will be welcomed because of our contribution to the rest of the UK’s balance of payments, but he has not discussed that with the Bank of England. The Deputy First Minister says that we will have a representative on the monetary policy committee, but that has not been discussed either. The First Minister says that in a separate Scotland the Bank of England will be the bank of last resort, but he has not discussed that with the governor of the Bank of England. He is claiming a certainty for the people of Scotland that he has simply not established. Indeed—

He is happy to take Scotland on a leap of faith, knowing that he does not have the answers to these questions. The fact of the matter is that we have a vision for Scotland in which we stand—[Interruption.]

I believe that we stand taller as part of the UK in a partnership in which we share risks and rewards and on a platform on which we can build the just and fair society that we all want Scotland to be. I move amendment S4M-03113.3, to leave out from “agrees” to end and insert: “believes that it is in Scotland’s best interest to remain part of the United Kingdom; believes that the UK is stronger together and weaker apart; further believes that Scotland has achieved a great deal as part of the UK and can achieve so much more, and further believes that by remaining in a devolved UK the next generation will inherit a more prosperous, confident Scotland.”

I thank the First Minister for his speech and for what he said about the gifts that we want to present to the Queen. We are here to pay tribute to Her Majesty the Queen, as the country prepares to celebrate her diamond jubilee. Sixty years in one job is good going—I have been in this job for just six months and some days it feels like it has been 60 years. We recognise the scale of the achievement of this particular very strong woman. I salute the Queen, for her relentless energy, for her poise and composure in taking on the demands of public service, and for her dignity and wisdom as a head of state. Those of us who are fortunate enough to have held public office can begin to understand to some extent what it is like to live life under scrutiny and with the consequences of any perceived slip or mistake. The Queen has lived her whole life in the public eye, and there has always been intense media interest in her life and the lives of her family. She has met that challenge with great dignity and professionalism and has never appeared to lose her calm and composure. In recent years, the royal family has had to adapt to a time of 24-hour news, YouTube, Hello! magazine, the paparazzi and Twitter. Every outfit and appearance is debated, every nuance of every speech is analysed for hidden meaning, and every action is scrutinised and commented on, but the Queen has always appeared effortlessly to carry out her public duties. Her reign as monarch has won her the respect of the country and a special place in the nation’s affections. Much has changed since the day in 1952 when, as a 26-year-old, the Queen succeeded her late father as the Queen regnant and head of seven independent Commonwealth countries. The United Kingdom was rebuilding after the second world war. To step into such an important role at that young age with such upheaval behind her and uncertainty ahead of the country must have been daunting, but if it fazed her on that day or has fazed her on any day since then, Her Majesty has masked it with the grace and nerve for which she is now famed. Over the past 60 years, there has been great change across the world and the United Kingdom, and in the lives of people across our communities. Her Majesty has been a constant at the head of the state while all else has changed. The world was a very different place when the Queen assumed the throne. In 1952, the rationing of tea was finally ended and a one shilling charge was introduced for prescription drugs under the national health service. In that year, the New Musical Express published the first singles chart, the “Flower Pot Men” debuted on television and the famous children’s book “The Borrowers” was published. Harry Truman was the US President, Joseph Stalin was the leader of the Soviet Union, Chairman Mao led in China and Winston Churchill was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. In the years since then, there have been 12 different Prime Ministers, and since devolution and the Queen opening our Scottish Parliament in 1999, there have been four different First Ministers in Scotland. I believe that all of them have, while in office, benefited from her counsel. I am sure that the young woman who sat down with her first Prime Minister—Winston Churchill—in 1952 has grown wiser over the years; indeed, many of our recent Prime Ministers have stated publicly how much they have valued the Queen’s experience and advice. I am also sure that, since devolution, our First Ministers have had the benefit of her wisdom. It is true that Her Majesty has always made clear her deep affection for Scotland. Beyond her official role in opening every session of the Parliament in June, the Queen is known to spend much of the summer on her country estate in Balmoral, and she has, of course, shown great interest in the work of the Parliament when she has been with us. We know that Scotland was the scene of many an idyllic summer holiday in her childhood and was, of course, the place to which she retreated in those dark hours as she supported her family through the grieving process after the tragic death of Princess Diana. Likewise, Scotland has deep affection for our Queen, as was illustrated by the enthusiasm for the golden jubilee celebrations 10 years ago. I am sure that plenty of Scots will find their own way of celebrating her diamond jubilee this weekend. In many ways, Queen Elizabeth II has transcended any debate about the changing role of the monarchy. Through her dignity and professionalism, she has won many supporters to the institution for which she stands. Our royal family is the envy of the world, and people from every corner of the globe flock to see the Queen. Indeed, we need only cross the road at the Scottish Parliament to see how enthusiastic tourists are about learning more about the royal family and the Queen in Scotland. The way in which our Queen has served this country as head of state has set an example to us all and made her a fine ambassador for the United Kingdom to the whole world. I know that all of us here hope that she will continue to do that fine work for many years to come.

I thank the cabinet secretary for holding a debate on the implications for the Scottish economy of the current euro zone situation. The debate follows on from the questions that I raised last week with the First Minister. There is no more important topic that we should be debating this week. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development says that the euro zone crisis is the single biggest threat to the global economy. If Greece defaults or leaves the euro, or if any of the Spanish banks collapses, those stories will not be told to us by foreign correspondents but will be domestic Scottish news. That is why I am leading the debate on behalf of my party. Scotland is not immune to the euro crisis. We must be prepared for its impact and learn the lessons from it. Although much of the debate can feel very technical and the language that is used to discuss it can feel distant from us and very academic, the impact on individual lives is immense—particularly among the most vulnerable across the whole of Europe. It is essential that there is a political response to a crisis in which those who had least control over what caused it are the ones who are most deeply feeling the impact of it. The situation is changing rapidly. Last week, Catalonia—Spain’s wealthiest autonomous region—had to ask the central Spanish Government for a bail-out. Its fourth largest bank, Bankia, also had to ask the Spanish Government for a €19 billion bail-out last week—that is the biggest request for state aid in Spanish history. Spain’s credit rating has been downgraded because of the amount of debt that the country is having to take on. As a result, Spain’s cost of borrowing has risen to a six-month high. I understand that it has just been announced that Spain’s borrowing costs are now around 6.7 per cent. Analysts believe that 7 per cent is the level that indicates that a country is in danger of bankruptcy. There is increasing concern that Spain will soon have to seek an international bail-out and join the ranks of Greece, Portugal and Ireland. To us in Scotland, as part of the United Kingdom and sterling, the travails of the Greeks may seem distant. However, UK banks have already been writing off their Greek debt. The worry for the UK is what would happen if there were contagion and other countries were to default. UK bank exposure to Spanish debt alone is €75 billion. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will outline to Parliament later what discussions he or the First Minister has had with the Chancellor of the Exchequer about what can be done to limit the potential impact on Scottish banks if countries default. What discussions has the cabinet secretary had with the banks? What preparations are being made to address the fears that we have for the future? At the weekend, we learned that Lloyd’s of London, the world’s largest insurance market, is preparing for the worst. The chief executive admitted that it is prepared for a collapse in the single currency and that it has reduced as much as possible its exposure to the euro zone. We therefore need to know what plan the First Minister has put in place to prepare for the worst and what discussions he has had with businesses about what should happen if the situation were to deteriorate in the way that we fear. As the cabinet secretary outlined, the euro zone accounts for 45 per cent of Scottish exports. Spain and Italy are the seventh and eighth biggest markets for Scotland’s international exports. Any slowdown or recession in the euro zone will affect demand for Scottish goods and services. The Spanish company Gamesa is critically important in our renewables industry. It used to be said that if America sneezes, Britain catches cold, but in the modern world, contagion in one part of Europe will affect us all. The euro zone crisis has seen the value of sterling strengthen against the euro; that is good for anyone going to the euro zone for their summer holidays, but it has made Scottish exports more expensive and therefore less competitive. Another impact of the crisis is that it has triggered a sharp rise in borrowing costs for banks. The banks are passing on the cost to British businesses, which must be discouraging investment. Scottish Enterprise has reported that the higher banking costs are being passed on to consumers, further squeezing household budgets. It is anticipated that the cost of borrowing will increase further in the second quarter as the euro crisis worsens. Banks are curtailing lending to first-time buyers as they are having to hold more capital to balance the increased risk of lending to those with small deposits. The Council of Mortgage Lenders has warned that the euro zone crisis may result in fewer first-time buyers, creating a stagnant market that will see average house prices fall. That is a concern for us all. Pension savers, too, are being hit hard by the euro crisis. Annuity rates have fallen by more than 25 per cent over the past four years, costing millions of retirees invaluable pension income. In December, the First Minister, along with the First Minister of Wales, called for an emergency meeting of the joint ministerial committee to discuss the impact of the Prime Minister’s European Union veto. However, I am disappointed that the First Minister has not attended the last two meetings of the joint ministerial committee. He could have asked for the euro crisis to be put on the agenda so that the committee could discuss how the UK and devolved Governments can address the common issues that are faced by all nations of the UK. Last Friday, the First Minister was at a cinema multiplex with celebrities launching his campaign for a referendum on whether to stay in the United Kingdom. Tomorrow, the people of Ireland will vote in a referendum on whether to agree to an EU fiscal pact. Ireland is still in the middle of an international bail-out and has an unemployment rate of 14 per cent. Supporters of the pact say that it will help to bring stability to the euro zone and provide access to a future bail-out fund. Those who are against it say that it will bring years of more austerity. I said last Thursday: “The last time that our banking sector hit crisis, a Labour Government immediately rescued our banks so that ordinary families in this country could still get money out of the cashpoints. ... There was no question, no hesitation and no negotiation. It was the kind of action that the Greeks and the Irish can only dream of. Our banking system was saved by one of the most successful economic unions in history—the United Kingdom.”—[Official Report, 24 May 2012; c 9364.] We are part of a successful economic and political union and, as part of the United Kingdom, we share risks and rewards. It has been suggested that the First Minister does not wish to comment on the euro zone crisis because of its implications for the SNP’s monetary policies, but in a world that is experiencing the greatest economic uncertainty of my lifetime, we do not need more uncertainty. We do not need any more fudges, maybes, or ifs and buts; we need as much clarity as possible. I do not want to spend time debating with the cabinet secretary whether any new admissions to the EU would have to adopt the euro. However, it is clear to everyone that once the euro crisis is over, it is almost certain that a new regime will be introduced that will see much tighter fiscal co-ordination among all the euro zone countries. The euro zone wants what Scotland has with the rest of the United Kingdom now—a stable monetary system. Every country in the euro zone has learned the lesson that sharing the same currency means that they must share the same fiscal policies, which can be done only by closer political integration. Europe has seen that; Alex Salmond is the only leader who wants to go in the opposite direction.

I am talking about the implications of the SNP’s position, which is to stay in monetary union with the rest of the United Kingdom. It claims that that gives it greater independence, which is clearly not the case. Surely, one of the biggest lessons of the euro crisis is that we cannot have monetary union without fiscal union and a large degree of political union. The cabinet secretary cannot assure us that he and the First Minister have learned that lesson. There are profound questions about the European economy, and therefore the Scottish and UK economies, that deserve better answers than those that are designed to get through a difficult moment in a television debate. We need to understand what role and influence we would have over the monetary policy committee of what would then be a foreign bank—the Bank of England. It is not good enough simply to assert that, rather than to be honest about the consequences of such decisions. Surely the Scottish Government has an agreement with the Bank of England that that would be the case. Surely, at the very least, the First Minister, his deputy and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth have been holding in-depth negotiations with the governor of the Bank of England on the issue. Indeed, have discussions taken place with the Bank of England on whether it agrees that an independent Scotland could retain sterling? If they have, what are the fiscal limits that the bank will impose? What will the costs be to the people of Scotland if the Bank of England agrees to become the lender of last resort?

I am not sure what point the member was making. I repeat that, with independence, the SNP offers less influence on the bank that would make decisions on its fiscal policy. It is curious that the SNP no longer argues for being in the euro, yet it does not argue for a separate currency of its own.

The question is not whether the people who run the bank are Scottish, but in whose interests they will make the decisions. It is inconceivable that they would make a decision on the basis of their competitors in another country, when at the moment they are part of a partnership across the United Kingdom. If those discussions with the Bank of England have not taken place and agreements have not been reached, the Scottish Government is treating the people of Scotland with contempt. It is treating Scots like fools in offering them, in a world of uncertainties, a series of what are frankly back-of-a-fag-packet assertions to get nationalist politicians through the moment. Everyone in Europe is braced for what may happen in the euro zone. People in Greece, Spain, Portugal and Italy must envy the stability that we have with sterling. Greek and Spanish families are paying the price for a political dream that paid scant regard to economic realities. That is the lesson we should learn, and we in the Scottish Labour Party will fight to ensure that Scottish families never have to pay a similar price. I move amendment S4M-03078.3, to insert at end: “; further recognises and regrets the impact of austerity measures without accompanying growth on ordinary people and families in Scotland and across Europe; regrets that the Scottish Government has not done more to stimulate growth using the powers entirely at its own disposal including, for example, its failure to make best use of procurement for the Forth Replacement Crossing as well as the delay to a number of other investment projects, and does not believe that leaving the United Kingdom would improve the Scottish economy, particularly given the lack of clarity on the issue of currency.”

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00701)

These are tough times. People across Europe are fearful of what will happen if Greece defaults on its loans and leaves the euro zone. The situation in Spain, Portugal and Italy is also looking increasingly perilous. If Greece leaves the euro, and others may follow, what are the First Minister’s estimates of the impact on the Scottish economy?

It would have been good if the First Minister could have shared some of his thoughts now, since that was the question that I asked him. The last time that our banking sector hit crisis, a Labour Government immediately rescued our banks so that ordinary families in this country could still get money out of the cashpoints. That included Scottish banks, of course. There was no question, no hesitation and no negotiation. It was the kind of action that the Greeks and the Irish can only dream of. Our banking system was saved by one of the most successful economic unions in history—the United Kingdom. Is not the real lesson of the euro crisis that you cannot share a currency and have monetary union without a fiscal union and a political union?

This is the man who said that the problem with the banking system was that it was overregulated. We also note that he refuses to confront the logic of his own position that the Bank of England would be the lender of last resort for a Scotland that was outside the United Kingdom. People in this country and throughout Europe are looking for certainty and stability in an uncertain world. The First Minister used to say that we needed a Scottish pound because interest rates set in London were bad for Scotland, yet now that is what he advocates. He used to say that we would join the euro because the pound was failing. Now, louder than William Hague ever did, he is saying, “Keep the pound.” You know, consistency is a wonderful thing. Is not the real reason why the First Minister keeps changing the economic case for leaving the UK that he cannot find one that adds up?

Instead of the First Minister giving us his greatest hits in lines of not answering the question, he should take responsibility and reflect on what is happening in Europe now and the consequences that that will have for Scotland. We have all heard that the First Minister is planning a big day out at the pictures tomorrow. For many of us, the cinema is a form of escapism, but evidently, for the First Minister, his economics are escapism. Europe is facing the greatest economic crisis since the depression, but instead of looking up E for “Economists” in his address book, he is looking up C for “Celebrities”. I suppose that that makes a change from dialling M for Murdoch. [Interruption.] This is a serious business.

Like people across Europe, Scots fear what will happen to them if the euro zone collapses, but the First Minister’s message to them is, “Turn off the news and put down the paper. There is nothing to worry about.” I think that we know now what will be showing at the multiplex in Fountainbridge tomorrow: “Alex in Wonderland”. [Interruption.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00671)

The Parliament debated the national parenting strategy this week. There was unanimous agreement that there had to be more support for struggling parents. That support is important because we know that some parents do not get it right, that the child is not always the priority, and that that can have tragic consequences. Following the Declan Hainey case, the First Minister and I had constructive talks about child protection. Will the First Minister update the chamber on what progress has been made in that area?

We welcome progress. We urge the First Minister to recognise how serious the issue is and how quickly we need to move on it, given that we now know that in March 2010, just two weeks before Declan Hainey was found dead, Renfrewshire Council received a report from another case review. The case was known as family 10. It is worrying that the review highlighted systemic failures in child protection. In that case, children were mistreated to a deeply distressing degree. The family 10 review was too late to save Declan. Two serious case reviews in Renfrewshire have found systemic failure, yet no one has been held to account. Does the First Minister believe that, after one death and two findings of systemic failure, Renfrewshire Council was best placed to investigate itself?

Hoping for it does not make it happen. This is a really serious issue and here is the real point: in 2009 the First Minister told members in the chamber that we had the best child protection inspection system “anywhere in these islands and perhaps anywhere in Europe.”—[Official Report, 25 June 2009; c 18904.] Indeed, before the case of family 10 and before the death of Declan Hainey, the First Minister said in the chamber that his inspection system had found Renfrewshire Council to be one of the top five councils in Scotland. A few months after Declan Hainey was found dead, the inspectors went back to Renfrewshire Council to follow up on their first visit. This time, they concluded that Renfrewshire Council’s efforts to keep children safe were excellent. They reported: “As a result of the very good quality of provision to protect children and meet their needs, we will make no further visits in connection with this inspection.” In the case of family 10 there were systemic failures. In the case of Declan Hainey there were fatal systemic failures. Yet, before and after those failures, the First Minister’s inspectors provided two positive reports, the second of which claimed that the protection of children was excellent. In light of the contrast between the First Minister’s rhetoric about child protection and the reality, does the First Minister still believe that his inspection regime is the best in Europe?

The people who are carrying out the inspections are doing an important job, but they are accountable and the First Minister is responsible for the capacity of the system to deliver. The First Minister’s approach seems to be a counsel of despair. Although we cannot provide 100 per cent protection, we must do everything that we can to understand where the failures are in order to ensure that they do not happen again. Can he explain why the best child protection inspection system in Europe has failed to find the systemic failures that led to the maltreatment of children by a family and a baby’s death? Can he explain why, after those tragedies caused by systemic failures, the best child protection inspection system in Europe still says that the child protection service is excellent? The family 10 inspection was being carried out at exactly the same time as the significant review of the Declan Hainey case was saying that there were at least 16 actions that needed to be taken. In the light of those failures, will the First Minister please order a full independent public inquiry into child protection, not just in Renfrewshire but throughout Scotland, so that the public can be confident that our systems are protecting our most vulnerable children?

1. Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I am absolutely delighted to be here and that the local government elections went so successfully and smoothly. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00663)

I am sure that the First Minister is aware that the Western Isles are very dear to my heart and to my family. Perhaps people will welcome this announcement even though they are sceptical about some of the decisions that the Scottish Government has made in recent times that have had a significant detrimental impact on the Western Isles. What lessons has the First Minister learned from last week’s local elections?

For once, the First Minister has indeed answered the question, because his answer is, “What lessons? None.” Let me tell him what I have learned. I have learned that people do not like it when a party’s priorities are put before theirs, and people’s priorities are jobs, childcare, schools and public services. The First Minister has put Scotland on pause by getting rid of nurses, teachers and local government workers, and the people of Scotland sent him a clear message last week. Yes, they had a message for us—this is about listening and learning—which was that we have made progress, but the Scottish Labour Party has a long way to go. [Interruption.] Yes, it is about learning lessons. However, what really took the gilt off the gingerbread for me was that while we had some remarkable results and were gaining support, the First Minister was losing support at twice the rate. Why was that?

There is a direct question to the First Minister in the fact that, in the past year, his support has gone down by a quarter. He has to learn some lessons from that. Let me give the First Minister some clues. His obsession with the referendum, the delay over the referendum and the attempts to skew the referendum are not popular with the public. The First Minister’s failure to focus on what people care about—jobs, childcare and public services—does not go down well with the public. The fact that the First Minister has more time for Rupert, although sometimes he is Sir Rupert, for Sir Fred, although he is no longer Sir Fred, and for Sir Brian—he is still getting his knighthood, isn’t he?—than he has for the people of this country does not go down well with the public. When will the First Minister start listening?

First, on knighthoods, it was only the First Minister who gave Sir Rupert a knighthood. Secondly, on the council tax, I would advise people to look at the small print, because there is a £17 million deficit that will have to be covered by local government. On the positive message from Labour, it was Labour across the country that spoke about jobs and services at every turn. That is why we got the response we did. I thought that it was just me that the First Minister does not listen to; in fact, self-evidently it is also the public, his back benchers and perhaps even one or two on his front bench. Who is the senior source, who said, “The people of Scotland don’t like arrogance”? Or what about the wise words of self-styled rising star Humza Yousaf—and we need a new rising star after Derek Mackay’s last seven days—who said: “We’ll lick our wounds. We’ll look at the numbers and see where we went wrong, hopefully.” Well, we can all live in hope. The First Minister is not daft. Is it not the case that he won on the arithmetic, as he said, but that in reality, on the politics, he got stuffed?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00641)

Given the further revelations in the past few days, why does the First Minister still believe that Rupert Murdoch is a fit person to run an international media company?

I presume that the First Minister is content to be on the same side as the Tories in their view of Rupert Murdoch. I would have a bit more respect for the First Minister if he allowed his back benchers to say what they think in our parliamentary committees. The First Minister has in the past accused me of hypocrisy in raising the issue. Members: Yes. I agree—he has persisted in arguing that line lots of times. However, let me give him a real example of hypocrisy. I quote: “The prospect of one person, especially Mr Murdoch, having more influence over the media in the UK would be a matter of concern, especially in Scotland.” Those are not my words, but the words of the Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, when Murdoch tried to take over ITV news. She was right then and I agree with her, so what made her change her mind? It cannot have been when she found out about phone hacking on an industrial scale. It could not have been when she found out that the phone of a murdered teenager was hacked. Surely it was not when she found out that Joan McAlpine’s phone was hacked. Did she change her mind when the First Minister told her to after he realised that he is the last person left defending Rupert Murdoch?

If the First Minister was so concerned about the Milly Dowler issue, he certainly would not have sought to rehabilitate Rupert Murdoch by inviting him to tea at Bute house. Further, he would not have sought to dissemble on who was responsible on the issue when he wrote an article in the first edition of The Scottish Sun on Sunday. Is it not the truth that the First Minister’s relationship with Rupert Murdoch is preventing any real scrutiny of News International’s activities in Scotland? When the phone hacking scandal broke, the First Minister claimed that it was a London problem. Well, it is now well and truly on the First Minister’s doorstep. It is time that we had a proper inquiry here in Scotland that investigates who else has been hacked and the full extent of the media influence over politicians and Government. A former First Minister has been hacked and an aide to the current First Minister has been hacked. Has the First Minister himself been hacked? Why is he blocking a Scottish inquiry into the activities of his old friend Rupert Murdoch?

I do not think that even the First Minister himself believed that, never mind his back benchers. [Interruption.]

This is our great, modern, new Scottish Parliament. We see a Tory secretary of state being brought before the House of Commons, we see a Tory Prime Minister being brought before the House of Commons, where we also see a parliamentary inquiry. [Interruption.]

However, in the Scottish Parliament, the First Minister runs away from accountability. These things are not incompatible, except in the First Minister’s own head. The First Minister told us that “the people who live in Scotland are the best people to make decisions about their own future. Of that there can be no doubt”—[Official Report, 25 January 2012; c 5603.] Yet he is content to rely on a judicial inquiry in London and an inquiry that is being run by a parliamentary committee in London to determine the truth in Scotland. I look forward to hearing the First Minister answer a question under oath—indeed, I look forward to hearing him answer a question. The question for the First Minister now is: why does he fear a parliamentary investigation here in Scotland? This started with Rupert Murdoch trying to take over BSkyB, but it turns out that he owns the Scottish National Party.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00624)

Yes, of course, but we would have welcomed it if the First Minister had used the investment in the Forth road bridge to create jobs in Scotland rather than jobs in China. After days of what some might describe as uncharacteristic silence and the more common prevarication and bluster, last night the First Minister finally alighted on a defence of his position to support Rupert Murdoch’s bid to take over BSkyB. He took that position, he says, because the takeover would have created jobs in Scotland. When did the First Minister first articulate that view in public? How many jobs did James Murdoch promise him?

I always welcome jobs coming to my own city. I would also welcome it if the First Minister answered the question that he was asked. I wait for that day to come—maybe it will come at some point in the future. The reason why the First Minister cannot tell us the first time that he articulated in public the view to which I referred is that the first time that he did so was last night. The explanation that he gave was less of a reason and more of an alibi. He claims that this was about gaining jobs, but Rupert Murdoch says that he spoke to the First Minister to apologise for cutting jobs. Of course, not everyone agreed that the deal would be good for Scotland, which is what the First Minister now says. In October 2010, a motion that opposed the News International deal was lodged in the Scottish Parliament and was signed by the member whose constituency includes BSkyB’s biggest Scottish base, Angela Constance, who is now the First Minister’s Minister for Youth Employment. However, it seems that Scottish National Party policy had changed by 1 November of that year, because we know from Frederic Michel’s e-mails that it was mission accomplished and that the First Minister was prepared to lobby Vince Cable on Murdoch’s behalf. We know that that was still the position in February and March last year and that Alex Salmond had a call scheduled with the new Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport, Jeremy Hunt. However, on 13 July last year, all six of Alex Salmond’s members of Parliament at Westminster supported a motion asking Rupert Murdoch to withdraw the bid for BSkyB. If it was really such a good thing for Scotland, as the First Minister said last night, and if jobs relied on it, why did he support his MPs in opposing the deal?

The First Minister did not listen to what I said. His Minister for Youth Employment, representing Livingston, opposed the deal, and his MPs opposed it, too. I welcome the jobs coming to Glasgow, but they have nothing to do with the issue about News International. The First Minister says that the position changed because of Milly Dowler. The revelation that Rupert Murdoch’s newspaper hacked Milly Dowler’s phone was the moment that any doubt about Rupert Murdoch was removed and the moment when his empire started to fall yet, after that devastating revelation, the First Minister became the only senior politician in this country—perhaps the only one in the world—to invite him round for tea. Rupert’s newspapers might be being investigated for bribery, perverting the course of justice, destroying evidence and perjury, but he is still welcome in wee Eck’s house. The First Minister wrote an article for the launch of Rupert’s newspaper saying that the issue was to do not with just News International, but with all the newspaper industry. There are three police investigations, a judicial inquiry and nearly 50 arrests, but Eck still puts the kettle on for Rupert. Does the First Minister not realise that all he is achieving is a demeaning of the office that he craved for so long?

I hate to think what the people will think of that performance by the First Minister. I remind the First Minister again that Ed Miliband lodged a motion that opposed the deal. The First Minister’s own MPs supported that motion. I will not ask the First Minister whether he supported Murdoch so that Murdoch’s Sun would support him. The public will have made up their minds about that. The truth is that the issue is not the First Minister’s evident cynicism, which we have seen in the past, but his infatuation with very rich men. First, the First Minister gave his office’s full backing to the then Sir Fred Goodwin in a deal that broke the bank. Who can forget—[Interruption.]

I am sure that a lot of this is as much of a revelation to the SNP back benchers as it was to us. Who can forget, even without yesterday’s reminder, the deal with Donald Trump? Now there is the deal with Murdoch. There are common themes. Each case was secret; each deal was a fiasco; and in each case the truth had to be dragged out of the First Minister bit by bit—big deals, big men, one not quite so big man, and no jobs, just job losses. The First Minister says that it is about jobs. I think that he just likes rich men. Some say that the First Minister has been devious, conniving and double-dealing. Is he not just trying to cover up the fact that a rich man has played him for a fool again? Is it not the case that he is no statesman, just a sucker?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00608)

In March 2011, just before the Scottish Parliament election, the First Minister announced that Doosan Power Systems Ltd was going to invest £170 million in a new research facility in Renfrew and a manufacturing facility elsewhere in Scotland. In the same week, he suggested that the factory was going to Dundee. That was welcome news for the Scottish economy and the renewables industry. Since then, the word “Doosan” has been a key part of the Scottish Government litany of supposed economic successes—indeed, John Swinney was talking about Doosan just last Sunday. However, it has now been reported that the First Minister was told in December last year that Doosan was scrapping the planned investment. The First Minister announced that Doosan was coming; when was he going to tell us that it is not?

The fact of the matter is that the First Minister announced that project. He said that it was a “great stride forward”, but why would he not tell us of the stride backwards? It has been reported that the Scottish Government wanted that news to be suppressed until after the local council elections. A Scottish Government spokesman in the same article denies that and is reported to have said that the Scottish Government wanted the statement out earlier. Page 84 of the First Minister’s budget bill reports the planned investment, yet on 25 January and 8 February, when that document was debated in this chamber, the new information was not provided. If it is true that the First Minister wanted the statement out earlier, why did he not make it? Clearly, Doosan was not sensitive about it, because it let the story out at a trade fair in Denmark. Surely the Scottish people deserve to hear the news before the Danes do.

I am beginning to get how this works. If it is good news, the First Minister announces it; if it is bad news, it is not in the business of the Government to make announcements on behalf of companies and it would be highly inappropriate for us to take any responsibility because that is all the job of the companies. The fact of the matter is that, regardless of the other investment announcements, this is a hugely significant decision for Doosan that we must all be concerned about, given the implications for jobs and our shared commitment to reaching our climate change targets. I repeat the point that, in January and February, we debated a budget that included the positive news of the investment, but the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth did not mention the new information. Instead, we are told, he mentioned it in the bygoing in a politics debate on a television programme months later. The fact of the matter is that the First Minister, his ministers and their officials knew at the end of last year about this significant announcement. In that case, why did he, his ministers, his MSPs and his press office keep on talking as if the investment was coming? I know that Doosan invests in much more in Scotland than just this project, but I think that we all know what impression the First Minister wanted to create. Why did he allow his colleagues and his press office to keep on giving the impression that this project was coming to Scotland when he knew that it was not?

The First Minister again wilfully misses the point. We were unable to respond to a significant decision because the First Minister chose not to tell us. This is not about talking the Scottish economy or Scotland up or down; it is about the First Minister’s integrity and the honesty of his Government. If this were a one-off, we might give the First Minister the benefit of the doubt, but there is a pattern. Before the last election, while he was taking the credit for Doosan’s planned investment, he used taxpayers’ cash to keep the truth about his local income tax plans hidden from the public. When he was forced to come clean, he chose to do so on the day that his pal Rupert Murdoch got embroiled in the hacking scandal. When academics criticise the First Minister, his aide writes false letters in their name recanting. Good grief. The Advertising Standards Authority has even had to pull him up about the pandas. The serious point is that we have a shared concern about the decision about Doosan. If the First Minister will suppress serious issues such as the Doosan investment announcement before the local elections, goodness knows what he will conceal before the referendum. After this, how can any of us believe a word that he says?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00591)

It was reported this week that seven out of 10 primary school pupils are succeeding in numeracy but, two years later at secondary school, nearly six out of ten of them are failing. Why is it that so many of our secondary school children do not have basic counting skills?

I do not think that the statistics indicate any such thing. Indeed, both the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association and Lindsay Paterson have said that Mike Russell’s claim that the improvement in primary school numeracy skills is due to the curriculum for excellence is wrong, as it is far too early for the curriculum for excellence to have had any impact. He may wish to reflect on that. Perhaps I can explain this serious issue in a way that the First Minister might understand. The odds of a second-year pupil in Scotland hitting the required numeracy standards are 3-2 against. Those might be good odds if someone wants to win a few bob at Musselburgh, but they are not so good for those of us who are parents sending our children to school under the Scottish National Party. In 2003, Labour introduced a cap of 20 pupils for every S1 and S2 English and maths class to raise literacy and numeracy standards. The First Minister dropped that pledge. Does he agree that Scottish pupils are now paying the price for that mistake?

The First Minister says that I should take this question seriously; it is about time that he took his job seriously and answered the question. The thing about statistics is that we cannot select the ones that make us feel good about ourselves—which the First Minister has done. Government has to respond to what the statistics say. The statistics tell us that there is a two in five chance of being numerate in secondary school in Scotland. That should be a spur to action, not to a scurrying about for some justification. As I have indicated, that is a nonsense. The First Minister and I might not agree on education policy generally, but I am sure that we can agree that there is nothing as negative in politics as a promise not kept. Let us look at the promises that he made to Scotland’s parents and pupils: a nursery teacher for every child, promised but not delivered; a maintaining of teacher numbers, promised but not delivered; class sizes of 18 or fewer for primary 1 to 3, promised but not delivered; the curriculum for excellence that he talks about, promised but not delivered; and today, two guaranteed hours of physical education every day, promised, now repromised, and still not delivered. I make that zero out of five—[Interruption.]

The First Minister should understand what he promised and his failure to deliver—if he wants to make a difference for the people of this country. I make the First Minister’s record zero out of five. I could go on. Let me explain to him that education is a priority for every parent in Scotland. Does he not understand that there is nothing crueller than making promises to children that he has no intention of keeping?

A lot of young people will be sitting exams in the near future and, as teachers, we always knew to advise them, “Answer the question.” Again, the First Minister fails to do that. Last week, the First Minister’s health secretary was bottom of the class, and—despite his protestations—his education secretary, Mike Russell, has the dunce’s cap this week. We found out last Thursday that the First Minister will deny the truth until he is confronted by it. What a shame that the public gallery is not big enough to seat the 30,000 second-year pupils his Government is failing in numeracy alone. While he waits for Scotland’s future to be decided in his referendum in 1,000 days, the future of young Scots is being determined today. In the spirit of being helpful, if the First Minister cannot keep his own promises, may I offer him one of ours? Will he, as a matter of urgency, bring specialist teams into our schools to help our children to learn how to count?

Thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer. In a speech to the Scottish National Party conference in Glasgow, the First Minister said that he would meet his manifesto pledge from 2007 to increase the number of hours of free nursery education for every three and four-year-old to 600 hours at some point after 2014. Given his commitment to that, I am rather surprised that he is not at his place to participate in, or at least listen to, the debate. In that speech, the First Minister also quoted Nye Bevan. One thing that we will find out today is whether the First Minister fits the description in another quotation from Nye Bevan, in which he said of Harold Macmillan: “The Prime Minister has an absolute genius for putting flamboyant labels on empty luggage.” Let us see whether the First Minister has the same genius. That promise—that reannouncement of a promise—cannot be an empty one. The First Minister has not actually promised to deliver on it in two years’ time. What he has pledged is a bill in two years’ time—a bill that he does not need, because he has the power to deliver today. I am bemused by the SNP amendment to our motion, because it rolls back on the First Minister’s commitment to 600 hours of free nursery education. It talks broadly about more childcare and more flexibility, but the reality is that the Government could provide that now. SNP ministers are asking SNP back benchers to vote for an amendment that dilutes the First Minister’s position. The First Minister and his SNP back benchers need to understand that children are not just for conferences. The commitment is critically important. It is bizarre that, in opposing our position, the SNP is denying the commitment that the First Minister made at his own conference.

In that case, I expect that the education secretary will join me in opposing the SNP amendment and supporting our motion. This is not a smear. Our motion makes it absolutely clear, and the Scottish Parliament information centre agrees with us, that we can do what the First Minister pledged to do right now.

Yes, we can. Without getting into pantomime with the education secretary, I say that we can swap advice, but the advice that we have received from SPICe shows clearly that that can be done. One has to ask why the education secretary would be so anxious to prove that he cannot do what the First Minister said he was so keen to do. To the Government, the seven years between the manifesto pledge and the aspiration of delivery might seem a short space of time. Perhaps that is the fastest that the First Minister can move. After all, the biggest announcement of his Administration so far is that, after its five years in government, we can wait another 1,000 days for his long-promised referendum. The First Minister likes to talk about his positivity and claim that all his opponents are negative. I explain to him that there is nothing so negative in politics as a promise not kept, however many times the promise is remade. Let me explain why, Scotland having waited five years for the First Minister to fulfil his pledge, to wait another two years at least is not just unnecessary but unacceptable. The reality today is that Scotland lags behind our neighbours in the United Kingdom when it comes to childcare. Scots parents have fewer hours of free childcare each week. They have the 12.5 hours a week that have been delivered by Alex Salmond as opposed to the 15 hours a week that have been delivered by the hapless Nick Clegg in England—not a man known for holding to his word. When our parents pay for the childcare that they need on top of free nursery education, they pay at rates as high as those in the richest parts of the UK. Scottish parents pay a higher proportion of average earnings than even parents in London. Our aspiration must be free nursery education within flexible and affordable wrap-around childcare. The free 15 hours of nursery education must be the next stage towards that. I am not sure that the First Minister really understands the pressures that Scottish families are facing. Working mothers and families have busy lives, juggling the demands of work with the nursery timetable, and they face increasing pressures on household budgets by way of increases in fuel, food and energy costs at a time of pay freezes and reduced hours. Making all of that work can be like spinning plates, and it can be achieved only through meticulous planning, careful budgeting and often the good grace of family members—often grandparents—and friends, who get children to and from the nursery gates. Many people find that they work simply to cover childcare costs, making no significant net gain when those costs are deducted from salaries, but realising the benefits of nursery care for their children and the benefits of work for themselves. Increasingly, many people are not that lucky, and the reality is that it makes financial sense for them no longer to work and fund additional childcare. Scotland’s unemployment crisis throws up big numbers, but behind those big numbers are thousands of individual stories, each with its own complexities and challenges. The huge drop in female employment tells us that many women are leaving the job market through natural turnover, whether it be through retirement or to start a family, and they are not being replaced because it is no longer affordable for working mothers to go back to work. Despite the generous advances that were made in the area by the Labour Government in 1997, the flexible and affordable childcare that people require simply does not exist. Here in Scotland, we face some of the highest childcare costs in the United Kingdom and the highest female unemployment rate. That cannot be by accident. The First Minister spoke to that vulnerability last month when he offered to increase the number of free hours to Scottish families. That seemed to be a welcome gesture to help to mitigate the pressures that childcare costs are placing on Scottish families but, cruelly, the First Minister made it a referendum bribe rather than the immediate help that working mothers need today. He proved once again that he does not care about Scottish families, that he does not understand Scotland’s working mums, and that the challenges that face the Scottish people are simply stepping stones to separation—his one and only obsession. The First Minister has an opportunity today to prove me wrong, and to work with us and the other parties to tackle an issue that we all agree is a problem facing hard-pressed families. Today is one occasion on which the Administration has the chance to close the gap between rhetoric and reality. I ask all members to take that chance and start delivering for Scottish families now. Often, it appears that the highest functioning part of the Administration is not the health department or education, and not finance or enterprise. The highest functioning part of the Administration is its public relations department—where the relationship between rhetoric and reality is less like that of distant cousins and more like that of separate species; where the falseness of a claim does not stop it being repeated; where no link can be too tenuous; and where when failure is finally admitted, it is regarded as a shovel-ready subject that can be buried as long as the day is bad enough. The spin doctors are the highest functioning part of a Government that promises a better tomorrow, but fails to deliver today. We want to help the Administration to stop being a mañana Government. We believe that the Government can and must deliver now on its promise of better childcare, without any further unnecessary delay. According to SPICe, increasing the number of hours of free care for three and four-year-olds could cost as little as £40 million, which is just an eighth of 1 per cent of the Government’s overall budget. We will work with the Government now to find that cash in the budget and start delivering for families today. The truth is that children who were born in Scotland in the year that the First Minister made his pledge will not benefit from it, and nor will those who were born the year after—or the year after that, or the year after that. Children who were born in the year that the First Minister was elected will be halfway through primary school before he starts to deliver on his nursery care promise, unless we take decisive action today. The gap between promise and reality need not be like that. In 1997, Labour promised a free nursery place for every four-year-old by 1999 and we delivered. We promised a free place for every three-year-old by 2002, and we delivered and made that a statutory requirement in the same year. The SNP seems to be keen to match the previous Labour Government’s language of aspiration, but that is just an election campaign con if it does not match the record of delivery. Separating Scotland from the rest of the UK has been the First Minister’s key aim all his political life. I do not agree with him, but I respect his view. However, he cannot put Scotland on pause while he waits for a time when he reckons he might win his referendum. He cannot take promises that he pledged to fulfil by last year, toss them into some date after the referendum, and expect us to put up with it. Scots families need help now and it is not right to force them to wait for that help, or for the Government to pretend that it cannot do anything about it in the meantime. It is not right for the First Minister to make it a condition of that help that people will get it only if they vote in the way that he wants in the referendum. The broken promises of today and yesterday will perhaps be made good, but only if the people of Scotland vote in the way that the First Minister wants at some point in the future. Scotland’s families do not deserve to be put at the end of the childcare queue in the United Kingdom and at the end of the First Minister’s list of priorities. We will work with the Scottish Government to put Scotland’s families first and to deliver for Scotland’s children. We will work with the Government to close the gap between its rhetoric and the reality that people in this country face every day. The First Minister has been stating his childcare aspirations for more than five years. If members vote for the Scottish Labour motion, we can turn aspiration into delivery today. I move, That the Parliament believes that an extension to available nursery hours for pre-5 children is an important contribution to their educational development; notes the commitment made by the First Minister to extend available hours; further notes that the Scottish Government previously extended hours in 2007 through the use of a statutory instrument, the Provision of School Education for Children under School Age (Prescribed Children) (Scotland) Amendment Order 2007, SSI 2007/396; recognises that there is no need to use primary legislation to increase the number of hours of pre-school education available to pre-5 children, and considers that the Scottish Government should give early effect to the commitment made by the First Minister by introducing a statutory instrument before the end of June 2012.

I am positive that I can help the First Minister with his commitment, which was: “Conference, we will place into the new Children’s Bill introduced to Parliament next year a statutory guarantee of over 600 hours of free nursery education for every Scottish 3 and 4 year old and for every looked after 2 year old in our land.” We can do that now, as a starting point and then build on that. We want to help the Government on the issue, and we can do it now.

I did not say that.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00570)

I am sure that the First Minister will enjoy his visit. Labour always welcomes glimmers of hope for employment and investment in the interests of communities throughout Scotland. Very few of us would agree with the approach that is taken by the Tories when it comes to our health service. I was glad when the First Minister told us, last month, that Scotland is choosing a different path. Since then, however, we have found out a little more about the path that the First Minister is taking, which seems to have been on a bit of a downhill gradient. We have fewer nurses, decreasing standards in care of the elderly, cuts to social care budgets and patients going without blankets. Even the good statistics cannot be trusted—as we found out yesterday. Before the First Minister rhymes off the statistics that he has, no doubt, already prepared, I ask why we should trust them.

The point of the Scottish Parliament is that we all aspire to better than what the Tories are offering at Westminster. We expect the Scottish Government’s record to be better, too. I will talk about individuals in a moment. First, let us consider what experts have been saying over the past few weeks. The Royal College of Nursing says that there are not enough nurses to provide “basic, safe care”. Audit Scotland warns that councils and health boards are failing to ensure that vital care services can be delivered in the future. The Centre for Public Policy for Regions says that, since 2006, Scotland has been lagging behind the increase in resources for England. Does the First Minister think that they are all wrong as well?

The Government’s health budget has been cut in real terms by £319 million. The substance of the First Minister’s answer was that the RCN—the nurses union—is wrong. He talks about Wales; we would like him to focus on his responsibilities as First Minister here. I assure him that Labour members would love to be in his position. Once again, the Government’s rhetoric does not fit the reality. If the First Minister does not accept the picture that the experts paint, what does he have to say to Helen Macbeth? Mrs Macbeth is 92 years old. When she was seriously ill in the Royal Alexandra hospital in Paisley, she spent her first night frozen, because embarrassed staff could not get her a blanket. She had to rely on her daughter to bring one in for her the next day. Jack Barr is a great-grandfather who went into the RAH for a serious operation. He spent three nights in hospital with only his beach towel to keep him warm. Does the First Minister realise that it is not enough just to say that he is protecting the NHS—he actually has to do it?

It is one thing for the First Minister to repeat his version of his record, but he must confront the reality of what is happening in people’s lives. It is also one thing to attack Jackie Baillie, but it is something entirely different to attack others who raise concerns about the national health service. We have established that the First Minister will not listen to me or to independent voices. Will he listen to people who are suffering from his mismanagement of the NHS? Mrs Macbeth and Mr Barr are sitting in the public gallery. We have found at least seven recent cases of patients going without blankets at the Royal Alexandra hospital. We pointed out the situation, but the Government denied it. George Adam, the MSP for Paisley, called on me to investigate my health spokesperson, Jackie Baillie, for having the audacity to give voice to the complaints of her constituents. If he had just shelled out 45p for his local newspaper, the Paisley Daily Express, he would have seen that our claims are true. If the First Minister will not believe me, why does he not come and meet Mr Barr and Mrs Macbeth in my office after question time to explain that we do not have a problem in the NHS and that the problem is a figment of Jackie Baillie’s imagination? They will tell him, as I am telling him, what the NHS is really like under the SNP. When will the First Minister stop the rhetoric and face up to the reality of his responsibilities?

Whatever that was, it was not taking responsibility. I point out to the First Minister that his health secretary wrote and said that the problem with the towels was that, although they were there, the staff could not source them. The First Minister said that the incident was isolated. However, as was reported in the Evening Times, Unison members have been complaining for 10 months that this is a serious issue. It is about time that the First Minister took responsibility, recognised the powers that he has to defend the NHS and responded to constituents’ concerns.

Will the minister take an intervention?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00547)

Will the First Minister explain why Scottish families are facing some of the highest childcare costs in Europe while his Government offers less help than Nick Clegg?

I note that the First Minister did not answer the question why we are still in the place that we are in—but there is nothing new there. On Saturday, the First Minister, who has, of course, never knowingly undersold his own position, promised “The best package of free nursery education on offer anywhere in the UK”, but just not yet. Nothing new there, then. We saw the same pledge in the Scottish National Party’s manifesto in 2007—remember that one? It is filed in the fiction section of a library near you. We know what happened with the pledge in 2007: Mike Russell dumped it in 2009. The First Minister repackaged it on Saturday, and we need to wait until after the referendum in 2014 before he delivers on it. Why has he failed to deliver on his own pledge? Why has he let Scottish families and Scottish children down?

If we had been in power in 2007, we would now be in a position that the rest are in. If the First Minister had worked out how important public provision was, he might have acted a little earlier than now. We worked out its importance a long time ago. Families need action now—not a provision in a children’s bill, and not a two-year delay. Families do not need legislation in the future; they need a Government that will provide funding now to deliver reliable and affordable childcare when people need it. The First Minister has the power to do that now. Why does he not exercise it? On Saturday, the First Minister promised a bill. It might be news to him that working families throughout Scotland already have a bill—for childcare, and it is a pretty expensive one. Families need support now. Why do we have to wait another two years for the First Minister to put a provision in a bill, never mind delivering what people need?

If that is the First Minister being positive about me, God help me when he decides to turn on me. What Labour did on childcare over eight years benefited me as a mother, never mind as a minister. Indeed, we have the benefit in Glasgow now, with a Labour council—

This episode is another example of the mañana Government: excuses today and jam not even tomorrow but maybe in two years’ time. Working families are struggling now and the First Minister simply does not get it. There are fewer children in nursery, after-school clubs are closing down, and the childcare that is on offer is simply not meeting people’s needs. On Saturday, the First Minister said: “In devolved Scotland we can demand. In an independent Scotland we can deliver.” Members: Yes! That was obviously for the children on the SNP back benches. They are so predictable. What the First Minister really meant was that he will not deliver until he gets his way in a referendum—talk about an abuse of power! The reality is that, for the First Minister, the issue is not childcare; what gets him excited is the constitution. In this devolved Scotland, families cannot and will not wait. We insist that the First Minister delivers for Scottish families now. Will he take the issue and the people of this country seriously and act now to help Scottish families?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of this international women’s day. (S4F-00528)

On behalf of Labour members, I support the First Minister’s comments about Paul McBride and express our sympathy with regard to the very sad and tragic loss both to Mr McBride’s family and to critical debates in Scotland. As the First Minister said, he will be sadly missed. This week, Joan McAlpine, the First Minister’s parliamentary aide, likened Scotland’s place in the United Kingdom to that of a woman in an abusive marriage. Does the First Minister agree?

The First Minister should be very careful about suggesting that people on this side of the chamber wish to diminish the issues of domestic abuse and violence in the home. The reality is that there has been commitment and co-operation across the Parliament to address those problems, which is precisely why the First Minister should reflect on what his aide said. How the First Minister handles his aide is entirely a matter for him, but I do not know many people who, on coming out of an abusive marriage, have then entered a social union and kept the same bank account, which is what the First Minister has suggested for a separate Scotland. The First Minister needs to deal with the fact that his aide’s analogies are as offensive to women as his policies are damaging. As a result of those policies, 400 women are being put out of work every day. It is not, as his aide alleges, being part of the UK that is holding women back; rather, Tory cuts have been compounded by the First Minister’s inaction. That is why female unemployment is higher in Scotland than it is in the rest of the UK. When is the First Minister going to start doing something to help women back to work? Is it the case that, like everything else, we are going to have to wait his 1,000 days for a referendum before he lifts a finger?

I have acknowledged the commitment across the Parliament on domestic abuse, and I recognise the funding that exists for that. I hear from the First Minister a critique of what the Tories in Westminster have done—they are a problem because they are Tories, not because they are English—but I hear nothing about his responsibilities. I was making the point that the unemployment rate for women is higher in Scotland than it is in the rest of the United Kingdom, and that that is the First Minister’s responsibility. The Deputy First Minister has also been making grand promises this week. Apparently, only in an independent Scotland can we have policies that do not offend our sense of decency. However, on her Government’s watch, the fuel poverty rate is double that in England, and she does nothing. Childcare costs are higher than in the United Kingdom and one in four children lives in poverty, but she does nothing. Is this not the mañana Government? It is doing nothing for people who are in difficulty today, but is promising them the world tomorrow—a tomorrow that is at least a thousand days away.

If the First Minister was talking to women, he would know that his figures on women’s employment mask something much more serious. We have lost more than 100,000 full-time jobs to temporary and part-time jobs. Women in local government—which he has targeted for cuts—and in the voluntary sector are having their hours cut. The figures mask the fact that women are suffering disproportionately from unemployment and underemployment. The gap between the words and the reality grows as we speak. Last week, the First Minister told us that the only thing that Rupert Murdoch got when he visited him was “a cup of tea and a ... caramel wafer”.—[Official Report, 1 March 2012 ; c 6828.] We have now found out that he also offered Murdoch a multimillion-pound tax cut. There is a pattern here. All that a working person—[Interruption.]

All that a working person who needs help gets from the First Minister is warm words about what might happen in 1,000 days, but Fred Goodwin gets all the backing that the First Minister can muster, Donald Trump gets direct access to the chief planning officer, and Rupert Murdoch gets offers of multimillion-pound tax cuts in exchange for headlines. Some people might say that Scotland is being bought and sold for Murdoch gold. Is it not about time that we heard less, that women heard less, and that families across this country heard less about the First Minister’s fantasies for tomorrow and more about how he will deal with the realities of today?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00511)

We all continue to be shocked by the revelations that are coming from the Leveson inquiry about phone hacking, pay-offs and the inappropriate relationship between journalists, police and politicians. It would be naive to dismiss those as London practices that stop at the border. What steps are being taken to learn from the Leveson inquiry? Did the First Minister discuss the matter when he last spoke with the chief executive officer of News Corporation, Rupert Murdoch?

Fine words must be tested against the action that we take. We know that the police are not the only people who leak stories to Rupert Murdoch. The first edition of the Scottish Sun on Sunday revealed the date of the referendum—Saturday 18 October 2014—citing a Government source. For the sake of a front-page splash, the date was leaked before the consultation was completed, before the Parliament was told and before the people of Scotland had their say. Has the First Minister, who of course wrote a column in the paper’s first edition, thought about who might possibly have been the source of such a mutually serving leak? What steps has he taken to determine the source of the leak?

I am sure that, in the First Minister’s world, that sounds believable, but it is testing credulity to the point of destruction. Just a few weeks ago, I read out the First Minister’s cringeworthy letter to Fred Goodwin, backing the deal that broke the bank. This week, we have been reminded how far the First Minister was prepared to go to accommodate Donald Trump. That did not end well, although apparently, First Minister, he still likes you. I will not embarrass the First Minister by reading out his musings to Rupert Murdoch—or Sir Rupert, as the First Minister likes to address him—but it seems that the First Minister has finally learned that theatre tickets and golf DVDs will not get a reply but a good exclusive will. Despite what the First Minister says, the editor of The Sun says that the date is 18 October 2014. He is so sure that he told Twitter: “See what odds you can get on 18/10/14. We’re right.” Is the First Minister saying that the editor of The Sun is wrong?

The First Minister’s restraint is admirable but, in the middle of all that, I do not think that we got an answer. Simply asserting that I am wrong does not dispute the fact that the editor of The Sun says that he is right. The First Minister is trying to make people believe that the exclusive in The Sun had nothing to do with him. His defence is, “It wasnae me and it wasnae just me.” That will not do. It is said that we can tell a lot about a man by the company that he keeps. [Interruption.]

What does it say about the First Minister’s judgment if he is prepared to compromise the referendum for Sir Rupert, to compromise our planning system for the Trump and to compromise Scotland’s economic future for Fred the Shred? We all know that Sir Rupert ran with Sunday’s story on the First Minister’s nod. After five years of asking, will the First Minister simply confirm what date he intends to hold the referendum? Just name the date.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00480)

Last week’s unemployment figures revealed that more jobs are being lost in Scotland than in any other part of the United Kingdom. This week, we have been presented with more grim forecasts for the construction and retail sectors in Scotland. The First Minister needs to realise that this is about real people and real jobs. The First Minister’s plan MacB—the one that he boasted about to all who would listen—has clearly failed. Why have one in three of all the jobs that have been lost in the UK in the past three months been Scottish jobs?

As ever, the First Minister focuses on other people’s responsibilities and not his own. Never mind the budget at UK level—his own budget for jobs and growth could be done under the Trade Descriptions Act. Last week, the number of young people who are unemployed broke the 100,000 mark. That is unacceptable. What was the First Minister’s response? He had nothing to say. Perhaps he was much too busy falling out with his old pal Donald Trump, falling in with Twitter fan Rupert Murdoch and arguing with the Prime Minister about who knows best how to run a referendum. All the while, more and more young people are being shut out of the job market, with long-term consequences that we should all fear. To coin a phrase, when will the very man who launched a consultation document in a castle put people before prestige?

Of course we support all those across the country who want something to be done. We want the First Minister to get on and do those things that need to be done, because what he is doing is not working. The First Minister talks about his new Minister for Youth Employment. That is one job for one woman, but what about the other 399 women who are losing their job every day under the SNP Government? Although the First Minister talks about it, and despite the promise that was made by the First Minister at the election to protect public service workers, almost 24,000 people who were delivering public services lost their jobs last year. The First Minister chose to pass on 89 per cent of the cuts to local government, so it was inevitable that women would bear the brunt of those cuts. Female unemployment is at its highest since records began. Why has the First Minister broken his promise to protect those public sector jobs?

It is breathtaking complacency on the part of the First Minister, in the face of unemployment figures that must make his blood run cold, to find figures and suggest that everything is okay. On the very day that those shocking unemployment figures were released, the First Minister was in London giving a lecture about separation. Rather than lecturing people in England, perhaps he could take advice from the Labour Government in Wales and those in other parts of the UK where the figures have got better not worse. In Scotland, unemployment is heading towards the 0.25 million mark on the First Minister’s watch. Instead of focusing all his energies on running a referendum campaign, when will the First Minister get on with the job of running the country and addressing people’s real concerns?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00461)

Indeed we do. The new Forth crossing is the most expensive public project in Scottish history and is central to attempts to sustain and grow Scottish businesses and to create much-needed jobs. The project should have a legacy that goes beyond a bridge; people understand that. So why did the First Minister sign away the contracts—and the Scottish jobs—to Spain, Poland and China?

I am stunned by the limit of the ambition that the First Minister shows. This contract was to be a legacy for the people of this country and for the economy but, on his own minister’s account, it is worth £20 million out of a contract worth £1.5 billion. The First Minister has no excuses. In Wales, a Labour Government had the political will to ensure that Welsh companies had equal access to public contracts, thereby saving businesses and creating jobs, but rather than look to our neighbours, Alex Salmond went to China and pulled off a master deal—the Chinese got an £800 million steel contract and we got two pandas. If Wales can deliver for Welsh businesses, what is stopping the Scottish First Minister delivering for Scottish businesses and Scottish families?

The First Minister thinks that this is a game. The script that the people of Scotland want to hear is not one in which he says, “Oh, it’s not £1.5 billion; it’s £20 million out of £790 million, so that makes it okay.” That is a tiny proportion of the money. The reality is that the biggest contract in Scotland for a generation is creating jobs in Spain, in Poland and in China. Alex Salmond is spending £800 million on steel—[Interruption]—and from that contract not a single job is being created in Scotland, at a time when 200 people are losing their jobs every day. Even the London Olympics have benefited Scottish companies to the tune of £100 million—five times more than the benefit from the Forth replacement crossing contract. How can it be value for money in the long term to send abroad the profits, business creation, research and development and high-quality jobs that such big contracts generate? How can that make sense?

And he accuses me of not being able to read my script. [Laughter.] I am sure that it was well worth it for civil servants to do the research to find that quotation. Can we deal with what people in this country are saying now? They include Community trade union workers, who are concerned about their jobs, and all the businesses and people—beyond steel—who thought that the contract would bring work to their communities. A fortnight ago, in response to the shocking unemployment figures, the First Minister claimed that his Government puts the greatest emphasis on job creation; yet here we are in a situation in which Scottish trade unionists from the Dalzell steelworks have written to David Cameron—I cannot believe that I am saying this, but I have the letter here—to ask a Tory Prime Minister to protect them from the actions of a Scottish First Minister. [Interruption.] I know, I cannot believe it, either. The steelworkers and Community trade unionists in Scotland wrote: “To date, First Minister, Alex Salmond MSP, has failed to give any satisfactory explanation why foreign suppliers were given preference over Scottish firms”. Why is the First Minister not doing his job? Why is he not standing up for Scotland? Will he stand up for Scottish workers and instruct an immediate review of a disgraceful contract, which will have huge consequences in our communities?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00438)

Excellent. Today I would like to discuss a Royal Bank of Scotland banker who enjoyed huge success but whose arrogance drove him to overreach himself and lead Scotland to disaster. [Laughter.] The First Minister need not worry—I am not talking about him. I am, of course, talking about Fred Goodwin, the Fred Goodwin to whom the First Minister wrote to back the deal that broke the bank. The First Minister wrote: “Dear Fred, I wanted you to know that I am watching events closely on the ABN front. It is in Scottish interests for RBS to be successful, and I would like to offer any assistance my office can provide. Good luck with the bid. Yours for Scotland, Alex”. Yesterday, the First Minister admitted that with “the benefit of hindsight” he would “do things differently”. Does that mean that he is prepared to apologise to the people of Scotland for his serious error of judgment?

In my previous life as a schoolteacher, if I asked a child to accept that they had done something wrong, I did not accept the defence of, “It wisnae just me.” It is not a defence to say that other people made mistakes as well. What I asked the First Minister to do—and what he has singularly refused to do—was to apologise for his error of judgment. His judgment was wrong and he should apologise. More important, however, the First Minister needs to learn a lesson from this. Mr Goodwin clearly got carried away with himself, did not ask the hard questions and became blind to the consequence. As the First Minister is in danger of doing likewise, let us look at the hard questions about separation; after all, I am not the only one who questions the First Minister’s judgment. His former economic adviser, Professor John Kay, says that if Scotland were to remain in a currency union, “It might ... cause people to start wondering what the point of independence was in the first place”. Will the First Minister tell Professor Kay and the rest of us what, exactly, the point is?

The First Minister needs to learn from history, not rewrite it. The fact is that it was the First Minister who said that the problem with banking regulation was that it was gold plated and that he would lighten it. I am curious as to why the First Minister is sticking by his plan to remain in a currency union. Last week, to bolster his position, he told us that there were 67 countries with a similar arrangement; however, all week, in response to my office, to the Scottish Parliament information centre and to the media, he refused to name them. Indeed, he named them only 30 minutes ago. It took him seven days to get information that he could have got in seven seconds from Wikipedia. [Interruption.]

We do not want to have people making things up on the hoof. Will the First Minister clear this up and give us three good examples of countries that do not have a central bank and are in a currency union?

Would that it were so. The fact of the matter is that, whatever that was, it was not an answer, and it certainly did not clarify anything. The reality is that up to a third of the countries that are identified in the 67 have no influence whatsoever. It appears that the First Minister is saying that he is pursuing independence at any cost. His case for independence is beginning to look like the RBS deal that broke the bank. He cannot provide the detail, and when we look at the proposal closely, it falls apart. He is proposing a currency union just like those in, say, Togo, San Marino or the Federated States of Micronesia. In 2003, we were getting the euro. In 2005, we were getting a Scottish central bank. Yesterday, it was sterling, but somehow free from the Bank of England. Is it not demonstrably the case that the First Minister is simply unable to make an economic case for independence? Is he not in danger of becoming the Fred Goodwin of Scottish politics? [Interruption.]

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00430)

We always welcome a sinner who repents and someone who pays attention to others within the chamber. I am absolutely delighted with that news. I believe that it is in the interests of the people of Scotland that we undertake that task together. This week, of course, the First Minister unveiled the question that he wishes to ask the Scottish people in the forthcoming referendum: “Do you agree that Scotland should be an independent country?”—[Official Report, 25 January 2012; c 5603.] Members: Yes. Well, we know what you think. Can the First Minister tell members what he means by “an independent country”? Members: Oh!

The attacks on the disabled are coming from the Tories; they are not doing that because they are English. The First Minister must understand that the choice in this country is not between the Tories and separation; there is another approach. The First Minister conceded this week, significantly, that in his version of independence the Bank of England would be the lender of last resort. Does that mean that John Swinney will bring his budget to not only this chamber, but the Bank of England to ask how much he has permission to borrow, what his fiscal policies should be and how much he can spend? The First Minister told us this week that he is an avowed Anglophile. Is he not taking that a bit too far?

I bow to the expertise of the ex-Royal Bank of Scotland economist, who of course was so wise and sensible that he wrote to Fred Goodwin to urge him to buy the bank that nearly broke the Royal Bank Of Scotland. Perhaps some humility about our ability on the economy might be in order. The First Minister is telling us that he is content that the key decisions that will impact on people’s mortgages, savings and pensions will be made by a foreign bank with no remit to look at Scotland’s conditions and circumstances. Does he agree with his own chief economic adviser, Crawford Beveridge, that that is “not ideal”?

That comes to the nub of it—the First Minister hopes and believes that that will be the case, but it will not necessarily be so. The reality is that the people of this country want to have confidence in their pensions, their mortgages and their future. We know that Alex Salmond thinks that he has the prescription for Scotland’s ills—it is the same one that he has had for the past 40 years. In that time, the world has changed and we have changed. We have the euro, the rise of China, the devolution of Scotland and technological revolution, but in good times or bad, feast or famine, high days and holidays, he always has the same answer—separation. Is the truth not that the Scottish National Party’s push for separation, rather than being about people’s savings, their mortgages or their pensions, is about the First Minister’s blind faith that things will be better because he says so? Why is he prepared to take unnecessary risks with people’s mortgages, their savings and their pensions in the midst of the worst global economic crisis since the 1930s? There is no good reason, because political separation will mean that we will have less economic control to serve the people of this country.

As this is Burns day, I am tempted to reflect on my party piece at Burns suppers, when I do the reply to the toast to the lassies and call in aid Rabbie Burns against the pomposities and vanities of men. However, I shall resist the temptation to share some useful quotations today. I will reflect simply that Burns, as with others, called on us to be humble and to face and recognise the humility of our position and our responsibilities towards all the people of this country. I thank the First Minister for his statement. He will know that I asked to hold all-party talks on the referendum, so that everyone in our country could have confidence in that referendum and its outcome. We must recognise that we all love our country, whatever constitutional settlement we support. The most important thing is that whichever side wins the referendum, it and the process leading up to it should be conducted in such a way that, the day after it, all Scots can come together to fulfil our national duty to make Scotland all that it can be. I regret very much that the First Minister has continued to decline the all-party talks that I offered. Sadly, the consultation process has done little for those who fear that the process is not a fair one. The First Minister asserts as truth his view of the future of Scotland and misrepresents the position of those who want to remain in the United Kingdom. Indeed, he tries to define the position of those who believe in devolution, saying that they must have maximum devolution. Let those who disagree with Scotland being separated from the rest of the United Kingdom shape their own position and let not the First Minister define it for them. Does the First Minister recognise that those of us who wish to stay in the United Kingdom want Scotland to be a strong country? Why does he belittle Scots—and generations of Scots—by saying that we are not equal partners with the other nations in the United Kingdom? Indeed, why does he assert as fact that we all wish to be independent of each other when we all know, as families and communities, that we want to come together in partnership and co-operation? Does he recognise that those of us who argue for Scotland being strong in the United Kingdom do so because we believe in the first principles of co-operation and partnership, not in separating ourselves off from others? Even at this late stage, given the willingness of the First Minister to meet and negotiate with Westminster and to meet the world’s press in Edinburgh Castle, will he acknowledge the importance of coming together with the political parties in this chamber, who represent the majority of Scots who do not support the separation of Scotland from the rest of the United Kingdom, to reach a consensus on the platform on which we will be able to engage in a serious debate about the choices facing Scotland, and not just hear his assertion of his position and his misrepresentation of those who disagree with him?

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00405)

I am sure that we were all shocked yesterday to learn that every day for the past three months 200 Scots have lost their jobs. Unemployment has gone up 10 per cent over the same period, there has been a 25 per cent rise in the number of women who are unemployed—which must have an impact on families—and over the past year there has been a 123 per cent increase in long-term youth unemployment. In the light of those figures, what changes can we expect in the First Minister’s budget bill when it is published tomorrow?

I know that there is a pattern, but I did not expect to get “hunt the alibi” quite so early. This is not a game. We can trade figures, but we need to confront them. The reality is that although the First Minister is saying that job creation is his highest priority, it is not working. It seems to me that, although the First Minister has been in power for five years, he simply does not get it. Last summer, he claimed that the unemployment figures demonstrated not that they were not the Scottish Government’s fault, but that “the economic policy of the Scottish Government is delivering, and is continuing to create and safeguard jobs across our communities”. When the figures are good, the First Minister is fabulous, but when they are bad, where is that alibi? With 200 Scots losing their jobs each and every day on his watch, does he still stand by the statement that he made in the summer?

I am sure that that response will be a great comfort to the 200 people every day for the past three months who have lost their jobs. The First Minister’s response to the serious situation that those families are in is, “It wasnae me. I didn’t do it. Somebody else did it—and by the way, you’ve all got problems and I haven’t”. This is a man who takes himself seriously—we know that—but it is about time he also took his job seriously. What concerns me is not just his breathtaking complacency about the horrendous unemployment figures, but the fact that he clearly did not see it coming. He now has in his back pocket more than £0.5 billion extra from Westminster as a consequence of budget decisions. Will the First Minister give us and the people who are confronted with unemployment in our communities an assurance that every coin of that money will be spent on tackling unemployment and on giving our young people some hope for the future?

I have said it already: I am not playing a game, and I am not pursuing a theme. I am talking about the issues that are of concern to the people of Scotland. At the moment, 200 Scots a day are losing their jobs, and the First Minister settles for party-political jibes. Given the seriousness of the situation, and the First Minister’s pathetic response, I fear for the people who have lost their jobs and for those who are worried about losing their jobs. An uncaring Prime Minister, and what looks increasingly like an ultracomplacent First Minister, are uninterested in what the people of this country are talking about. A man who has been in the job for five years must at some point surely take responsibility, but this is a man who wanted Scotland to join an arc of prosperity, which is now an arc of insolvency. This is a man who graduated—[Interruption.] This is a man who graduated from the Fred Goodwin school of economics and backed the deal that broke the bank—[Interruption.]

I think that members sometimes have a problem with what they are hearing. The reality is—[Interruption.] The reality is that, in the real world, 200 people each and every day are losing their jobs on the First Minister’s watch. When will the First Minister stop congratulating himself on how well he is doing his job and come up with a serious plan to create jobs for the people of this country?

Did I hear a sigh of relief when the timing was reduced? [Laughter.] I am proud to have the opportunity to lead in this debate for Labour on the future for Scotland—a country that we all hold dear. For the avoidance of doubt, I now formally move the motion in my name. We know that this Parliament was built as a means to an end, and that end was social justice for the people of our country. Yet here we are again debating whether the constitution is an end in itself. Scotland is my country: the nation that shaped me and taught me my values. It is a nation whose achievements inspired and inspire me, and a community whose failings drive me and my overwhelming desire to fight for social justice and equality. Let me say this at the outset of the debate: the commitment of no one in this chamber, or outwith it, to Scotland should be doubted because of their position on the constitutional question. My belief in Scotland remaining in the United Kingdom is based on my patriotic belief that Scotland’s interests are best served by being in the United Kingdom. The First Minister once said that he had no problem with those who believe in Scotland being part of the United Kingdom as a matter of principle. He can therefore have no problem with me, because for me the principle of co-operation, solidarity and social justice knowing no borders is at the heart of my beliefs. I am disturbed that, while Mr Salmond has declared his willingness to work with the UK Government, the tone of his amendment to the motion is one of arrogant prescription for how that should be done. Let me say to the First Minister, for all those Scots who no longer live in Scotland, who are working away from this country, who have family ties to this country and who are proud of their heritage, that they will be offended by the idea that their commitment to Scotland is less than that of those who live in Scotland. I do not question the patriotism of those who believe that our nation—[Interruption.] I will repeat myself: I do not question the patriotism of those who believe that our nation would be better if it withdrew from the United Kingdom, and I trust that they will not question the patriotism of those who believe that our interests are best served by continuing to work in partnership and strengthened co-operation with our neighbours.

I am very comfortable with the fact that that is the only thing on which I agree with the Tories. On the other hand, the member’s party went through the lobbies with the Tories to deliver Thatcher to Scotland, and I would not have wanted the accolade that the member’s finance minister achieved when David McLetchie said that a Scottish National Party budget was the next best thing to a Tory one. I know where the principle lies. Similarly, questioning how, where and why there is injustice in this country is not talking Scotland down but the first sign of our driving ambition to make our nation better. After the SNP’s historic victory in May, the First Minister told us that there would be a referendum on Scotland leaving the United Kingdom, and that was no surprise. He certainly has the mandate, although to say in a throwaway line in a leaders’ debate four days before polling that he intended it to be held in the second half of the parliamentary session is not a manifesto commitment, and he knows it. Indeed, at the outset of the campaign, he pledged to hold the referendum sooner rather than later, and we encourage him to do so. As Labour—the only party of radical constitutional change—[Laughter.] Let me finish my point. The test is not what we say we are going to do; it is what we deliver. I repeat, as Labour is the only party of radical constitutional change and has actually delivered constitutional change, let me remind the chamber that we did it by means of a process that is something of a blueprint for how things should be done here. Donald Dewar led the way. Although the Scottish National Party and the Tories decided not to join us, he was instrumental in setting up the Scottish Constitutional Convention, which was open to all parties and all sections of civic Scotland and Scottish society. After the landslide of 1997—possibly an even greater one than that of the First Minister—Donald Dewar was again inclusive, even drawing in Mr Salmond, who had refused to be part of the convention. Then there was another really important part of the process. Donald Dewar acted—swiftly and decisively. Within four months we had a referendum and within two years we had this Parliament. We should contrast that with the First Minister’s commitment to constitutional change. He has been in power for four and a half years, but we have no referendum. We now have four consultations but, for all the talk, precious little action. [Interruption.] The SNP really ought to listen. It took Donald Dewar four months to hold a referendum and two years to establish a Parliament. In contrast, after more than four years, all Alex Salmond can say is that he has achieved the publication of four documents and has named a season in which he might consider holding a referendum. I can understand that happening when Alex Salmond was in the minority, even though he refused our support then, but why the delay? That is what people do not understand. Why the delay, when he has an unprecedented majority? Why the need for another thousand days? It makes no sense to those of us who understand how to deliver constitutional change, and I cannot imagine that it makes much sense to his back benchers, either. When it comes to constitutional change, where Donald Dewar delivers—four months; two years—Alex Salmond dithers, and we are going to wait at least another 1,000 days. What is he frightened of? He tells us that he can get any legislation he likes passed in this Parliament. He has the mandate. He has the majority. Surely it cannot be that he does not have the courage to face the verdict of the Scottish people. He says that independence will be the cure of all Scotland’s ills and that our economy will be transformed by what his spin doctors say are job-creating powers. His finance minister says that we will be the sixth-richest nation on earth and that Scotland will be free—are we allowed to say that word any more?—and proud. Alex Salmond is Moses, who has led his people to the brink of the promised land but, as they view it from the mountaintop, says to them, “Let’s camp outside for a few more years before we go in.” Bizarrely, at the end of today’s proceedings, the only party that will be voting against a legal, firm and decisive referendum, held soon, is the SNP. It is the SNP’s life work to break a consensus that we should have a referendum on which we can all agree. I do not know whether Mr Salmond can explain that, but it is entirely extraordinary and inexplicable to me. Thank goodness that Mr Salmond never decided to go into medicine. We can imagine the good Dr Salmond telling his patients, “The good news is that I’ve found a cure for your illness. The bad news is that I’m not going to administer it until halfway through your treatment.” However—this is a more serious point—the truth is that, while we wait, Scotland has been put on pause as we face the worst economic crisis in 100 years. The explanation from the Government when things go wrong is that it does not have the powers. However, it will not do the work to get those powers. Business and trade unionists may say that the uncertainty is costing Scotland jobs and investment, but as long as the First Minister has a soundbite, all is well. The rocks will melt in the sun before the First Minister admits that anything is wrong on his watch. It is not just the damage that the delay is doing to Scotland in the short term that matters; what also matters is the profound long-term damage that will be done to future generations if the referendum is not seen to be free and fair, and a crucial part of that is the timing of the referendum. When the Parliament was set up, we took the progressive decision, which was agreed across civic society, that a First Minister should not have the power to call the Scottish election at a time of their own choosing. We introduced fixed-term Parliaments. Elections to local government and to the European Parliament are at fixed intervals. Even Westminster has adopted that principle, but with the referendum, which will be the most important vote in Scotland’s history, the First Minister insists that he alone—and it is he alone—should have the power to call it. Frankly, to many of us inside and—more critically—outside the Parliament, that looks cynical; it feels like a fix. That is not good enough. It is not fair on Scotland now or the Scotland of the future for the timing of the referendum to be in the hands of one politician. The referendum belongs not to politicians but to the people of Scotland. Therefore, the challenge of leadership is to build a consensus on how the referendum is run. We will not build a consensus on our vision for Scotland, but we can at least build a consensus on how the referendum is run.

If the Scottish Government believes in the principle of 16 and 17-year-olds having a vote in elections, it is curious that they will not be voting in the local government elections that will be held in May. [Interruption.] The Cabinet Secretary for Parliamentary Business and Government Strategy (Bruce Crawford) rose—

I believe that the First Minister should now hold meaningful cross-party talks involving representatives—[Interruption.] On an issue of such seriousness, the idea that it is not possible to suggest that we have consensus without being catcalled down by the leadership is depressing in the extreme. There should be a single question, and I am heartened that the Deputy First Minister agrees with me on that. I was heartened that she agreed with me until Monday evening, when Mr Salmond’s Treasury spokesman at Westminster seemed to contradict her. Imagine that—a Westminster politician contradicting a Holyrood colleague in the same party. We have cross-party consensus for a single-question referendum, and we should confirm that in meaningful talks that include other leaders in civic Scotland. The purpose of the referendum is to decide whether we remain in the United Kingdom, which is why there is a consensus on a single question. We come back to the principle that the vote needs to be free and fair and needs to be seen to be free and fair. That is in all our interests, regardless of which side we are on. The Scottish Labour Party is the party that believes in devolution and which is radical on the constitution, and it would be wrong for the First Minister not just to define his own position but to try to define that of the Opposition as well. As the Scottish National Party argued when it stayed out of the convention, devolution and independence are two profoundly different concepts. I agree. One is not a short measure of the other, and they ought not to be conflated. The people of Scotland ought to have the opportunity to make that critical decision. As I have said, we need clarity. I have asked the First Minister to hold cross-party talks. In particular, I encourage him to understand the importance of the referendum being properly administered. I believe that the Electoral Commission is beyond reproach. Surely no one is attacking its integrity. Why would we need to set up another body? Does the First Minister not understand that people feel suspicious about that decision? We do not understand why the First Minister is putting himself in a position in which it appears that he wants to fix something rather than resolve it. Let us come together on the process, on the timing and on the question, and on that basis we can disagree profoundly on the future. I believe that this is a time when we have a responsibility to ensure that no one can question whether the referendum is fair and free, so that, whatever happens, we can accept the result. We have a responsibility to ensure that future generations will not be able to look back at the referendum and say that it was a grubby fix. We have a responsibility to recognise that the choice that the First Minister is asking our nation to make is bigger than all of us. Let us settle the process quickly so that the nation can debate the principles that are at stake. We should be allowed a chance to act as leaders of our country, and not just as leaders of our parties. I urge the First Minister to build a consensus on the process so that we can have a rigorous, open debate about our choices of futures for Scotland. That will not just give us an opportunity to have a serious debate on the issues but allow certainty when the vote finally comes. We owe it to the people of Scotland. Scotland deserves it. I look forward to the First Minister agreeing that we can work together, along with civic Scotland, to support the way in which the process is done, so that we allow the people to make their choice. I move, That the Parliament recognises that the Scottish Government has a mandate to call a referendum on the constitutional future of Scotland and calls on the First Minister to hold immediate cross-party talks, including with leaders from all quarters of civic Scotland, to agree a timetable for the referendum, to ensure that the referendum provides a clear result on a single question and to ensure that the referendum is run in Scotland by the Electoral Commission so that the people of Scotland can have an early and rigorous debate on the future of Scotland.

The point of my contribution was to suggest that, across Scotland, we could meet, talk and agree a consensus on the best way forward. I have not excluded that proposal, which will naturally be part of that debate. Let us have the talks.

This feels like a double shift—[Interruption.]

You can see that this is a well-oiled machine.

1. To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00390)

We now know that the First Minister’s preference is that the people of Scotland will be asked to decide on Scotland’s constitutional future some time in the autumn in 2014. Nobody can be in any doubt about what a momentous decision that will be for the people of Scotland. What will the First Minister do to ensure that we and all of Scotland will have confidence in the timing, governance and scrutiny of the referendum?

I noted the amendment that the First Minister lodged, and I have to say that I was disturbed by its tone and its prescriptive nature, and by the rejection of the genuinely made offer to come together to build consensus. Last May, the First Minister told the Parliament that, despite the SNP’s majority in the Parliament, he does not have a monopoly of wisdom. Let me humbly offer him some of my wisdom. The fact of the matter is that his being able to drive something through the process does not mean that it is in his or in Scotland’s interests for him to do so. It would not be wise, in my view, for Parliament to go ahead with a referendum process that was underlined by a concern—even if it was a misconception—that it was somehow fixed. He must surely understand that he must dispel the perception that he is acting in the interests of the SNP and not those of Scotland. I repeat my offer from earlier this week and this morning: will the First Minister not just meet party leaders to talk, but work with them to achieve consensus on the way forward for a referendum process that is fair and beyond question?

The difficulty is that the First Minister does not know how to build consensus. As the leader of the Opposition, I ought not to be pleasantly surprised in a fortnight’s time; I ought to be part of the process of shaping the thinking on what the referendum will say. I accept that the First Minister might not put a high price on the wisdom of the Labour Party’s leader, but I reflect on the wisdom of others. On the prospect of a multi-option ballot, Professor Qvortrup told us that “Two questions on a ballot where people are asked to vote on both options is simply not feasible. There is a good chance that you would end up not knowing what people really want.” Those who argue for a change to the devolution settlement want the union to work, whereas the First Minister wants to break it up. Surely he agrees that we need clarity on the result. Instead of resisting the United Kingdom Government’s offer to give legal clarity, surely he should agree with his fellow nationalist Jim Sillars, who said: “If the Scotland Act, as it does, refuses to give Holyrood powers over the constitution it cannot, therefore, lawfully hold a referendum on independence.” Surely the First Minister agrees that we can resolve this without rancour. We should recognise the consensus that has been built and reinforced by his Deputy First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, who said: “The SNP, as it happens, has always said that our preferred option is a straight question, yes or no to independence.” We seem to have agreement on that. We do not need to muddy the waters—all four parties agree that it should be a yes or no question. The First Minister has said that he will consult, but will he listen to and act on what he hears?

The problem with the First Minister is that he offers a false prospectus: he says that the choice is independence or the Tories. Neither of those is something that Scotland particularly wants. The debate has to be conducted in terms that recognise that Scottish Labour has a positive vision for Scotland inside the United Kingdom. I will offer the First Minister some advice. A signal of his recognition that he does not have a monopoly of wisdom would be not simply to find people who agree with him, and welcome the fact that they agree with him; it is to work with people who do not agree with him. That is the challenge to which he must he rise. When the decision is made, depending on the will of the Scottish people, Scotland will separate from, or remain within, the United Kingdom. The day after the referendum, all of us in this chamber—indeed, every Scot—will have a responsibility to unite and to work together to make Scotland the best that it can be, whatever the constitutional arrangement. Will the First Minister accept his responsibility to be a national leader on the calls for us to come together on the process of the referendum, and to ensure that he is not operating simply as a party leader? Will he deliver and play a part in a free and fair referendum that everyone in this country can trust and will accept the day after the vote?

1. May I say how delighted and privileged I am to be here? Before I start, I wish the First Minister and everyone across the chamber and in the Parliament a happy Christmas and a peaceful new year. [Applause.] And now to business. [Laughter.] To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S4F-00368)

Where it is possible for us to work together, I assure the First Minister that we will do that, but it is also our responsibility to oppose and challenge him. It is Christmas, and a time when we are all looking forward to spending time with our children. Certainly, I have seen less of my own recently than I might want to. It is a time that belongs to children but, for some children, there is not much to look forward to—children abandoned and abused by their parents; children like Declan Hainey. What has the First Minister done in response to that tragic case?

I am rather concerned that the First Minister has not already indicated what he is intending to do in response to something that is very serious. We have to ensure that the rhetoric in the chamber reflects the reality of Scottish life. When the First Minister was asked about a similar tragic case—the death of Brandon Muir—he said: “we have the most systematic and strenuous inspection system certainly anywhere in these islands and perhaps anywhere in Europe.”—[Official Report, 25 June 2009; c 18904.] Does the First Minister still believe that that is the case? Does he agree that the reality is that it was not good enough for Brandon Muir or Declan Hainey and that it is not good enough for scores of children whose names may never appear in the papers but who are suffering now?

I want to believe that that system is in place and that our children are safe, but we know that that is not the case. We cannot simply say that there is an inevitability about this. The responsibility of Government in this kind of case is to identify where the challenges are, where the problems are and what we can do to address them. It is not about blaming the workforce; it is about recognising that, for all of us, whatever systems are in place, they are not sufficient. Throughout Scotland, we have social workers who are overburdened, health visitors who are under pressure and the inevitability of children who have been abandoned by their parents being abandoned by a system that is supposed to care. We all know that budget cuts will only get worse, so what is the First Minister going to do in his budget choices to ensure that the most vulnerable children in our country are protected?

Of course, I support that kind of thing, but this child was not in care; that is part of the difficulty. The child was in the family home. The danger is that we have a counsel of despair that there is nothing that Government can do. We all know that, if we work together and are honest, we can get this right, but we cannot afford a gap between what we say we care about—our rhetoric in the chamber—and the reality in Scotland’s homes. There has to be a connection between what we say and how people live, so I am asking the First Minister to have an independent inquiry into how our most vulnerable children are being affected by the budget choices that his Government has made. Surely it is possible, recognising the scale of the challenge, to test our budget choices by their capacity to protect the most vulnerable in our communities.

I am asking the First Minister this question as a mother. There are mothers throughout the country asking the same question. These children are hidden to the system and I am asking the First Minister what he can do. Can we have an independent inquiry into how the child protection system is working? Bits of it will be fantastic, as he says, but there is clearly a huge problem. If we can have an independent inquiry, we can work together to challenge this most awful of circumstances in our communities and make Scotland a better place for our most vulnerable children.

The problem is that when somebody says something offensive at a football match or when watching football on television in the pub, that will be an offence, but it will not be an offence to say the same thing in a community. What message does that give to people?

Will the member take an intervention?

I regret very much the position that we are now in, whereby the Opposition will vote against the bill and it will be voted through by the Government. Willie Coffey, in one of his many puns, talked about opposition being cobbled together. The minister should reflect on the fact that, on an issue that everyone is concerned about, the Opposition parties have come together to express their concern about the bill. It is not good enough to say that that is about wilful opposition. The minister should recognise the significance and the scale of the opposition to the bill, in the Parliament and elsewhere, if she wants to address the issue. I would love to have the luxury of the SNP’s majority. However, the Government must recognise not only the power of that majority, which I am sure that it will use from time to time to implement its programme, but the responsibility of majority to recognise that in certain circumstances it is not good enough for the Government to use its votes to get its way. When the First Minister stepped back in June and said that he wanted to build a consensus, we celebrated and welcomed that. However, we got not a pause to reflect but a period of paralysis. Nothing happened and the bill came back in the same form. We promised that we would not exult when the First Minister stepped back and we welcomed his move. However, I am disappointed that we still have the same bill with little amendment and that the minister has not acknowledged that the concerns that have been expressed are serious. Members across the chamber recognise the preciousness of unity on the issue, because we recognise that disunity gives heart to the most bigoted in our communities. We wanted unity on the issue so much, yet we feel that we cannot come together, unified, on the bill.

It is not worthy of the seriousness of the debate to try to allay people’s concerns by saying that we did not lodge amendments. We made exceptionally clear our willingness to work with the Government. We did not start from the position of opposing this bill, of all bills. I did not want to be in the position that I am now in of opposing the bill, but the fact is that we have reached the view—across the Opposition—that the bill has the potential to make the situation worse rather than better. It is offensive to condition people into believing that, if someone disagrees with the bill, they condone sectarian behaviour. I welcomed Humza Yousaf’s comments about the need for maturity, but I regret the minister’s suggestion that those of us who do not support the bill are in denial about the scale of the problem. It is precisely because we understand the scale of the problem that we will not stand by and allow the bill to go through without raising concerns about it. We have a strategy and a record in government on this question. When we developed a strategy, we consulted on it; in that way, legislative weaknesses can be reflected in the legislative programme. This Government has done things the other way round. It is simply not good enough to have assertion rather than evidence. It is a very simple factual matter that of all the convictions for religiously aggravated offences, only a third of the offences took place at or around football grounds. That is my concern. This is a huge issue in our communities and the bill does not address that question at all. The minister says that people did not engage in careful consideration, and that there was no thoughtful and constructive engagement. We did that, but we simply came to the conclusion that the approach of the legislation would make things worse. We are entitled to say that and we reflect the concerns of people beyond the Parliament. The Government has a majority, but the Parliament takes very seriously the need to listen to the voices outside the Parliament. There are many voices who agree with us, and the Government cannot wish those voices away. If time had been taken in this debate, and if we had reflected seriously on how best to tackle the problem, perhaps we would have dealt with Patrick Harvie’s questions about whether it would have been better to use the legislation about hate crime. I am personally in favour of legislation, on occasion, symbolically signifying what people disagree with. I am also in favour of naming crimes, which is why I supported legislation on stalking. However, such things take time. People in our communities want to engage with the process. It is simply not good enough to say that, of course, legislation will make it better, and that legislation is necessary for the transformation of attitudes. If people are not won over to that position—people who feel that they have been discriminated against, who feel threatened by the legislation, who are unsure whether, when they go into a football ground, or indeed a pub, they will be committing an offence—it is reasonable for this legislature to address those concerns rather than to deny their existence. One of our colleagues said that at least a pub would be a better place to work in as a result of the bill—but only on match day and only if the television is on. If behaviour is unacceptable to someone who is working in that pub, it should be unacceptable, offensive behaviour, full stop. The parliamentary process allows us to tease out the issues that are difficult to address. It is simply not good enough to close down the debate and to say that people are not interested, that they are not reflecting any real concerns and that they are simply being oppositionist for opposition’s sake. The tone of the back-bench speeches was far more constructive than that from the ministers on the front bench. I welcome that. We do not pretend that our action plan is the last word. We want to engage in a debate and a discussion on how these matters can be taken forward. We offer our action plan as a genuine, serious way of making progress and I still extend to the minister the offer of engaging directly on how these points can be addressed through the parliamentary process. While the Government is set on pushing through the legislation, we remain troubled, but we remain united in our concern about sectarianism. Our offer to the minister is genuine. We will vote against the bill but we will continue to engage as actively as we can, with the minister and with committees, on how to tackle the broader scourge of sectarianism and offensive behaviour, which goes far beyond football grounds and far beyond match day. It is very much to our regret that we will vote against the bill, but we continue to be determined to work with people across the Parliament to tackle this grave problem in our communities.

I indicated to the minister that only one third of convictions for religious aggravation relate to offences in or around football stadiums, which means that two thirds of such offences must happen in our communities. The problem must go far beyond football.

Your choices.

I am sure that the minister will recognise the important preventative and deterrent work that is done by the Glasgow domestic abuse court. Given that it has proved to be highly effective, could he give us an update on the planned roll-out of domestic abuse courts across Scotland?

On the recession, I am sure that Christina McKelvie would not want to perpetuate the myth that violence against women occurs in particular communities. Not class, nor occupation, nor income will keep a woman safe from a man who is violent.

I welcome the debate. The useful speeches that have been made across the chamber reflect the unity that exists around the recognition of both the seriousness of the issue and the challenge that it presents. This is an important debate. However, as Dennis Robertson said, we must be wary of appearing to make excuses for men who perpetrate violence against women. Although there is an important debate to be had on the issues around minimum unit pricing, I urge members to be cautious about bringing those into the debate. Violence against women is a problem in countries where there is alcohol and countries where there is no alcohol. In our own communities, there are men who perpetrate violence against women whether or not they drink. Domestic abuse and violence against women have been with us on good days and bad days, in recession and out of recession. We must be careful that we do not create an excuse or an explanation that does not address the key problem. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government, in its own document, does not perpetuate the idea that this is about alcohol. The document does not identify alcohol as an explanation for or a cause of violence by men against women, for a very simple reason.

The fundamental issue is that men have said, over the generations, “It is the drink that does it.” These are men who manage not to pick a fight with anybody in the pub and who are not routinely violent in their workplace or when they are out among their colleagues, but who are violent when they go home. As soon as someone says that it is about the alcohol, they create a different attitude and understanding of what has been going on. As Marco Biagi and others have said, this is about power and inequality, and we have to confront that and deal with it. I assure the member that on this side of the chamber there are people with a long record of raising issues around violence against women. If they believed that minimum unit pricing would sort out the problem, they would have used it to sort it out. I am not arguing that we should not have a debate around the misuse of alcohol, but it would be dangerous and misleading to create the impression in this debate that alcohol is the cause of domestic abuse when it is not even present on many occasions. The issue is dangerous. There are loads of people without very much money who are not violent and who do not have other problems, and there are people with addictions who are not violent. We need to focus on the way in which violence against women permeates the whole of society. I welcome the important point that Marco Biagi made about men speaking out, too. Violence against women should be as unacceptable as racism to men in their working and social lives. The men responsible for forcing women into refuges have somehow not been ostracised as we might hope they would have been. There is an important issue around prevention and challenging attitudes, but as David McLetchie has said, we cannot wait for attitudes to change. It is important that the justice system marks the seriousness of violence against women. It is critically important that we interrogate the figures that David McLetchie presents, because they send out a very worrying message about short sentences. We raised the risk that that strategy would have a disproportionate impact on some of the most vulnerable people and families in our communities, at the very basic level of women being able to get order into their lives, organise themselves and perhaps get the perpetrator excluded from the home. I raised with the minister the issue of domestic abuse courts. I think that the model in Glasgow could easily be used in other cities. I hear what Annabel Goldie said about sheriffs with expertise perhaps going into rural areas, but there needs to be monitoring of the toolkit to make sure that it is being applied. There is also a key role in the Glasgow model for the advice, support, safety and information services together project, which does risk assessment, supports women, takes them through the court system and has an important role in informing the court about disposals. In any model we develop, that approach needs to be encouraged. We know that violence against women does not just involve domestic abuse. It is important that we raise issues around rape, prostitution, trafficking and the way in which young men are in control of some of our communities through their aggression, which also feeds into their homes. We also have to be mindful that women are at risk when they decide to leave. When they have left the home large numbers of women, sadly, end up being murdered by ex-partners. We have to reflect on the impact of that on women who may be making a choice and a decision to leave. Again, the sentencing issue is critical. In the short time that I have left I want to say something about the power of testimony and the role of survivors. Women’s Aid and other organisations have allowed the voices of those who have survived abuse to speak out and to shape policy. We must hold on to that approach. During the recent elections, I had the privilege of attending a hustings organised by voice against violence—an organisation of young people who describe their experience in a moving, powerful and challenging way and who demand that Government acts on their behalf. I hope that that powerful testimony is being used to shape current Government thinking. I would welcome the minister’s comments on whether funding is continuing for the children experiencing domestic abuse recovery project. I know that further funding was given, but I would welcome his comments on where it has gone. The challenge for us is how we deliver. I want to make one point about preventative spending and intervention. As a teacher in a school, I worked to challenge attitudes, which is critically important for all our young people—both boys and girls. However, school is often a place where someone can intervene and where youngsters who are experiencing domestic abuse can describe that experience and be supported. In any budget approach that we take there needs to be an equality impact assessment that can protect critical intervention funding for young people. I have still got in my head the faces of those youngsters who needed help and support; it is not just about messages but about intervening to support such youngsters directly. We all know the importance of vision in this area, but we also know that vision without action is daydreaming. I think that members across the chamber recognise the Government’s critical heavy-lifting role in working with women’s organisations so that we act to protect women and their children and ensure that the justice system protects them and keeps them safe and challenges the perpetrators. I think that we all share the determination that the Parliament, with its powers, can make a difference to the lives of individual women and children and, in the longer term, put out the very strong message that we want a different kind of Scotland—one that is free of that kind of violence—and that we want women’s equality, which would make that possible.

Will that domestic abuse pilot include the advice, support, safety and information services together project that goes along with the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, which is critical in assessing risk for women and informing the court?

John Mason says that money is not everything. Does he think that it assists Glasgow’s colleges, which serve young people who are looking for work, to cut their funding by 20 per cent?

5. To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government will ensure that proper security checks and policing are in place at ports. (S4F-00295)

The First Minister will be aware, as we have heard, that the Stena Line ferry service to Belfast has moved from Stranraer to the newly developed port at Cairnryan. Is he aware of the on-going local concerns about security, given the double whammy of the United Kingdom Government’s decision to axe funding for ports police officers and last year’s decision by the Scottish Government to axe 11 police officer posts, which could be followed by more? I expect that he will have discussed the matter with the UK Government, but what steps is he taking in the interests of this country’s security to ensure that his Cabinet Secretary for Justice makes good the cuts that he authorised to police control at the ports?

That is slightly longer than I expected. This is an important issue. It is about community safety, confidence in the justice system and securing justice for victims of crime. I am sure that members recognise the importance of an effective justice system, public safety and public confidence. For the avoidance of doubt, I confirm that Labour is not opposing for the sake of opposition and that we are not insulting police staff, or police officers or those in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service who do an important job in serving the public. We acknowledge the important job that they do in difficult circumstances. We are not being negative or partisan; we are doing our job as the Opposition, which is to bring up the concerns that are raised with us about what is happening in our communities and to urge the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to do his job and to pay attention to and address those concerns and the gaps that seem to be emerging in the quality of the service. The motion mentions concerns that there are 428 fewer police support staff and that unmarked cases in the COPFS have recently doubled. I was struck by two things about the cabinet secretary’s amendment. First, it reflects the continuing notion that 2007 was year zero and that nothing was done before 2007 to address those concerns or to improve the quality of service. Secondly, the amendment reflects a sense of complacency about what is happening in the justice system and the police service. When the cabinet secretary considers what is happening in his area of responsibility, he needs to listen to more than just the people who agree with him. There are concerns among police staff and staff in the COPFS about the quality of the service that they are able to deliver. I want to cover issues to do with the COPFS and the impact of cuts on police staff, in relation to both the pressure on staff to do their jobs as effectively as possible and the impact on the service then provided. Those issues are critical. We know that there is a real-terms cut in the COPFS budget but the only area in which it has been identified that spending will fall is staff costs, which will have an impact on the service and on those who remain within it. The key issue is what the price of such a cut will be. Will there be a redistribution of the workload to other staff? Will that increase the pressure and stress that has already been identified?

This will be a dialogue of the deaf if the only way in which we can engage in a serious discussion about the choices that the Government is making and the consequences of those choices is if I am able to produce an alternative budget. That is an entirely unacceptable approach by the Government, which must take responsibility for what it is doing and for the budget choices that it is making. People have concerns about what they are expected to do. In October 2011, there were nearly 14,000 unmarked cases—52 per cent higher than at the same time in 2010. The cabinet secretary needs to explain why that is the case; if he does not know why that is the case he needs to show that he is addressing those concerns.

Lord Hamilton reported to the Justice Committee that there were 100 fewer staff; the cabinet secretary may wish to investigate those figures. The cabinet secretary needs to explain why the number of unmarked cases has changed as indicated. He cannot simply deny them away. There may be an explanation, but we need to know what it is. There are reports of planned closures of courts, which would impact on jobs and local economies. The cabinet secretary needs to address those reports, too. It is simply not good enough to assert that everything is fine if people who are working in the services say something entirely different. That is an issue for the cabinet secretary to address. It is not about finessing numbers or explaining away: it is about investigating the concerns and addressing them. The gap between the ministerial view of the world and life in our local communities is also highlighted by the situation of the police and police staff. It was a key strand of policy and delivery in the Labour-led Scottish Executive to civilianise significant elements of police work, thereby releasing police officers from roles that diverted them from the front line and seeking to increase efficiency. Now there are grave concerns that, as one police staff member said to me, we are seeing the decivilianising of the police in a shift that is ineffective, inefficient and illogical at a time of financial pressures. We are potentially taking police officers away from addressing community safety so that they can backfill posts. That is expensive and wasteful, when we know that they should be out detecting crime and giving the public confidence. We simply ask the cabinet secretary to investigate that and have an audit of what roles the police are undertaking. It is just as critical that we recognise that, in losing police staff, we are not simply losing key administrative staff but losing highly trained staff whose jobs are more than simply admin, whether it is football banning order managers, intelligence analysts, resource managers, citations officers, scenes of crime officers, fingerprint experts, financial analysts or computer investigation and security officers, whose jobs are of course critical in relation to internet offences.

If you let me press on for a minute. All those jobs are critical to delivering a high-quality police service. If those are going, it will undermine the capacity of the police to detect, identify and act against criminality in our communities. I ask the cabinet secretary to recognise that there are concerns that, if posts are going, those kinds of high-quality jobs that deliver a service may go too, with the consequence that the whole service is reduced. It is evident from the jobs that I listed that police support staff perform a wide range of complex and specialist functions that are central to a modern-day police force and are key in ensuring that officers spend the maximum amount of time out on the beat and not stuck behind a desk. There are reports that some chief constables are concerned about having to make irrational staffing decisions in order that the cabinet secretary can say simply that 1,000 extra police officers are on the beat. There are 1,000 extra police officers, but are they all on the beat? Has the cabinet secretary clarified that that is what they are doing? Are we making the most logical, rational decisions that can be made about our police service?

I am not suggesting that. I am suggesting that the cabinet secretary does his job. The job is not simply to take the credit because there are 1,000 extra police on the beat and deny any responsibility for what is happening on the ground in relation to those services. If the police are having to make choices to get rid of police staff because they are unable to address the question that the cabinet secretary has raised of police numbers, then there is a problem. The issue is about rational investment in our police services and in our prosecution service so that we address the needs of victims of crime and the capacity of police to identify crime.

No. There is no point in having huge numbers of police out on the beat if, when their reports go back, they are not pursued and progressed in a timely manner so that they end up in court. The current situation is irrational and illogical and a matter for the cabinet secretary himself to address. We recognise, as everyone does, that there are tough choices to be made. We want the cabinet secretary to take responsibility for the choices that he makes and to engage with those who are concerned, even if that is an unintended consequence of his position. We need a substantial, honest debate. In particular, I urge the cabinet secretary to investigate what the police officers are doing. If they are backfilling posts, what are the consequences? If high-quality police staff jobs are going, what impact is that having? On the prosecution service, I urge him to ensure that justice is not being denied because of time barring or high levels of unmarked cases. I am sure that, if nothing else, we can agree that an efficient, effective system of policing and prosecution is in the interests of the victims of crime and the communities that we serve. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern that the Scottish Policing Performance Framework Annual Report 2010-11 shows that the number of police support staff fell by 428 in the last year and that violent crime increased by 2% during the same period; believes that cuts in the number of support staff lead to police officers being taken off the beat to fill civilian posts; further notes that the number of unmarked cases with procurators fiscal doubled to 14,000 in the six months to October and that many of these cases were more than four weeks old; considers that such delays in the processing of offences undermine public confidence in the justice system, and believes that both reductions in police support staff and backlogs in the marking of cases put public safety at risk.

Does the member agree that a lot of the money from the proceeds of crime is harvested from particularly poor communities and that it should be directed back into those communities? Some communities are concerned that, while they have suffered and there has been a conviction of, for example, an illegal moneylender, the money is distributed across the country rather than being directed to the needs of those specific communities.

Does the member agree that he should urge his minister simply to investigate the claims that police officers are coming off the beat and backfilling staff posts and that we are losing quality police staff because of cuts? Surely he must agree that it would be a concern if that were the case. Does he agree that there should simply be an investigation and an audit to clarify whether that is happening?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that we are raising concerns on behalf of police staff in Scotland? We are speaking up for police staff and for staff in the Crown Office. Why does the cabinet secretary want to create a different argument, rather than address the problems that have been raised with him?

I want to raise an issue as MSP for Glasgow Pollok. Excellent housing associations and housing co-operatives serve my community. I am dismayed at the decision of the First Minister’s Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to cut £112 million out of Glasgow’s housing development budget in the next three years. That is a catastrophic decision that will have a huge impact on the ability to create housing and a massive impact on the local economy because of the lack of jobs in construction. I urge the First Minister to tackle the issue urgently. It is essential that we have a housing policy that meets the needs of, and affords economic opportunities to, the people of Glasgow. The decision flies in the face of the needs of Glasgow, and I urge the First Minister to change it as soon as possible.

Will the minister give way?

The minister talked earlier about the importance of common purpose. It would help the debate if she would at least acknowledge that those who are expressing concerns about the bill in the chamber or elsewhere are not doing so because they do not want to address sectarianism. Impugning the motives of those who do not agree with her solution does not take us one step forward. I urge the minister, in the interest of consensus, to recognise that those who do not agree with her solution are not people who do not want to address the problem.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member said that 91 per cent of the public support action on sectarianism. Does he agree that 100 per cent of people in the chamber want to address the problem of sectarianism, particularly those of us who are close friends of Trish Godman, who had to deal with the problem that he mentioned? Does he accept that, in order to progress, we should start with the basic principle that everybody here wants to tackle the problem but some are not convinced that the bill is the way to do it?

Will the member take an intervention?

I say genuinely that I come to the debate more in sorrow than in anger. We have had an allegation that somehow we are opposing the bill for opposition’s sake. First, the Government should note that the amendment is supported by the Opposition parties across the board. It should also note that Labour members have worked hard to be as co-operative as possible because we recognised the seriousness of the issue. As I said in June, I learned a lesson from the previous election. Where we can work with the Government, we will. That does not mean that we will suspend our critical faculties; nor does it mean that everything that we say that calls the Government to account is opposition for opposition’s sake. If there is a lesson from the debate, it is not just a lesson for the Opposition. It is a lesson for the Government that when people say serious things about serious issues, the Government ought not to try to close down the debate on the basis that it is opposition for opposition’s sake. If we are having to open our minds to new ideas, I urge the Government to do the same. I promised in June that if there was a pause I would not celebrate or describe it as a U-turn. I said that I would welcome it. If, even at this late stage, the Government says, “We hear you and we understand your concerns. We will step back and work with you to consider legislative and other measures that will address the problem”, I will not celebrate. I will welcome it and I will congratulate a mature Opposition, working with a mature Government. That option remains open to the Government. I urge the Government to take it. Why would anyone in the chamber—someone who represents my city, whose constituents suffer from sectarianism—oppose something just for the sake of it?

Will the member say that again?

I have never in my life been scared to take action, but I want to take action that will make a difference. We raised concerns. The charities raised concerns. The churches raised concerns. I am particularly troubled by comments made to me by the Church of Scotland that if the legislation is derided, it will give succour to those who do not want to take any action on the issue. There is an issue about giving a signal. I agree that that is sometimes what legislation is for, but if this legislation is not effective, the signal will be, “These people can continue as they did before.” We do not want to make a bad situation worse. We were offered a pause but what we got was a freeze, with no negotiation, discussion or clarity about how things could be changed. Sectarianism is not just about football, and concerns about football are not just about sectarianism. At this week’s Health and Sport Committee, Harry Burns gave startling evidence that neurosurgeons were identifying to him an increased incidence of head injuries among children—and repeat admissions for head injuries—around the time of football matches. The fear and alarm of a child facing violence in their family home may not be audible on Sky Sports, but it is as much of a scandal as any other issue that we need to address. A member at the back of the chamber said that the bill does not seek to solve all social ills. We recognise that football is a vehicle and that sectarianism and its manifestations turn up elsewhere. We know that an early analysis of section 74 statistics suggested that less than 20 per cent of offences are football related. We need to think about what happens in our communities. We need to tackle the offence. If we cannot define an offence, we cannot expect a police officer to decide what would cause offence to a reasonable person—never mind in Spain, where that challenge will also apply under the bill. For example, if a person is in the pub and is abusing someone with vile sectarian language, that is an offence if the football is on. If the television is broken and that person says the same thing, it is not an offence. What signal does that give? It does not make sense. The Government has said that it does not want to identify other issues. If the minister will listen, I suggest a four-year programme of action with the three themes of education, intervention and rehabilitation. I suggest a programme of grass-roots intervention, education and anti-sectarian measures that can be firmly embedded in the curriculum. Lots of things can be done, but one critical thing is this: we need to make this generation the one that defeats sectarianism. That must start in our schools—if that is the programme of government, we will support it. Even at this stage, I urge the Government to believe us when we say that we want to tackle the problem with the Government. We want to work with our young people so that the next generation will not suffer in the way that this one does.

Will the Presiding Officers reflect on the fact that, in this case, it is not only that it appears that the Parliament was misinformed, but that somebody’s views were misrepresented, and that person is not in a position to make sure that the record is changed. I think that that is another issue that we would want you to consider.

Does the cabinet secretary think that the public might prefer him not to go on in great detail about the issue but instead address the key issue for the justice system, which is the clogging up of cases in the prosecution service and the undermining of people’s confidence in the system?

I can see how cheery everybody is at that prospect, yet again. I am beginning to take it personally. I thank Lord McCluskey and his team for their report. I recognise that it is an important contribution to a broader debate about the justice system. I was struck by the history lesson on Scots law that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice gave us in his opening speech, and by his comments on the critical duty that we have to defend the integrity of Scots law. It is a concern that we can shift from having pride in the development of the legal system over time to reflecting an instinctive chauvinism for anything that happens to be Scottish—the idea that, because something is Scottish, it must be good. The reality is that the legal system, like many other things, is a living thing that is shaped by people’s experiences over a long time. It is not our job simply to preserve everything as it is and ever was, but that is a way of sustaining that system of justice. The reality is that, historically, we cannot be complacent about ordinary Scottish people’s experience of the judicial system, which will have changed over time directly because of that experience. Historically, people have experienced a system that was not fair. It did not offer access and it was not perfect. If the cabinet secretary starts from a position that it is as it is and will ever be thus—that is, perfect—we will not be able to respond to the concerns of individuals in our communities.

I will just make this point. I reflect on Maureen Watt’s concerns about individual judgments. I share her concerns, and I have shared the anguish of individual constituents who are simply bewildered by the decisions that the courts make. However, that applies at every level of the court system; it is not unique to the Supreme Court. It is a challenge for all of us to sustain the independence of the judicial system while we understand that people feel frustrated by individual findings in individual courts. We have to work through that and give people confidence, but the issue is not particular to the Supreme Court, so it should not be considered in those terms. To use Stewart Maxwell’s favourite word, I was “astonished” by the way in which the cabinet secretary responded to my intervention about the extent to which the issue, no matter how important it is, reflects the priorities of the people whom we represent. It is not in any way to diminish the work of the legal experts who produced the report to say that we should urgently address the concerns about the chaos in the prosecution service. It would be good to find the Cabinet Secretary for Justice as exercised by those concerns as he has been by his particular interpretation of what is happening in the Supreme Court. In order to resolve his concern about my intervention, perhaps he will agree to make an urgent statement to the Parliament next week on the serious implications of what is happening in what is a very stretched service, and the implications for access to justice and people’s confidence in the justice system. I will welcome his contribution if he commits himself to making that statement. I respect the senior judges and others who have contributed to the debate, but I would take the cabinet secretary’s scolding—he returned to it three times—a little easier if it was not delivered by a Cabinet Secretary for Justice who has abused Scots justice, berated “ambulance-chasing” lawyers and threatened to withhold money from the courts. In welcoming Lord McCluskey to listen to this afternoon’s debate, I wonder whether he might be rather surprised by the way in which his report is being spun by the cabinet secretary and, indeed, by the First Minister. The reality is that the report rebuts the Scottish Government’s central contention when the issue was first raised—that the Supreme Court should not have a role in human rights cases and that it should not be higher than the apex of the current court system.

We have said that all of Lord McCluskey’s recommendations should be interrogated closely and debated. I do not see why we need to jump to proposing that the issue be dealt with immediately in the Scotland Bill, particularly given that learned people in the legal profession do not speak with a unified voice on this issue. Obviously, everyone agrees with the independence of the Scottish justice system. However, Lord McCluskey does not say that that independence has been undermined. Indeed, Lord Hope ignored the court’s apex structure in the Fraser case and recognised that he did not have general jurisdiction. It is important that any assertion that the justice system’s independence has been undermined does not become fact. If there is any evidence that that is the case, the cabinet secretary should tell us which of the accepted canons of Scots law have been overturned to justify the statement that the system’s independence has been undermined. Even his own report did not find that. It is also clear that Lord McCluskey’s report does not endorse the argument—which I acknowledge has not been marshalled today, although it has been in the past—that it would be better to have a Scottish supreme court or to have people lingering in the courts of Strasbourg waiting for decisions that it would be for them to go to London. It was all about geography rather than the rights of the person who is seeking vindication. Surely the important test is to have efficient access to justice and an effective justice system for Scottish citizens and communities. We acknowledge that there is an interesting and important debate to be had about certification, but we should also point out that the view that is set out in the McCluskey report does not reflect the views of the whole legal establishment. It is nonsense to say that there is a unified view on the matter, so we will want to be persuaded, on the balance of the arguments, of what the best approach might be. I have to say that the cabinet secretary’s approach to this particular aspect reflects his approach to the whole matter. When he says to me, in his most reverential tone, that we must respect the views of a serious and senior legal figure when he argues for certification, what he actually means is that we should listen to senior legal voices if they agree with him. That is simply unacceptable.

I believe that the cabinet secretary berated me for not taking the issue seriously. He might want to have a word with his own back bencher in that regard. As far as certification is concerned, we need to understand whether it might have any unintended consequences that have not been thought through and we need to realise that there are complexities to deal with. I certainly feel that the cabinet secretary has gleefully picked on this particular issue because it gives him threadbare vindication for his and the First Minister’s entirely inappropriate and disproportionate behaviour in the past. Having caused a huge fuss, they have had to search manfully through the report to find some issue that they can hold up and say must be considered. I agree that the issue should be debated, but it does not merit the diatribe to which the legal profession and others were subjected. The cabinet secretary says that we need to reflect on and listen to what those in the legal profession who understand these things have to say, but he must understand how appalled those people were by the tone that he and the First Minister adopted. Their comments were not worthy of back benchers, never mind people in the offices that they hold. We welcome the report and any debate that gives us an opportunity to think about how we can have a justice system that people have confidence in and which gives them access to justice. As I have said, we all know that the courts make decisions that people find bewildering, but there is no suggestion that Supreme Court decisions are not rooted in interpretation of the ECHR. There is a bigger challenge for all of us: it is to ensure that we have a justice system that is properly resourced and in which people know they can get a fair hearing and know that those who disrupt their communities and create victims are held to account. That is the bigger debate that we should be having, rather than one that is predicated on the false premise of an attack on the independence of the judicial system that is merited neither by what is happening nor by the findings of Lord McCluskey.

Is the First Minister aware of the report in yesterday’s Evening Times highlighting the circumstances around a recent rape trial in which a woman who had reported that she had been raped expressed her distress at the way in which she was treated during the trial? That included—astonishingly—the woman being asked to hold up her underwear in court, which she described as humiliating and degrading treatment? Does the First Minister think that such cross-examination is acceptable? Will he as a matter of urgency instruct his Cabinet Secretary for Justice to review the sexual offences legislation that was meant to protect victims from inappropriate and aggressive interrogation in court in order to ensure that fear of the court process does not prevent victims from making a complaint in the first place? Will he tackle the reason why rape convictions remain so scandalously low?

Does the First Minister accept that Lord McCluskey’s review group confirmed that “the Supreme Court should continue to have an appellate jurisdiction in relation to issues of Convention rights arising in Scottish criminal cases”? That is precisely the point that led to the First Minister’s and Mr MacAskill’s rather intemperate attacks on the court and the legal profession. Does the First Minister also accept that the review rebuts his view that it would be better for people to wait years to be heard in Strasbourg than to be heard in London? Given that the review group has disagreed with him on those matters, will the First Minister indicate how he plans to rebuild the relationship between the Government and the judicial system? I am sure that he recognises that that relationship is critical to giving people confidence in the Government and the justice system.

In the elections in May this year we saw many changes and most of them were unpalatable to people on this side of the chamber, but there was at least one little change that gave me cheer on being re-elected: it was the extending of my new constituency into Govan to include for the first time the Govan shipyards—that is a matter of great pride to me. I shall be brief, as I realise that there are still many people who want to contribute to the debate, but I emphasise that this is not just about celebrating a little bit of history and is not just some romantic nostalgia; we are marking the foresight, determination and solidarity of the workforce in the UCS work-in. We are recognising the way in which their inspirational and moral case was prosecuted, drawing support within my city of Glasgow, throughout Scotland and across the United Kingdom and beyond; support that was shaped by an understanding of the injustice and economic vandalism that was being pursued against skilled working people. That campaign is a strong memory from my teenage years and, like the Lee Jeans campaign in the early 1980s, it provided a spark of light in dark times. Those campaigns threw up leaders, heroes and heroines, men and women who stepped up to the mark and drove to success, and we celebrate them. However, we also know that it was about not just those who became household names but the strength of workmates, their fellow trade unionists and their families and communities, who created the power to shift apparently unmoveable obstacles and stopped the Tories in their tracks. There is an essential truth here: although individuals can make the case, can represent, can agitate and can give eloquent voice to the demands of the many, it is movements—the labour and trade union movement, the women’s movement and the co-operative movement, among others—that deliver change over time. We salute all of those who came together in a common endeavour, demanding the same things that the STUC, the unions and our communities are still demanding today: a strong economy, yes, but also a shared prosperity created by Government action and support. In marking this anniversary, we reflect on the history and are proud of it. However, critically, we celebrate the legacy—the skilled jobs still in Govan now, and high-quality jobs in engineering and shipbuilding in the Govan of the future, supporting and sustaining that community and beyond. We remember the soaring speeches, but it is the legacy for which we owe the UCS workers our heartfelt thanks. Again now we hear the Tories with their certainty—that if it isn’t hurting, it isn’t working. In these tough times, we should reflect on the fact that those with power will be judged not on the speeches that they make on the economy, but on the choices that they make, on the actions that they take, and on whether what they do makes a difference to the lives of our young people and future generations. We salute the workers of the UCS for what they did, for the pride with which they did it, and—centrally—for the legacy that they left behind.

I was going to ask how long I had, but I worry that people might say “Too long” so I will not encourage that refrain.

I can see people sitting up in their seats in anticipation at the very thought of it. I am referring not only to colleagues opposite, but to those behind, who have heard me speak and will be rather concerned about the Presiding Officer’s generosity. However, I shall begin. It is not the job of the Government to build up the self-esteem of Opposition members, but I want to say to Annabelle Ewing, who accused the Opposition of negativity, that there is a difference between being negative and disagreeing. We recognise that the SNP won the election, but it did not win the right to silence us when we do not agree with what its members say. I am all for positivity—it is the very air that I breathe. Kevin Stewart said that some people do not share his positive vision for Scotland, the implication being that we do not have a positive vision. I have a positive vision for Scotland within the United Kingdom, which my colleagues share; it is simply different from Kevin Stewart’s vision and that, in itself, does not make it wrong. Regarding the legislative programme, I agree that one does not test the quality of a Government by the number of bills that it produces. I agree that we do not have to be always exceptionally busy with legislation, but the bills that are laid out in the legislative programme reflect the Government’s priorities. We know that it is a priority of this Government to create an independent and separate Scotland, so it is inexplicable that the referendum bill, which is prepped, consulted on, discussed and ready to go, is not part of the programme. We were going to have the bill in January 2010 and we were going to vote on it in November 2010. The Government has been given a majority that it could not have dreamed of when it drew up its manifesto, which cautiously said that the referendum bill would be introduced in the second half of the Government’s term, so the Government can—if it wishes—bring it on. I am disturbed not by the Government separating off and not dealing with the bill, but by the fact that, while the bill is not introduced, the Government’s every action will be informed by its need to prove the value of independence. I would be concerned if the Government was not introducing the bill because it feared the Scottish people’s verdict. I urge the need for post-legislative scrutiny, if the absence of too many bills provides the opportunity to consider the legislation that is in place. I will highlight housing. There is evidence that some housing legislation on which we agreed across the Parliament has had unintended consequences, including people having to make themselves homeless inappropriately because of a lack of supply and local authorities and housing providers being told that they cannot define sensitive lets to protect housing for older people or being prevented from addressing issues with private landlords and antisocial behaviour. I hope that the Government will consider that. It is difficult to capture the essence and joy of the range of speeches that we have heard in the past day and a half. The cabinet secretary and I probably do not have many views in common, but we both deserve a good attendance award for being in the chamber from the beginning to the end of the debate. I urge individual ministers to reflect on and respond to the range of points that has been made to them, as it is impossible for us to reflect all those points in the remaining time. The First Minister was right to start with the economy, and so shall I. We share his concern about the UK Government’s approach, which is to cut too fast and too deep. However, I urge the SNP to resist the temptation to blame the previous Labour Government for everything that happened in relation to the global recession. It might be tempting in party-political terms to make the case that John Mason presented, but the difficulty is that to argue that the Labour Government caused everything is to collude with the idea that the problem was caused by too much public spending and that the consequent solution must be public expenditure cuts. That is a dangerous road to take for those who oppose the coalition Government. John Mason yesterday misrepresented his leader’s position before the crisis. As we all know—although John Mason appears not to know—Alex Salmond believed pre-crisis that bank regulation was gold plated and that an independent Scotland would have lighter-touch regulation. As the Royal Bank of Scotland went its mad way towards the brink of ruin, when it tried to buy ABN AMRO, not only did the First Minister not caution the bank to be a little less reckless, but he wrote to it to say, “Fantastic idea—let me know how I can help you with that purchase.” With the benefit of hindsight, we can all see the crisis coming and blame others, but those of us who oppose what the coalition is doing in the UK need to understand that saving the banks and Scottish jobs, as much as saving jobs across the rest of the UK, has led us to the current position. The First Minister spoke about growth. He said that we needed “to create the conditions that encourage growth. With growth comes work and with work come security and confidence.”—[Official Report, 7 September 2011; c 1369.] Of course, it is not as simple as that. It is essential that ministers understand that creating growth does not inevitably bring with it jobs, security and confidence—achieving that is the Government’s job. In the same way as the recession impacts on some more than others, unemployment rates—particularly among the young—are much higher in constituencies such as mine than in other places in Scotland. This week, evidence has shown that the recession is disproportionately impacting on women. It is essential that the Government’s economic and social strategy tackles that unevenness and disadvantage. I urge the Government to recognise that what is required will not happen on its own or trickle down—it will require the Government to act. The First Minister said that a policy of no compulsory redundancies creates security, but the problem is that that statement contradicts directly the experience of far too many working people across our communities. People who deliver public services are losing their jobs. For many people who deliver public services in the voluntary and charitable sector, the threat of job losses is shaping the renegotiation of their terms and conditions. In some cases, that is leading to some of the lowest-paid workers in the country who are doing some of the most important jobs having their wages cut by 23 per cent. Quarriers has highlighted the issue, but it is not happening only in Quarriers. That is a matter for the Scottish Government because it involves public money delivering public services. Public money can create economic opportunity if the appropriate conditions are introduced. We can protect the quality of services and the workers who deliver them, which is why a procurement bill is so important, as it would set conditions for access to the public money that we spend and we could therefore have a living wage in the public and voluntary sectors. At present, the opposite is happening: charitable organisations are cutting wages as a consequence of the contracts that are being let. Local authorities tell us that contracts are being let in that way because of the lack of funding. We cannot wish the situation away, because people are living with it. If that means that we need to consider how we fund local government, we must do so. We do not have a local income tax. Will we simply let council tax wither on the vine, or can we use our collective efforts to deliver local authority funding? We cannot step back in the way that is happening now. We know the importance of quality care and that it will be delivered if we treat care workers fairly. We are not all in this together when we have a compulsory redundancy policy that denies that people are having their salaries and wages cut in that way. On education, too, we cannot step back from the reality of what is happening in our schools—to my children and to others. The squeeze on resources—on jotters, books and staffing—has a drip, drip impact. Saying that Scottish education is wonderful is not a substitute for protecting the quality of learning. The minister must pay close attention because, as resources are squeezed, although some families have the capacity to fill the gap, opportunities are reduced for the most disadvantaged. While we step in and fund our children’s folders and books, those who do not have that access will be denied their opportunity. We understand that, if education concentrates on the core, those who most need special interventions—whether they be children with special needs or disabilities, or vulnerable children who are not parented at home—will be denied access to education. The things that get them to school in the first place must be funded, too. The First Minister said yesterday that higher education should be about “the ability to succeed rather than the ability to pay.”—[Official Report, 7 September 2011; c 1372.] Who could deny that? However, it is complacent to say that that has always been the principle of Scottish higher education. Historically, there was an issue of access. When I went to university—a million years ago, I admit—only 5 per cent of the university population came from a background such as mine. If the squeeze on higher education funding results in the reduction of places or steps back from the increased access to higher education, we need to consider the policy.

The member has no idea how depressing that intervention is. I am trying to make the simple point that, if the Government has a headline policy that it believes in free education but the consequence of its funding choices is a reduction in access for some of the poorest and most disadvantaged in our communities, it needs to examine the policy. We all need to examine it. We must have a plan B. We cannot have a policy that sounds good but which has serious consequences. That is the business of government. I do not know all the answers, but we need to at least ask the questions. If there is a reduction in access, the minister will need to have a plan B. On Scottish studies, I ask the Government to think more carefully about the reality in our schools, colleges and universities. I understand why those who believe that Scotland is a colonial outpost of empire, that it has been consistently oppressed by its English partners or that it has, as the First Minister has said in the past, suffered from the “benign diktat” of Westminster claim that we have been denied an understanding of our own history and culture. That makes sense for someone who takes that perspective. The problem, however, is that it is simply not true. Forty years ago, when I was a lot younger than I am now, a fantastic history teacher at my school taught me about the clearances. It was a seminal moment for me, because it chimed with my understanding of my own family. I learned what Scottish landowners were willing to do to the people who worked the land and it has shaped my thinking since then. Indeed, the whole land question comes out of that. We were taught about the Edinburgh new town; we were taught about the role of Scotland in empire; we were taught our history. It is also true that, at a time when—allegedly—we were being denied our culture, I learned to love Iain Crichton Smith, MacCaig and others. As a teacher, I taught Edwin Morgan, who, as members must recognise, is a significant voice in Scottish culture. I could teach Scottish culture and learn about Scottish history; these things did not happen in a silo. I also learned about Scottish movements. For example, I understood the connection between the experience of ship workers in Glasgow and those south of the border. That is our history. As a woman, I have always denied and fought against “the great men of history” approach—which, I have to say, has not actually been around for all that long—and there ought not to be a substitute “great Scots” approach to the world. We learn about all our cultures and the diversity even within the Gaelic culture, which should be celebrated not denied.

I did not actually say that. All I said was that the SNP’s premise that we are not taught about Scottish history or culture is simply not true. I have not talked about public sector reform, which we support. We must look at efficiency and ensure that we protect local services. As for justice, we must ensure that victims are at the centre of our commitments and decisions. Where we agree with this Government, we will do so. We want to contribute positively. However, people should listen to what Christine Grahame said yesterday. The Parliament must ensure that everything is scrutinised. I will not agree with all the conclusions that Parliament comes to, but if there is openness and if people can consider the issues with open minds, this legislative programme will make a difference to the lives of people in this country.

In all seriousness, I was saying that if the current policy leads to such a funding gap that we see courses closing and improvements in access reversing, the Government will need to look at it again. I do not want to have to look at it—and it may be that there is not such a funding gap—but I am troubled that the Government might end up with a headline position but deny what is happening underneath it. Those of us who care deeply about access to education for young people, particularly disadvantaged young people, believe that that needs to be addressed.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

On a positive note, the cabinet secretary knows that the Parliament has already made the decision to have a social responsibility levy. When will that be enacted to allow local authorities the funding to support families that are suffering from alcohol abuse?

The cabinet secretary indicated that the last reorganisation pre-dated mobile phones. Sadly, although we now live in a mobile phone world, I am incapable of working out how to switch my phone off, so I apologise for what looked like discourtesy in dashing from the chamber—it was, in fact, simply idiocy, for which I apologise to the chamber. I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement and welcome the fact that he has now confirmed what his planned approach is. I am sure that he will acknowledge that Labour’s position has been to argue strongly in favour of single police and fire services. I therefore think that we must be concerned about the continuing level of uncertainty and anxiety among the broader public, which was revealed in a poll that was published yesterday. It showed that, at this stage, a majority are against the proposal, although, curiously, Liberal Democrat voters are less hostile to it than any other voters—I am not sure where that takes us. I mention that because I want to stress to the cabinet secretary the importance of telling us not only what he will do but how it will be done. If I have a regret about his statement, it is that that detail is lacking, because we need detail on how he proposes to manage services during the transition period and how we will keep people safe under the new structures. In particular, what is the timescale for the establishment of these services? Will the cabinet secretary identify in more detail—I think that this goes beyond officer level—how local accountability and community responsiveness can be developed? In the light of the information in the draft business case, which has concerned the FBU in particular, that there are cuts of £35 million in the budget for firefighters, will he confirm that front-line police and firefighter numbers will be sustained at current levels? If so, how will that be funded?

Will the member be willing to work with members across the Parliament if it is established that police boards will lose civilian staff and back-office roles will be filled by police officers, who will not be doing the job that they are supposed to do? Does he acknowledge that the unions are concerned about the issue? Will he work with other people to establish what is fact and reality and to ensure that what people are concerned about does not happen?

Will the member give way?

Will the member now support the enactment of the social responsibility levy, which would raise funds that could be directed towards programmes to support families and communities that suffer from the blight of alcohol abuse? Can that be done now?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Jean Urquhart consider housing associations and housing co-operatives to be private sector housing providers?

Given that the cabinet secretary said that we have a commitment to human rights, does he agree that having those rights enforced through the Supreme Court is more accessible than having to wait to be heard at Strasbourg?

I associate my party with the cabinet secretary’s comments on the sad death of Lord Rodger and recognise the significant contribution that he made to Scottish public life. We send our condolences to his family at this sad time. I am happy to contribute to the debate. The role of the Supreme Court is a complex one. The interim report of the review by Lord McCluskey and his colleagues is an interesting and valuable contribution to our understanding of the issues involved. I do not pretend to be a legal expert on those issues, and I recognise that those with expertise in and experience of our judicial system and Scots law are engaged in significant debate about the role of the Supreme Court. It is evident that, in the next period, as Lord McCluskey moves towards a fuller report, there will be disagreement and debate about the group’s conclusions. Perhaps it is unfortunate that the interim report has been constrained in its access to information simply by a timetable imposed by the Scottish Government. The issue of the need for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court requires further consideration, but we should be alive to the fact that that change is not universally accepted. There are those who would not agree that this is an issue of parity. However, it will be important to reflect on the effect and impact of such a change and to understand what its consequences might be. What we should be able to agree on today is that this report by the First Minister’s group, led by Lord McCluskey, is a rebuttal of the stance of the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. If members recall, the First Minister and the cabinet secretary argued that there should be no role for the Supreme Court in Scotland’s judicial system—not when we get independence but now. There was an argument that the Supreme Court was somehow predatory upon the Scottish courts, that the Supreme Court routinely sought to interfere and that Scottish judges, sitting in London, were not able or competent enough to address issues of Scottish law. Indeed, it was argued that the English judges, no matter how learned they were, were not capable of understanding the Scottish legal system, and that their understanding was limited to excursions to the Edinburgh fringe. There was an argument that the Scots would be better served by access to Strasbourg than to London, even if that access meant many more years of uncertainty. The review group clearly rejects that position and the cabinet secretary’s new focus on appeals is the inevitable fallback for someone whose argument has been roundly refuted.

Some have argued that if the Scottish judicial system had been more alive to such issues earlier and had responded at a certain point, emergency legislation would not have been required. Nevertheless, I am not sure whether it is appropriate to judge the quality of courts on the consequences of individual decisions, which is precisely the point that is being made in this debate. Of course certain interesting issues have to be resolved, but that will never happen through foghorn diplomacy. Given his own intemperate comments, the cabinet secretary’s claim that he was promoting public debate somewhat stretches credulity. He must acknowledge that his approach to this complex issue has been entirely inappropriate. The language that he and the First Minister have used has demeaned their office, insulted individuals’ integrity and, worryingly, introduced the MacAskill principle of government, which is that he who pays the piper calls the tune. In that respect, I am interested to hear whether the same principle applies to, say, voluntary sector and other organisations that might wish to comment. The main reason why the approach taken was problematic was that it was counterproductive and obscured the real debate. Of course, this debate has been driven not by judicial dilemma but by the simple politics of a nationalist Scottish Government, whose innate nationalism defends all things Scottish on the basis of their being Scottish and is hostile to anything south of the border. The problem with the Supreme Court is not what it does but where it sits. Such a conservative defence of the Scottish legal system is odd, given Scots law’s historically strong willingness to learn from other jurisdictions and approaches. Indeed, Mr MacAskill himself has introduced provisions from the English legal system into the Scottish system and, even as we speak, Lord Carloway is considering issues of fundamental historic significance to Scots law such as the question of corroboration. Given the challenge to providing victims of crime with access to justice, we must never allow a complacent view that resists change in a changing world. Indeed, that is where we must focus: the role of the Supreme Court and, more broadly, the legal system itself in protecting victims and ensuring fairness. At the height of the First Minister’s excesses in railing against the Supreme Court, his position shifted significantly from an attack on a perceived wounding of the Scottish legal system by an English court to what seemed to be an attack on the way in which human rights legislation protected and gave succour to perpetrators of crime, not their victims. That issue is important for all of us who want human rights to be protected in our courts and communities. We still have to address the hostility that is felt by many people in Scotland and beyond towards a human rights agenda that compensates prisoners for slopping out while appearing to offer no protection to families under the cosh from aggressive neighbours and unresponsive public services that do not address their needs. We have to rehabilitate the case for human rights and ensure that it protects the victims of crime instead of being used as an alibi for agencies that have failed to protect them. In that regard, we on this side of the chamber are more than happy to engage in a debate on rights and responsibilities and various balances and understandings in relation to human rights legislation. We must talk about human rights for those in care homes, our schools or wherever and about the balance of rights and responsibilities in our communities. We regret the tone in which this debate began and the fact that it was driven by a political agenda, not by an agenda concerned with the legal system. However, we acknowledge the significant contribution made by Lord McCluskey’s report and the challenge that it presents and, indeed, welcome Lord McCluskey’s comment in the report that the debate cannot be confined to the legal profession. Although it should be informed by the profession and although we should recognise that people with great expertise in the field hold a range of views on the matter, there has to be a buy-in from far beyond the legal profession. After all, if there is a gulf in understanding between the views of the legal profession, the courts and judges, and the experience of the people in our communities, we are all diminished. In that respect, the human rights issues are significant. We would therefore welcome further reporting from Lord McCluskey and engagement with the UK Government, particularly with the Advocate General. We urge the Scottish Government to engage in quiet diplomacy, rather than the foghorn diplomacy of the past. That did not inform or shape the debate; rather, it prevented the debate from proceeding constructively. We are open to an interrogation of the present system and to change that protects access to justice. Above all, we urge the cabinet secretary to debate the issues of justice in terms of justice and not as a convenient hook on which to attach the Government’s political mission. I look forward to the debate. I move amendment S4M-00447.2, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “further welcomes the group’s reaffirmation of the continuing role of the UK Supreme Court in constitutional and human rights issues affecting Scotland; recognises that the interim report and the work of the expert group set up by Lord Wallace raise some important questions in relation to devolution issues; regrets the inappropriate language of the First Minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice with regard to highly respected judges of the UK Supreme Court and the threat to withdraw funding from the court, and believes that wider consultation and discussion on proposals for change are vital in order to allow proper, well-informed, thorough and detailed consideration of all the relevant issues and implications of reform.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that there are people in the legal profession who do not take the same view and that we should recognise that there is a range of views in the profession? Does he agree that we should try to come to a resolution through co-operating, rather than by picking folk who agree with us and saying that there is an issue of principle?

How many experts in Scots law are sitting in Strasbourg? How long would it take to get cases there and how long does the SNP think is acceptable for people to have to wait for access to an appeal?

The point being made is serious. A timetable has been unnecessarily imposed by the Scottish Government, and we are debating a report on which final conclusions have yet to be reached. The review group says that it wants to consult further, so it would surely have been logical for us to wait for that, rather than addressing the issue on a timetable determined not by the review group but, for whatever reason, by the Scottish Government.

We can all pick people to reinforce our position. The view on the Labour benches is that there is an argument to be had and that we need to reflect on the serious views that have been taken from a range of people about what the solution might be. It is inaccurate to say that there is a need to establish the leave to appeal in the way that the cabinet secretary has suggested. Instead of simply pulling out people to support our individual position, which does not progress the matter at all, we want people to come to a judgment by having an open mind and listening to all the evidence.

I bring the First Minister back to the original question’s reference to the attendance of solicitors during interviews. He will be aware that the Law Society of Scotland has estimated that the proposed Scottish Legal Aid Board helpline will cost twice as much as the amount that is currently spent on police station advice. In addition, it has advised that solicitors are voting with their feet, by moving away from the new process. In the interests of achieving value for money, will the First Minister agree to investigate the matter? Will he resist the development of any system that can be shown to be more costly and less effective?

Will the minister give way?

The minister said that the legislation will apply to other football clubs. Does she not realise that the pace at which the bill is being put through Parliament means that we have had no discussion or debate about whether it should address sectarian behaviour not just at football clubs but in our communities? That denies a problem that is much more widespread and affects more than football clubs.

Does the member think that there is a particular issue to do with policing pubs in which football is watched, in relation to establishing which games are being watched and whether people are actually watching the game? Does he accept that, in the initial stages, a deal of police resource will be required to enable the police to go into pubs where there might be disorder?

Will the member give way?

We all acknowledge the significance of the debate and the importance of the issue. I will speak first about the timing and why that matters. The Lord Advocate said that we had a choice: we could talk to ourselves for a while, or we could just get on with it. Even with the very limited scrutiny that the Justice Committee could give to the bill, it was able to raise important questions—not in a hostile way, and not in a way that would be difficult for the Government—that I, for one, had not thought of before. Our process strengthens any legislation, even when we start from the point of view of supporting a bill. I hope that, in her summing up, the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs will make it clear that she disagrees fundamentally with the approach that the Lord Advocate took when he made his comments. After the election, the Scottish Labour Party in particular wished to acknowledge what the SNP had done in winning the election. We said that we wanted to co-operate with the Scottish Government wherever we could, but that we reserved the right not to do so where we disagreed. When I said that—I have said it publicly—I did not imagine that the argument that I would get into would be on sectarianism, an issue that all members of the Parliament—particularly Jack McConnell during his time as First Minister—have highlighted and on which they have demanded that action be taken. It is a matter of huge frustration that, instead of taking the current approach, we could have built unity by working through the parliamentary process on good proposed legislation, and thereby sent out a very strong message. The Government has made it difficult for people to build that unity. I object in the strongest of terms to any implication that says that we do not care about sectarianism if we oppose the bill. That is fundamentally unfair and unjust. We want to ensure that, if the bill is enacted, the voice coming from the Parliament says that we are united in opposing the behaviour that has promoted it and that we take the matter seriously. We do not want the law to be implemented in such a way that people can deride and disregard it. We have lost an opportunity, at this early stage, to build such unity. We were explicitly told by ministers, by means of an argument that I found I could accept, that the clubs wanted the legislation to be in place before the new season started. That was a powerful argument for supporting the passage of the bill, but the clubs have in fact told us that that is simply not the case. We must ask what the truth of the matter is. Sadly, I am left with the feeling that the First Minister thought that it was a good idea to get the legislation in before the next season, and his ministers have been left to develop a post hoc rationalisation for doing that.

Absolutely. I am happy to condemn the SNP on a range of things, including its objections to the constitutional settlement but, on this issue, we can be united on getting the right legislation through. During stages 2 and 3 we want to do what we can to make the bill as strong as possible and we will reserve our judgment on the bill until the end of that period. John Lamont talked about Catholic schools. In my constituency, I have Catholic and non-denominational schools of which I am immensely proud. It is inconsistent for people to argue that children going to separate schools causes discrimination, when we know that, historically, that is not the case. Further, it certainly does not make sense for someone who advocates private education to say that those difficulties are the consequence of separating children. Alison McInnes asked a number of questions and I would welcome the minister making a commitment to answer them in writing, because that would help us in our further consideration of the bill. There is a place for legislation that sends signals, clarifies issues and ensures that people understand that the subject with which it deals is a problem, so we do not simply say that there is no place for this kind of legislation. We will make a judgment on the bill after interrogating it further at stages 2 and 3. I will ask the minister a number of questions. We accept that there are issues around breach of the peace legislation that can weaken the possibility of securing a conviction. I accept the role of legislation in naming the crime, which is why I support legislation on stalking and legislation that identifies trafficking and domestic abuse. I understand why that is being done and I do not think that that, in itself, should be an objection. We have significant concerns, however, about how the legislation will be policed in public houses. I am not talking about a ridiculous scenario. I am concerned about the possibility that someone who is abusive and offends people in a pub in which the television is not on will not commit a crime, while someone who does so when the television is on will commit a crime. How will that be policed? Who should someone complain to? How will we train people who work in pubs to deal with that situation? That is not a trivial point; it is important. Related to that is the question whether someone who commits an offence was or was not going to the football, or had been going to go the football but changed their mind. Those who do not wish this legislation to work will make hay in those areas and we must acknowledge that there are those who do not want it to work. I am not being mischievous, but there are people who, by the very nature of their bigoted behaviour, will want to find ways of undermining people’s confidence in the legislation. Equally, we need to know what advice the police are getting. We are asking the police to implement legislation as it is getting royal assent. How do we imagine that they are being trained? What are they to be told that they have to do? I would like reassurance on that matter. Another area that we would like the minister to consider further concerns the question of domestic premises. Bob Doris made the point that sectarianism does not happen only at Celtic and Rangers games, but it is also true that it does not happen only at football games. Do we imaging that the bigot leaves his bigotry at the turnstile as he heads home? I know that, in our communities, sectarianism is the abuse of choice and that, when a football match is on, someone who has hostility to his neighbour will use their faith against them as a means of abusing them. We would like to know whether it is possible for the bill to encompass those situations. It is important that we do not allow the bill to be about just football. If we had had longer to think about the matter, we might have wanted to amend the hate crime legislation in a different way in order to identify specific behaviours in our community and in the football ground. In saying all that, I do not want to gainsay the important response to the events of last year. I want the minister to respond in particular to the points from Tim Hopkins about why condition B in section 5(5) identifies only religious hatred and to say whether she would consider expanding that condition. I also ask the minister to respond to the critical issue of the sunset clause. For us, it is not a get-out clause. We must identify now how the review would take place and who would be involved in it. I would like the monitoring of the bill to be reported to the Parliament within six months and at regular intervals thereafter. If we get confidence on those matters, it might be that that would give us confidence in supporting legislation that we know must be seen as a response to unacceptable behaviour that has shamed us and shamed Scotland in the way that the minister identified.

The cabinet secretary will recall that, when this issue was debated in the first session of Parliament, we acknowledged its significance and seriousness. At that point, we chose to give consent to the UK Parliament to establish a security authority that would also regulate firms in Scotland. I must emphasise the seriousness of the issue and urge that, if there is any suggestion that regulation of the security industry is to be weakened, we in Scotland act very quickly not just on bouncers but, critically, on the organisations and security firms that we know are still vehicles for organised crime and which intimidate communities and businesses. For example, the organisations that are running certain construction sites are effectively operating protection rackets. We will be happy to work with the cabinet secretary if it proves necessary to develop plans in Scotland to ensure that there are no gaps that might allow those organisations to continue to prey upon our communities.

I welcome the opportunity to open on behalf of the Labour Party in my new role as our spokesperson for justice, which is such an important area of responsibility for the Scottish Government and the Parliament. This is quite a difficult speech to craft properly; there are so many areas on which I could spend a great deal of time. I welcome the fact that the justice secretary has outlined a range of areas in which his Government intends to move forward. The reality is that the driving force for the next period will be the Scottish Government. It will shape the justice agenda, to which we hope to be able to contribute, so we welcome the justice secretary’s commitment to working with the Opposition. I will make a couple of general points about the justice portfolio and then I will make some specific comments about particular areas, although inevitably there will be areas that I will not have time to cover. Where we can, we are keen to work with the Scottish Government to take action to ensure that Scotland’s justice system is underpinned by fairness, transparency and consistency. We also want to make sure that it has as its central and powerful focus ensuring that our communities are safe, that protection is afforded to individuals and families, that criminality is deterred, and that victims are confident not only that they will be listened to but that they are at the centre of the process and—critically—believe that to be the case. From the inception of the Parliament, Labour has always sought to stand on the side of the victim, listening properly and closely to what they describe as their experience, and seeking to respond to that. We sometimes talk about justice issues in a cartoon-like way, but when people talked about the impact of youth disorder on their young people, children or grandchildren, we listened. When people spoke about the impact of unregulated private landlords driving down the confidence of communities and allowing them to disintegrate, we listened. People have described to us the community bullying and talked about the silence that they feel they need to keep because they fear what will happen when they speak up, and we have heard about the sense of injustice of the rape victim or the victim of violence and their feeling that the system does not understand their experience and compounds that injustice in the court system. Those were the driving voices of justice policy in our time in government and, in part, since then. We have understood how dangerous it is when those who commit violent crime, organise crime and prey on individuals and families feel empowered and unchallengeable, and when their victims feel that they are being silenced and ignored, or when the only alternatives that are apparent to victims are to stop complaining or to take the law into their own hands. We do not need to reflect for more than a moment to recognise that we cannot overstate the impact of that lack of confidence of individuals and communities in the authority of the justice system. The driving force for us is to shape legislation and action that understand that impact and respond to those experiences. We must realise that it is not enough to assert our compassion and that we must do the tough stuff of government—getting the detail right and putting in place the resources to ensure that people’s voices are heard and that we can make a difference. In the first full debate on justice in the new session, we need to be honest and rigorous. We must recognise that our role, as the Opposition, is to co-operate when we can, but to challenge when it is necessary for us to do so. Across the Parliament, we recognise the challenge that the sectarianism that reflects on us as a society presents for all of us, but our view is that there is no quick fix to a problem that has existed for a significant period—it is a long-term problem that will not be fixed simply by legislation. We have a concern—at this stage, I highlight it only as a concern—about the pace at which the minister and his Government are going. In The Times this week, the Lord Advocate was quoted as saying: “Passing laws is what the Parliament is there for. Yes we could spend a few months talking about it and then passing it. Or we could just get on and do it and have it in place in time for the football season starting.” I understand the impulse to move quickly, but the fact is that the parliamentary process does not involve only us talking to one another; it is about breaching the walls of the Parliament to allow those who understand the issues to help shape legislation. Neither as a minister nor as a back bencher have I ever come across a piece of legislation than has not been strengthened immensely by the end of the process as a result of the way in which, through the committee structure, people have shaped it. We have genuine concerns about what the Lord Advocate said—and not only in relation to the proposed sectarianism bill, which we all want to work, but because there is nothing worse than legislation that is derided as soon as it enters the system. If the Government’s attitude is that the time that is spent in the committee process is just time that is spent talking, it is missing one of the key strengths of our parliamentary and legislative process. It is with a genuine sense of co-operation that I urge the minister to reflect on the seriousness of getting the proposed legislation right. Equally, there needs to be honesty on police numbers. In its evidence on the budget process, Unison said that the budget for 2011-12 could mean the loss of 1,100 civilian police jobs. That would surely have an impact on front-line policing, and we need to interrogate that matter further. Would that mean police being taken from front-line jobs to do the administrative work? In my view, that would be a big step back from where we were before. On short sentences, I urge the minister not to stick to the position that he has held in the past. We recognise the importance of rehabilitation. Our view is that if we have effective community service orders, short sentences will wither on the vine, but the approach that the Government is taking means that the risk is being borne by those communities in which there are people who believe that they are untouchable and for whom CSOs have not worked. We know that one in three CSOs is breached, and there are disturbing figures that show that the length of time that it takes to complete a CSO is stretching. I urge the minister to reflect on that. Our communities need the certainty of knowing that CSOs are effective before we signal a shift away from the position that prison can have a role to play. On antisocial behaviour, we need to understand the persistent nature of the harassment, intolerance and intimidation that can make people’s lives a misery. Antisocial behaviour orders emerged out of that experience, and if they are ineffective, we need to think about how we can make them more effective rather than simply dismissing them. There is a gap between criminal acts and the low-level, persistent, horrible and nasty way in which some people conduct themselves, which must be addressed. The slightly sneering tone that sometimes comes from some quarters on ASBOs does not serve our communities well, and I would welcome discussion of how we can deal with that. I hear what the minister says on knife crime. We also understand that the courts must play a role in deterring young men from destroying their own lives, not just those of their victims. We know that the culture of routinely carrying a knife brings with it a heavy price that is paid by people throughout our communities. We know what it means for the victims and their families. When we spoke before about mandatory sentencing in this area, there was a sense of outrage and offence among the people in our communities who were told that the court system could not make a distinction between a carpet fitter and a man with a machete down his sock going into a dance hall. That beggars belief. It is important that we recognise the fear of knife crime in some of our communities and that we address the problem seriously. On following a positive agenda, as I have said, it is important that we co-operate where we can. I hear what the minister says about public sector reform. We will support a reorganisation of police and fire services where we can, as long as there is confidence that local accountability and local direction in setting policing priorities remain. On women offenders and Cornton Vale, it is important that we work together. We acknowledge the establishment of the commission, but over the past 18 months we have been concerned about the absence of leadership in addressing the problem of women offenders in Cornton Vale. We will also work on sexual offences issues, including the rolling out of domestic abuse courts. We will draw on the experience of the advice, support, safety and information services together project to understand how domestic abuse is experienced and the way in which the court system does not seem able to offer support when there are breaches of bail. When people are not automatically remanded, there are consequences for the families involved. We understand the importance of the powers in the proceeds of crime legislation, but we ask that that money be invested in those communities from where the money was harvested in the first place. Across the Parliament, members are committed to trying to address the issues that bring out crime and mean that people become the victims of crime—and not just within the narrow focus of the justice portfolio. We will support the Government in creating a strong economy and jobs where that approach can make a difference. We are happy to work with the Government where the focus is on addressing the lived experience of crime and injustice in our communities. Where our job is to challenge, we will do that. However, we want a justice system in which victims of crime can have real confidence. I look forward to our doing our part to create that system in the coming period.

Will the member take an intervention?

I shall try to be brief. I am happy to contribute to the debate, but I am depressed that we have to have it. I commend Bob Doris both on his motion and on his speech—especially the point that he made about the real challenge that we face in this regard, which is that something as horrific as what happened to our Deputy Presiding Officer in the previous session was seen somehow as being something to be explained away. In other circumstances, blaming the victim for bringing something on themselves by how they dressed or spoke would have been seen as being entirely unacceptable, but in this instance it was seen as providing some kind of justification for what had happened. That is a particularly important point that we must confront. This is a serious issue because, apart from anything else, sectarianism undermines our sense of a diverse Scotland, in which we can be proud of celebrating difference. We have often heard the phrase “One Scotland, many cultures”. We are happy to see people embrace that, so it is depressing to recognise that it is not the experience of some of our communities and people. Bob Doris has recognised that both sectarianism and anti-Irish racism are significant. We know that the impact of sectarianism and racism in our communities is corrosive. They create difficulties and challenges and they undermine our wish to see harmony across our communities. I acknowledge the need for legislation and appreciate that we will not discuss that at length today. However, it is hard to see how the mindset and action of someone who was willing to post three letters with bullets to Trish Godman, among others, can be sorted out simply by legislation on sectarianism. As the minister has recognised, we must be mindful of the significance of legislation itself. In the circumstances, the broader issues that we have to address go far beyond tackling terrorism. We need to have a serious debate, with proper consideration of the various options. I understand that the Government has said that the new legislation needs to be in place in time for the new football season, but I express the concern that if the legislation is introduced at the beginning of the season and is not effective—and is seen to be ineffective—we might end up making things worse and giving succour to those who wish to continue to express sectarian views. However, as we have said, we will work as constructively as possible around the proposed legislation. As with controversial legislation in the past, the parliamentary process offers a means to build support for what is being attempted. It is possible to get people to see the need for it and to sign up to it. That is particularly important in this context. The issue will be about not just the new legislation at a punitive level; it will also be about getting people to challenge attitudes and behaviours where they see them and where they realise that the measures are ineffective. As Bob Doris pointed out, this is not just about football. Sectarian abuse is the abuse of choice in too many communities where there is conflict between neighbours. It happens not just in the football stadium; it happens in the pub. I do not know whether the minister still intends to legislate in that regard. In football, we also have our greatest resource in tackling sectarian behaviour. There has been evidence in the past that it was football supporters themselves who took on the sexists and the racists on their terraces and stopped behaviour that was regarded as the norm 20 or 30 years ago. We must harness their commitment to, and pride in, their clubs and we must speak to the football trusts and work with them in taking on the job of challenging such attitudes. The mindset will have to shift. On the critical importance of education, our young people probably embrace more than anyone else the initiatives that Jack McConnell put in place for getting young people to work together to challenge sectarianism. We must harness that energy of bringing people together once more. Furthermore, we should harness the energy of voluntary organisations, which can go into communities and make the changes and the arguments for the change to which we all aspire. We can unite on a range of issues in recognising the importance of effective legislation, but let us also harness all those people in footballing communities and elsewhere who are as hostile to and disturbed by sectarianism and racism as everyone in the chamber.

Good grief. I did not realise that there was anything in independence that I would find attractive, but if it is low calorie, I could be persuaded in that regard if no other. I do not want to start my first speech back in the Parliament by attacking the Tories, but I was going to pad out my generous 13 minutes by reading out the list of fabulous maiden speakers, and that has now been denied me. I offer my congratulations to all those who made their maiden speeches today. Murdo Fraser is right to point out that their substantial contribution to today’s debate augurs very well for this session of Parliament. I will talk about some of them in particular, but that should not reflect on the contributions of those whom I do not mention. I am exceptionally grateful to be back in Parliament after going through an exceptionally tough election night. At a personal level, I am grateful to the voters of Glasgow Pollok for returning me here. In these tough times—they were tough for the Labour Party on that night—I have been given an added challenge. I know that, in these days of co-operation and the new politics, and in recognition of the SNP’s victory, I will have to be very good. However, to speak for a generous 13 minutes while continuing that approach might stretch even my capacity, so I hope that members will forgive me if I say anything that is not absolutely in the spirit of the new politics. Of all the speeches that we heard today, I remark in particular on that of our own leader, Iain Gray. We are exceptionally proud of our leader, and no more so than today. He captured not only the challenge for Labour of co-operating with a majority Government in these new times but the challenge for the Scottish Government of listening to others, doing the hard work of moving from aspiration to delivery and recognising that we have ideas—as have members on all sides of the chamber—that we wish to contribute to that very important job. The new word is positivity, and members will know that I ooze positivity from every pore. However, I say gently to some of the SNP members in the chamber—particularly to those who spoke this morning rather than this afternoon—that we have got it: we know that the SNP won the election. We are determined to co-operate where we can, but SNP members should understand that co-operation is not capitulation. It seemed this morning that they were happy to be congratulated but became slightly more disgruntled when they were being criticised. SNP members have a very strong platform, but they must recognise that, throughout Scotland as well as in the chamber, there will be times when we disagree with them and we are entitled to be heard. I present a further challenge, this time to Scottish Government back benchers, because it is important that, if they challenge their own Government, their voices can be heard. As for maiden speeches, I was very struck by Joan McAlpine’s comments about this young Parliament’s proud legacy, particularly with regard to the land question. I find it interesting that her view on land took her to the SNP while my view of the Scottish landowners and what they did to my forebears made me a socialist, not a nationalist. I hope that, in recognising the importance of the Commonwealth games, John Mason also recognises Glasgow City Council’s critical role over a long time in putting in place the buildings and capacity that resulted in our winning the bid. Too often Glasgow is vilified; in fact, it showed vision in understanding sport’s power to change lives and how something like the Commonwealth games can not only present the city and Scotland in a positive light but support community regeneration and local employment. There is a powerful message in all of that for the Scottish Government not only about the importance of its partnership with Scotland’s biggest city but about how public funding and procurement can tackle low-pay issues in the public, voluntary and private sectors. I was surprised to hear that Kezia Dugdale’s speech has been regarded as controversial, because I felt that it said something very powerful about our role in the Parliament. It is not sufficient for any of us simply to talk about what we care about or believe in; we have to do the heavy lifting of Government to deliver on targets. For example, I regret the fact that, over the past four years, child poverty increased instead of going down. Government needs to focus on such questions. While acknowledging Graeme Pearson’s wealth of experience, I nevertheless want to highlight in particular his comments about the proceeds of crime, which are harvested from some of our poorest communities. That money ought to be directed back into the communities that suffer most from organised crime. I welcomed Kevin Stewart’s speech, in which he made the case for support for his own city. We will all have to face that challenge; indeed, the Scottish Government itself faces the challenge of balancing these demands for justice and fairness. James Dornan said that we now have a can-do Government. However, the problem is that, over the past fortnight, we have heard excessive comment about what we cannot do because of the powers that we do not have. It is important that the can-do message is made stronger. I thought that Annabelle Ewing was deliberately trying to wind me up when she described 6 May as a very “enjoyable day”. If I remember correctly, it was not quite so enjoyable for some of us. She also mentioned boldness of thinking, but the fact is that she will have to tell us what the plan for corporation tax will be if it comes to the Parliament. If it means simply giving tax cuts to big business, I have to say that I do not believe that that will be in tune with the views of the people of Scotland. On the purpose of devolution itself, the First Minister said: “Devolution was born for a purpose: to let Scotland find peace with herself and for our nation to become comfortable in her own skin.” Well, maybe—but for some of us it was also about bringing power closer to where people lived, understanding their experiences, listening to the solutions that they had devised and using Government’s power to implement them. It is about protecting people in these very tough times, given what is coming from Westminster. There is, for example, a challenge in health. I agree with Christine Grahame about health inequalities. None of us can allow ourselves to get to the point where we simply say that the statistics prove that the health service is okay, despite the fact that those who use it and work in it are saying something entirely different. Moreover, we know that we are committed to free education, but what are we actually saying about the further education sector and what are we doing to resist the trade-off between having no tuition fees and closing down places in higher education, which will discriminate against the poorest in our communities? We opened up higher education to those in my generation who had not been allowed to go to university and such places should not be closed and denied to the same people. Neil Bibby and other members have mentioned youth unemployment. I reiterate the request or demand that we look at low pay and the living wage. There is a pay freeze that is mitigated for the lowest paid in the health service and the Scottish Government, but that mitigation is not happening in local government. Some 70 per cent of those in low-paid jobs in local government are women. I ask the Government again to consider that issue and whether there is any sense of justice, to ensure that the poorest do not bear the burden of these challenging times. We must also consider what is happening in the voluntary sector. We say that there are no compulsory redundancies in the public sector, but we know that, with contracts that are delivered inside the voluntary sector on behalf of the public sector, women are losing not 2 or 3 per cent of their wages but a third of them. That is happening in a restructuring that has been brought about because of pressures on contracts that are going into the voluntary sector. It is important that procurement protects those jobs and workers. We all have aspirations for Scotland, of course. The advance copies of the First Minister’s statement included the words “Check against delivery”. We will also check his and his Government’s commitments against delivery. He said that the Government will make housing a priority, but it is a fact that investment in housing has been continually deprioritised in the past four years. The capacity of housing associations to deliver has been reduced by a reduction in the subsidy.

Alex Neil will find that the housing numbers have fallen in the past year and that a funding structure has been put in place that will mean that housing associations and co-operatives will not be able to deliver the developments that they said they would. I urge the Government to look at the issue of co-operatives and mutuals, which we said a lot about in our manifesto, and to consider our financial inclusion strategy. There is no doubt that legal and illegal loan sharks are circling in some of our communities that are pressured by wage cuts and so on. It is the job of Government to protect and sustain credit unions and do the broader work of financial inclusion in those terms. On justice, I echo our commitment to support the Scottish Government in tackling inequality and discrimination in whatever way they are expressed in our communities, but it is important to listen to the lived experience of people in our communities. If tough sentencing is a lever against sectarian abuse, it must also be a way of addressing the scourge of knife crime in our communities. The First Minister said that we can have ambitions, and he talked about powers. He said that acting “within the restricted powers of this Parliament ... does not confine our ambitions for Scotland, but it confines our ability to achieve those ambitions.” We want the Government also to focus on what it can achieve with the powers that it has. The First Minister’s statement must not be an alibi. We want him to be ambitious with the capacity that he already has to address the needs of carers, to support women and children who face domestic abuse, and to tackle inequality in our communities. In conclusion, the Labour Party has had a tough time, from which we will rebuild and restrengthen ourselves, but it is as nothing compared with the tough times that families and individuals in our communities are facing. We know that there will be a constitutional debate; we understand that and recognise the SNP’s majority. However, I reiterate the demand that the referendum be brought forward and sorted. As the debate on constitutional powers continues, the importance of giving equal attention to the needs that we saw in the election campaign and before must be recognised. It must be understood that equal time must be given to the tough job of delivering on the priorities of the people in this country in respect of jobs, education and health, which members across the chamber recognise. Where the Government focuses on those priorities, it will be guaranteed the Opposition’s support.

For once, I might not use my full quota of minutes, but that does not mean that the bill is not significant. It is relatively straightforward and short, and it has managed to be the subject of consensus in the end, but that does not necessarily mean that it is not significant—perhaps that reflects how people have come together in committee and externally. As the minister said, amendments were agreed to so that people could reach a consensus on the issue’s significance and on the measures that are outlined in the bill. In reading the stage 1 debate again, I noted Malcolm Chisholm’s comments on the original consultation, in which people expressed anxiety that legislating to create legal consequences might deter victims from coming forward. It is interesting that we had a difficulty or challenge in making a judgment on that. The way in which the committee has considered matters reassures us, because we do not want to do something that will make the situation worse. What the minister said about implementation is important, and his plan for that provides reassurance. Post-legislative scrutiny is also important. The committee will have a role in making us alive to ensuring that the anxieties that were expressed in the original consultation in 2005 and 2006 are no longer a concern. The Parliament will have a role in that. We should remember the power of the message that victims have sent to Parliament. In the stage 1 debate, Anne McLaughlin and Elaine Smith gave voice to victims’ experiences. It is important to recognise that the experience of forced marriage is horrific. For someone to force another person into marriage is a horrific crime. That underlines the bill’s significance. One of the Parliament’s strengths, on which we should reflect, is that we do not just tick boxes for a bit of legislation and then move on. In implementing the bill and in post-legislative scrutiny, it will be critical to ensure that the bill meets its intended purpose. A strength in the Parliament’s culture is that Parliament does not simply move on; the opportunity exists to refresh legislation and to consider the issues that drove the legislation to be created in the first place. In all the debate about the bill, it has been emphasised time and again that what matters is not just the bill. The bill is not just symbolic: it does send signals and it is a symbol of what we say about the offence, but it will also provide protection and offer people legal measures that are not insignificant. We must place the bill in the context of education of our young people. We must give people the confidence to know that, despite what they have been told, forced marriage is not acceptable or reasonable, is not to do with their culture and is not expected of girls. There is a specific role for that educational side of the bill to be rolled forward. Public education is also important, given the anxieties about the degree of stereotyping around forced marriage. The challenge in the public debate is for people not to be allowed to retreat into such attitudes. We also have to recognise that many women in such circumstances may be very isolated—perhaps deliberately so. We have to think carefully about the trusted intermediaries who will reach out to those women. An important bit of work that needs to be done is to consider which organisations—which women’s organisations—may be best placed to support women in the circumstance of forced marriage. If evidence emerges of a need for support, it is essential that the Government, of whatever colour, wills the means for that support to happen. The amount of funding that is required for such support may not be huge; small bits of funding can allow organisations to offer it. If the support is not there, victims may not have the confidence to come forward. Ignorance or fear of family consequences are not always an issue—it may be lack of confidence. We all understand that forced marriage of any kind is unacceptable. In saying that, we recognise that forced marriage is not particular to women; it affects men, too. It is also fair to say that the issue must be seen in the broader context of the rights and role of women and their abuse in society. The bill shines a light on the issue and challenges the attitudes that underpin forced marriage. I, for one, welcome the legislation. It will be good to come together at the end of this session of Parliament to vote on the bill before we go our separate ways. We have reached consensus on a difficult issue for which we have worked out a solution. The bill will make a difference.

Hugh O’Donnell described this as a short and sweet debate. Neither the minister nor I often contribute to short and sweet debates, so we should cherish the moment—it is possible for anything to happen in this world. It is an important debate and, as has been said, the bill is significant. Its journey through the parliamentary process has been highly productive. Now, the challenge is to ensure that it makes the difference that we aspire for it to make. I add the thanks of Labour members to the clerks, the committee’s convener, Margaret Mitchell, the witnesses, committee members—for taking their job so seriously—and the bill team, who will have had to wrestle constantly with what was possible from the point of view of the legal people and with the political imperative of addressing what the witnesses brought to the table. Forced marriage is an important issue, but it is fair to say that it does not form part of mainstream discourse on a regular basis. The bill is not one that I expect will create a huge number of headlines but, for all that, we must recognise that it may make a difference to the lives of women and to the attitudes and views of families, individuals and communities, and in that regard it is important. I know that I have a great deal of time to speak, but I plan to make only a couple of points. One point that it is worth making is that, although the Parliament has a proud record of exposing and highlighting issues to do with violence against women, I would not want anyone to think that, in debating issues to do with violence against women and abuse, we can somehow always reach a consensus. In fact, those who first raised such matters, who first challenged attitudes to marriage and who first discussed the role of women did so in a context of hostility, not one of consensus. It is a mark of the journey that we have made that we can discuss such an issue as forced marriage in a Parliament that has constructed a consensus. However, we must understand how that has happened, because it was not by accident. It has happened because women’s organisations have spoken out on behalf of women and have found a way of bringing the experience of individuals into the political process. Parliament must continue with that important job, not with a sense of self-satisfaction but recognising how challenging it is. It is about changing lives, expectations and people’s fundamental roles in life. Women are suffering disproportionately in these challenging economic times and we must also challenge that situation. The economic challenge that women are facing is an expression of their inequality. It is also true to say that one reason why the Parliament has got to a place where it can spend time talking about issues to do with women’s role in society and violence against women, and where Governments of all colours fund organisations that help it to do that job, is that there are a significant number of women in the Parliament—some feminists and some not, but women who understand the important job that Parliament might have in making a difference to women’s lives. Across the chamber are women who are choosing to leave the Parliament today. Those of us who have to face the electorate have yet to have that verdict passed upon them. However, we know that there will be a challenge in future to make sure that women’s voices continue to be heard in Parliament. Although I recognise and celebrate all the women who have chosen to go today, I am sure that I will be forgiven if I mention in particular my sister Marlyn Glen, who has a long and proud record of fighting to ensure that women’s voices are heard. Her persistence and passion for working on behalf of those who are without power, particularly women, are probably without match. She played a part in shaping the Parliament and has a played a significant part in its work since she became a member. I wish her all the best. Should I be in the privileged position of coming back to Parliament, I know that Marlyn Glen will continue to work from outside Parliament to ensure that we continue to understand the importance of speaking out about the needs of the most vulnerable people in our communities—those without voices. The message to all parties is that, if we want to form a consensus around difficult issues, it is critical that all ensure that women’s representation in Parliament is sustained. The first parliamentary session was record breaking and there has been some retreat in all parties. Parliament will be weaker if we go back to not reflecting the experience of women, not representing women and not facing the continuing challenge to reflect society’s diversity. It is not simply that the representation of women and black and minority ethnic communities is important in itself but that that representation helps Parliament to understand disadvantage and inequality and brings us to this bill and issues that matter to communities across Scotland. I support the bill and look forward to it being passed at decision time.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Housing and Communities last met representatives of housing associations and co-operatives and what issues were discussed. (S3O-13348)

I understand that the minister has announced that in his innovation fund, housing association grant will be cut drastically to £40,000 a unit. What consultation has he had with housing associations and co-operatives on that? How will he take into account their concerns about the impact of that decision on the capacity of housing associations and co-operatives to do what they do best, which is building affordable homes and maintaining them long term in sustainable communities? Does the minister recognise that that short-term decision goes against his Government’s stated policy of preventive spending?

I, too, congratulate Duncan McNeil not just on securing the debate but on making a powerful and emotional speech, which was worthy of the women whom we are here to celebrate. In 1981, I was a young schoolteacher down in Rothesay, and I used to travel home at weekends. On every journey home, I witnessed what was happening in the west of Scotland, as I did in my working life, where I saw young children whose hope for the future was being squeezed out of them as unemployment rates rose. I was also a young activist in the labour movement. It is genuinely hard for me to overstate the impact of the Lee jeans women and the sit-in on my politics and my view of what politics was about. It transpired that trade unionists were not just men—they included these wonderful and inspirational women. Trade unionism was not just about heavy industry and shipbuilding, which was my picture of it as the daughter of a seafarer—Port Glasgow was the dry dock—but about the importance of other work to communities. The stereotypical view of the trade unions’ role did not apply. Here were women with great optimism and great humour who were standing up for themselves, their families and their communities. In the few words that I can say today, it is impossible for me to tell the Lee jeans women how important they were to all of us and how exciting it is to speak in the debate. In the past 30 years, what politics is about and what the role of ordinary people is in changing communities have been redefined. That can be tracked back to women such as those from the Lee jeans sit-in, who said, “This is not good enough. We will stand up for our families and our communities.” Not only did they say that in a time of great depression and fear about what was happening around them, but they could win. We hold on to that now as a powerful message about what people can do when they come together. The Lee jeans women quietly made history. We are good at celebrating our heroes, but we need to do more to remember the history of women such as the Lee jeans women—we need not only to ensure that their history is celebrated but to demand that their legacy shapes our future action. We can think back to what happened in the 1980s, when—as Duncan McNeil said—unemployment was said to be a price worth paying, and we can look ahead with fear because we might have people in power now who take the same view. Decisions that are being made now are having a disproportionate impact on women—on their capacity to get jobs, because their jobs are disappearing, and on their capacity to be supported, through child care and other measures, to go out to work. The services on which women rely disproportionately are under attack. Even a very simple figure sets that out. A calculation of the changes in benefits, tax credits and so on has been made that shows a loss of something like £4 a week in a man’s wage but £8 in a woman’s wage. We need to reaffirm the importance of understanding the important role that women play in their families, communities and the workplace. It is timely for us to remember, in celebrating everything that the Lee jeans women did, and to reaffirm, that this place—this Parliament—should have high levels of women’s representation and that it should speak for women’s interests. In the 1980s, the powerful women’s voice stopped a huge company in its tracks. That voice will also have an important job in protecting women, families and communities in the times ahead. I thank the Lee jeans women for everything that they did to give us hope in the 1980s. They transformed the view of women’s role and the power that women have when they come together. We need to ensure that this celebration is also an inspiration for the future.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what support is provided to community arts initiatives. (S3O-13230)

I welcome the minister’s comments, particularly as she acknowledged the wonderful work that is done by the Village Storytelling Centre, and I note that there are other projects in my constituency. The minister acknowledges the importance of community arts, which go far beyond simply the arts dimension to involve people and support vulnerable groups. I am sure that she will be aware of the anxiety of community arts organisations that, in tough economic times, the service that they provide will be seen as a luxury. In the light of the Government’s commitment to preventative spending, what analysis has been done of how community arts can be used to support people at an early stage, to prevent, and to save money at a later stage when people, through isolation, might end up going into hospital or whatever.

I trust that I will not change the tone of the debate too much. I am grateful to have the opportunity to contribute to the debate. As the first person to speak who is not part of the Finance Committee company—the pointy heads, as I like to call them—I, too, offer my best wishes to Mr Welsh. The respect for his work is shared by those outwith the Finance Committee. In a job that can be a bit like herding cats, he has managed to work with a great deal of authority. There is a danger that debates about budget processes and so on can be either very technical or very consensual in a merely cosy way. That has not been the case in today’s debate. It would be fair to say, however, that anyone who is thinking about preventative spending will have some anxieties about some of the choices that are being made at a UK level, which place disproportionate burdens on women and, for example, make it less likely that they will be able to work and support their families, which is something that, in the long term, will have consequences for their children. That is something that people need to be aware of. We know that budgets reflect people’s political priorities and, to some extent, the challenge is to ensure that they do that. Some of the debate about preventative spending involves people who say that they support families, but are not spending money at the right stage in order to do so. It is absolutely critical that we embrace the rationale behind a shift to preventative spending, make rational decisions about our priorities and have a greater awareness of what makes a difference. For example, a lunch club for elderly people stops bed blocking two or three years down the road, as it addresses issues of isolation and enables people to identify deterioration at an early stage. Similarly, a little bit of support for carers—enabling them to take a half-day away from their loved ones, for example—means that we can sustain the cared-for in a way that is real to their family. It is important, therefore, that in interrogating spending decisions, we have an understanding of what is effective. The issues that the committee has reflected on with regard to the early years can be applied to a range of important social policy areas. I do not pretend to be as close to the issues as the committee members are, but I would like to highlight a few points that I hope members will find useful. Malcolm Chisholm flagged up the connection between strategy and delivery. A key criticism that is being made is that there is insufficient connection between the framework, the strategy at a national level and what is happening on the ground. The Scottish Government has said that it does not want a top-down, prescriptive approach. Nobody would want that—that is a pejorative way of describing an anxiety that people have. However, we want there to be a connection. We want to know that strategies that are developed are delivered on the ground. There will be tough decisions about how that can be ensured and about how we can make strategies focused and consistent across the country as opposed to simply being a good read. The Scottish Government highlights the importance of an outcomes-based approach and John Swinney reiterated that in his speech, commending the concordat and the community planning partnerships in that regard. However, the key issue is not to outline an outcomes-based approach, but to ensure that it is happening on the ground. The reality is that, in the past four years, we have had one brief overview of how single outcome agreements are progressing and we are still waiting for any detailed analysis of their progress. We are aware of the frustration of voluntary organisations in particular, which say that they have to pick their way through single outcome agreements to identify the spend. The minister knows of my on-going concern that there is no equality impact assessment of single outcome agreements, which means that they do not reflect the rigour that we require. It is not sufficient to assert that something is working if there is no evidence in that regard, and I hope that the minister will take that on board. In recognising the importance of preventative spending, I have a concern that the policy is not being applied in the Scottish Government. One example of that, although it is not in the Finance Committee’s reflections, is the decision to cut the housing association grant by at least a third. That will possibly stall developments and prevent future developments, but critically—and most worryingly—it reveals a lack of understanding about the central effectiveness of the community-controlled housing and co-operative movement. Providing sufficient funding to build, maintain and repair good houses is part of a wider action that allows those communities to be sustained. That has worked, and short-termism in the funding of housing will have longer-term consequences for the very families that we want to help. There is also the key issue of making the transition in approach from reactive to preventative spending. I am concerned that people sell the idea of doing things differently because it is cheaper. They say, “You can spend a little early, and save money later”, and then force change by quantifying possible savings and applying that as a cut. We know that that is a worry in some places with regard to social care spending. I think that we all agree on the importance of evidence-based spending and we must be alive to early spend-to-save. That is reflected in the argument about targeted versus universal spending, and I agree with the Scottish Government’s response on that. For example, Home-Start runs an early intervention programme for vulnerable mothers in my constituency that helps them to keep their children and prevents those children from being taken into care. It is not necessary for most mums, for whom health visitor support would be sufficient, so it is a good example of targeted spending working well. Equally, the provision of nurture classes in our schools by definition recognises that some children are vulnerable and at a disadvantage. We ought to consider the built-in advantage that some families have, which must be addressed by providing support to those children. It would be nonsense to provide such support for all children, but it is critical in closing the gap in advantage that is experienced by some children. We need to reflect on how those choices are now being made. We know about the key role of the voluntary sector in understanding preventative activity and we know what we can do early to stop crisis later on. However, we also know that in tough times the danger is that those who make the choices see that little bit of spending as a luxury. I commend the report and I hope that my comments add to it. In terms of preventative spending, the key issue will be how we shift from the reactive to the preventative without leaving a gap in provision.

Does the member agree that the strength of the Coalfields Regeneration Trust is that it is about people? It is about people who are committed to the coalfield communities, who understand their history and who have a vision for the future. It is therefore mean-spirited at the very least to cut a relatively small budget that would allow those people’s energy and commitment to an area to continue to support the communities that they come from.

Does the member recognise that for some of our fragile communities across Scotland, one of the problems is depopulation? My family had to leave where they lived to get work. That had consequences for them, but there were also consequences for the people they left behind; it was difficult to generate any work in those communities and to support the services that the remaining people required.

Does the member regret the fact that the new building of housing association houses fell by 1,000 last year?

Will the member work with the Labour Party to try to persuade the minister that it would be a good idea to sustain the funding for the Coalfields Regeneration Trust and to not only restore what was cut this year, but guarantee funding for the next two years?

For the avoidance of doubt, the minister is making a cut of 68 per cent, guaranteeing one year’s money and then asking the CRT how it will spend that money—that is the level he is operating at. He is not sustaining the funding that was there before; he is asking the trust to continue to contribute with a cut of 68 per cent, while taking the ludicrous position of not even telling the trust what it will have for the two subsequent years. People will judge his remarks on that basis. This is an important debate. People have asked, at a basic level, what the point of the debate is. First, it appears to have secured something of a U-turn on the urban regeneration companies, although with the SNP one always has to read the small print later. However, the ludicrous, economically illiterate decision to cut the funding might have been stayed. The debate has also exposed the reality of the SNP’s attitude towards and views on the coal-mining communities, which we all know suffered so much in the past. What happened to the coal-mining communities and industry in Scotland is totemic; it is a symbol of what Thatcher and her cronies did to Scotland. It is no surprise that today’s Daily Record says of the minister’s decision: “It’s Like Thatcher All Over Again”.

The Conservatives ought not to deny their own history. They wilfully destroyed mining communities, and the people of Scotland remember that. Kenny Gibson talked about money being wasted in Glasgow. The SNP’s solution is simply to rip money out of Glasgow, rip off Glasgow and deny it the jobs that it requires. We know that there is a need for co-ordination on regeneration. I would be interested to know whether there is currently a role for the Scottish centre for regeneration in the Scottish Government, because it is critical that there is co-ordination on these issues and that local people are involved in decisions on regeneration. There are concerns about how community planning is being rolled forward and how people are engaged. Alex Johnstone talked about mobility. He basically said that the problems caused by economic decisions in the 1980s were the fault of the people in the communities who suffered for them; he blamed those people for not being willing to move. That is clearly nonsense. The CRT recognises that if we skill people, they might choose to go elsewhere, but if they are not skilled and the communities are not regenerated, we have not just people who are not working; we have all the social consequences of that, too. It is disappointing that Alex Neil has chosen to collude with the Conservatives’ view. Particularly in his opening speech, he settled for debating points rather than action. The immutable law of the minister is that the louder he is, the dodgier ground he is on. It is frustrating that he talks on the one hand about spending a fortune of money and on the other hand about needing to cut this little bit of money to the CRT. What is the logic in that? I am at a loss to understand why, for the want of £1.5 million a year, he would choose to cut the feet from an organisation that has a proven record. To be charitable to Alex Neil, it might simply be that he has not won the argument with his Cabinet colleagues. I get depressed when the SNP colludes with the Tories, in particular, in setting out the self-serving analysis that the country’s current deficit has been caused by spending too much money on public services. Such collusion might serve the nationalists’ party interest in the short term but the problem is that the Tories’ solution—to slash public spending—will leave our communities abandoned. We know that the Tories destroyed the mining communities in the 1980s; Alex Johnstone himself talked about the dark days of the 1980s, as if his party had nothing to do with them. We remember how at that time the Tories said that unemployment was a price worth paying. Nothing has changed. Those communities will now have to suffer disproportionately from decisions made at UK level with the collusion of the SNP, which will not say that it was not public spending that caused the problem. Regeneration is not just about physical regeneration or doing good things for people; it is about supporting people to achieve their potential. The nature of the communities that are being regenerated is critical and any approach must be shaped by the different issues that arise in each of the different communities. That is why the Coalfields Regeneration Trust’s distinct nature is important. After all, this is not just about creating jobs; it is also about giving people the skills to access those jobs and tackling any barriers that they might have. In the foreword to “Building a Sustainable Future”, Alex Neil says: “Achieving equality of place and people are central aims of this Government’s Economic Strategy.” That should be the case, but under his watch Scottish Enterprise has been stripped of any such role. As a result, the importance of that aim is not recognised by one of the critical agencies. It is a classic example of a Scottish Government that is great on strategies and talking but which is neither delivering on the ground nor doing the heavy lifting that, as Duncan McNeil made clear, is important in government. Moreover, this regeneration document is not even a consultation paper; it is a discussion paper. The irony is that in the past the SNP spent its life condemning key decisions—decisions supported by our colleagues in the Liberal Democrat party—that created jobs and built schools; now, instead of getting any action, we are left having a chat. Of course, the regeneration of housing plays a critical role and the minister quite rightly referred to the wider role of housing associations and housing co-operatives. However, he continues to make a ludicrous and false division between housing associations and council housing and denies the critical role that housing associations and co-operatives can play in driving regeneration in local communities, demanding instead that councils listen to what the Government wants to do. I find it dispiriting that the collapse this year in housing association building will lead to a loss of energy in regeneration, and I am disturbed that housing associations across the country are now saying that they will not be building any more and, indeed, are stopping projects.

That is precisely my point. [Interruption.]

It is false and ludicrous to talk about how 73 more council houses were built last year while destroying the organisations that have driven community regeneration over the past 10 years. There is an issue about supporting local government in regeneration, but rolling up all local government moneys on a per capita distribution basis leaves us unable to address the question of need in some of our poorest communities. It is not just about the formula; it is also about directing resources to particular areas with problems. We know that the Coalfields Regeneration Trust has been doing a lot of work. The arguments have been made about what it can deliver. It can, for example, reach parts of communities that the National Lottery was not able to reach. We do not know what is going to happen at a UK level but would it not be stunning if a Tory-led UK Government turned out to be more supportive of the trust than our self-styled miners’ friend in the SNP? Members should be in absolutely no doubt—however one looks at it, a 68 per cent cut will destroy huge amounts of the work that the trust wants to do. Why end something that is self-evidently working? Why provide only one year’s funding, which can only increase instability? Tricia Marwick seemed to be arguing that, given the definition of a coalfield area, we should end funding for it altogether—

Instead, she should be arguing for that funding to be sustained. Then we can argue about the formula that is used. If I could finish on this last point—

Back in 2007, SNP back benchers lavished praise on the Coalfields Regeneration Trust. If every one of them who spoke in favour of it then votes for it this afternoon, we will be able to sustain these communities with this funding. I urge the chamber to support our motion.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met organisations representing people with disabilities and what issues were discussed. (S3O-13082)

I am sure that those groups and the minister recognise the critical role of employment for people with disabilities and particularly the role of sheltered workplaces in providing that employment. In a debate on 7 October, the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism agreed that a timetable for each Government department and agency to reserve at least one contract to sheltered workplaces would be created. Will the minister indicate whether the timetable has been published and if not, why not? Can he list which Government contracts, under article 19, have now been reserved to sheltered workplaces?

I am hearing—including anecdotally—that pressures from the SNP on local government budgets are leading to decisions that result in delayed assessments and people having to stay on in hospital. Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge the evidence of the critical role of carers in preventing delayed discharges and of the absolute necessity of supporting carers to look after their loved ones at home? Does she recognise the deep anxiety of carers organisations that current care support does not meet the level of need? What steps is she taking to plug the gaps and end the postcode lottery of support for carers? Surely the situation of carers is, in itself, critical to preventing delayed discharges.

Will the member take an intervention?

The First Minister has, of course, disregarded the fact that there was pressure on the sector before the coalition cuts came in. Those cuts are now compounding the pressures. He also disregarded the fact that local government may find its savings disproportionately through the voluntary sector. Is he aware of the concerns of those who represent workers in the voluntary sector not just about the huge pressure on those who face losing their jobs, but on those who will remain in post and will have to pick up extra responsibilities in order to deliver the services that they care about? Will he agree to meet representatives of voluntary sector workers and their unions to consider urgently what he can do to support them in these difficult times?

I congratulate our colleague on securing this evening’s debate. He made some important points about the role of the further education sector, to which he is clearly very committed, and I congratulate him on his speech. I am also very proud of the FE sector. In particular, I want to highlight Cardonald College in my constituency, which has benefited from significant capital funding and has been magnificently refurbished. It is an excellent college and one that people enjoy, and it plays a critical role in the local economy, as well as everything else it does. Critically, it supports young people, but it is creative in providing opportunities for a wide range of people in my constituency and far beyond. Significantly and importantly, it provides second chances. If people have more challenges in their lives, they are less likely to have succeeded the first time round, at school, so the FE sector is crucial for giving people a second opportunity or, perhaps, a third one. We must not understate or underestimate the significance of that for youngsters who are born into difficult circumstances. They are often given the opportunity through the FE sector to achieve their potential and to move forward. Colleges are also important—again, Cardonald College has been excellent in this respect—because they reach out in communities to people who are hostile to formal education. The fact that they provide classes in the community has built confidence in the education sector, and we have some great examples of people benefiting from that. People who have previously been excluded from education because of their circumstances and people who have been reluctant to learn have discovered the joy of learning at a different stage of their lives. I also want to reiterate—this comment reflects some of what has already been said—that further education is not a second-best choice. Cardonald College is a good example of where the FE sector is leading the way and providing cutting-edge opportunities for learning—particularly in new technologies, whether they be in broadcasting or whatever—and it is leading the world in some circumstances. That ought to be recognised, too. Although the debate is a celebration—I do not deny the importance of celebrating—it is because of the issues that Andrew Welsh highlighted, particularly around the importance of colleges to deprived communities, that I want to mention the challenges that the sector is facing. Members will be aware of the National Union of Students Scotland’s campaign on bursaries, and I want to make just a couple of points about the importance of not endangering the sector through some of the decisions that have been made. We all get campaign letters on a wide range of issues, but I cannot overemphasise the degree to which the NUS campaign has been brought to my e-mail box in a way that no other campaign has. That reflects where the bursary cut is going to hit and the nature of the constituency that I represent. I hope that the minister will reflect again on the decision. We know that the number of people who are not in education, employment or training rose in the last period. We also know that £3 million of the more choices, more chances money has been cut from the sector, and that that will have a significant effect. Equally, the ending of some elements of the education maintenance allowance by the Scottish National Party has meant that £6 million has come out of support for poor families in our communities.

I fear that we might be in danger of leaving disadvantaged students even more disadvantaged. My challenge to the minister is to be alive to the consequences for particular equality groups of any spending choices that we make. Although the Tory Government has chosen not to enact the socioeconomic duty in relation to equalities, we should ask ourselves whether any spending choice that disproportionately affects women and disproportionately impacts on those with families, those who have struggled the most to get to college or those who have in their earlier lives been least supported in developing an education, is actually the right one. I urge the minister to examine this particular choice, to ask herself whether the decision to cut bursaries disproportionately impacts on youngsters from disadvantaged backgrounds and, if so, to think again about implementing it. My mailbag suggests that that is exactly what is happening. After all, given that we all share an interest in the sector, we will all want to ensure that we are not excluding youngsters. Notwithstanding that, I congratulate Andrew Welsh on making very important positive points about colleges, which are surviving through tough times.

Will the minister commit to asking officials to scrutinise the budget choices that have been made, precisely because, as she said, there are socioeconomic and gender aspects to the issue? We must ensure that we are not making cuts without thinking about the disproportionate consequences for some of the most disadvantaged people in our communities.

I welcome very much the idea of sharing information that will mean that housing benefit will not be paid out unless the property where the claimant lives is registered. However, the minister said that there required to be “flexibility” for “local issues”. Why is that? Surely consistency is the absolute in delivering our shared aims in all this.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I assure Sandra White that I will strive with every sinew to be as consensual as possible. The private sector plays an important role. I hope that the minister is alive to concern about what is happening in England. If there is a squeeze on funding in the social rented sector and rents rise as a consequence, we will end up in a position in which the only people who can afford to rent in the social rented sector will be people who are in receipt of housing benefit. That is a serious issue, which must be addressed.

We have been explicit in saying that we find the policy incomprehensible and deeply worrying. Another concern to do with housing benefit relates to the transfer of Government spend. Cutting capital spending and allowing housing associations to raise rents will mean that any improvements will be made on the back of people who are on housing benefit. A large number of private landlords are excellent at what they do, but at the heart of the issue are people who think that renting out a property is an investment opportunity and not a business, so they take no responsibility for their tenants or the communities in which their tenants live. In some cases at the extreme end of the spectrum, the sector provides opportunities for organised crime to settle into a community for the purposes of money laundering and extending control over the community. Those are serious issues. Landlord registration is therefore not just about the relationship between landlord and tenant; it is about what is happening in our communities. We should remember that the private landlord registration scheme came out of concerns about antisocial behaviour, and for good reason. Nothing stands still in our communities, and if problems are not addressed people give up and move out, property values go down and people with dodgy reputations and dark backgrounds buy up properties and put tenants in them. The issue is not just the tenants’ antisocial behaviour but the collusion between landlord and tenant in doing nothing about the behaviour. In my experience, even if a way is found to remove the tenant, the tenant who replaces them is not managed or challenged. If the focus is only on the tenant, the community still has the same problem. It is critical that we understand the problem in the context of ordinary people’s experiences. I welcome the people from the Croftfoot housing action group who are in the gallery. Mary Mulligan and I are Labour’s representatives on housing issues and I assure our visitors that Charlie Gordon keeps us well informed about their concerns, which are reflected in other parts of Glasgow, too. It is possible for people to earn money from a community while damaging and destroying it. It might be for individual tenants to be aware that they should ensure that their landlord is registered, but that is a small issue in comparison with the way in which the public purse often funds the problem. The bill builds on previous legislation, and if ever a lesson can be learned about the limits of legislation, one can be learned from the experience of the private landlord registration scheme. I welcome the extension of the scheme through the fit-and-proper person test, but if people do not feel the need to apply for registration it will not matter what we put in the test. The test will be irrelevant. I am concerned that good landlords are asking why they should register, if we are not addressing the problem. I support any measure that will strengthen the private landlord registration scheme. When he was Minister for Communities and Sport, Stewart Maxwell was assiduous in pressing local authorities on what they were doing, and I hope that that pressure has been sustained. My concern is that local authorities are saying that the resources necessary to enforce registration do not exist at a local level. There was dedicated funding in the early days. What has happened to that money? Have we sustained that level of investment in enforcement? If not, we need to think about how investment can be sustained. I welcomed and was interested in what the minister had to say about information sharing. I understand that he was talking about pilot projects. We need to do more to ensure that that approach is rolled out. I am interested to hear what more the minister has to say about his discussions with the UK Government on information sharing. When I was a minister, I was involved in such discussions but, sadly, I was not sufficiently persuasive. For me, this is the bottom line: if it is an offence for a landlord to receive rent on a property that they have not registered, why is the public purse paying out money on such properties? That is completely ludicrous. I welcome the pilots and the voluntary approach, but the housing benefit review provides a great opportunity to say that a landlord must have a registration number to show that they have registered. We will stop many of those problems if we stop people trading outwith the system. We create the incentive for landlords to trade outwith the system and we need to deal with that. It is important for the culture that renters—particularly young people and students who are becoming renters for the first time—should expect registration. There should be evidence of that and it should become the norm. We should not be having a discussion with the Scottish Association of Landlords about the number of figures in the registration number. As the minister said, we can find a system of making the registration numbers shorter. The point is that people need to be able to ask for the number before they rent at all. On HMOs, we all wrestle with the conflict between the need of students to have accommodation at a rent that they can afford and the rights of communities to be mixed and stable. We can build a consensus to work our way through that conflict, too. On planning, it is possible to establish a quota, but it would be essential for prospective landlords to know ahead of investing in an HMO that there was no point in applying if the quota had already been reached. There are important issues in that regard. Our Lib Dem and Tory colleagues will have to reflect on the consequences of the housing benefit changes, which will increase the number of people who live in HMOs. In some parts of our cities, particularly in Glasgow—I reflect on the authority that Frank McAveety brings to the question—it is not possible to address overcrowding through housing policy, because the issue is closely tied up with employment. Migrant workers come in and are exploited in relation to the quality of the accommodation that they get. We need to ensure that we use more than one policy to address that. There are big challenges that may be linked to the gangmaster legislation and on which we need to reflect. I welcome the interesting suggestions of a housing tribunal or court. As with antisocial behaviour legislation more generally—we can also think of other circumstances—it is hugely frustrating that the justice system seems simply not to understand what problem is being addressed. The courts think that it is an issue of a tenant being evicted because the landlord has suggested something simple, which they think is unreasonable. They say that fines of a certain level are unreasonable, because they have no comprehension of the scale of the problem or the scale of the damage that is inflicted on communities. It would be useful to inform them of what we are talking about and to have people with a degree of expertise. Certainly, in my area, there is an active disincentive for housing associations and other landlords—I am sure that it applies to the local authority as well—to spend money that they can ill afford only to find that the court clearly does not understand the problem. The measures in the bill build on what we did before, but the lesson is that, without enforcement, legislation is just words on a page. Our colleagues in the public gallery and in our communities remain frustrated. We must do what is in the bill, but we must also take it beyond that. There are critical, hard enforcement issues that we need to address. We look forward to working with the minister and others to ensure that we strengthen the legislation across that range of issues and raise the necessary questions about enforcement.

On the point that Nigel Don made about poverty being a factor in domestic violence, there is an issue about women lacking funds, but I am sure that he agrees with Scottish Women's Aid and others that male violence is no respecter of class. In fact, we delude ourselves if we think that it happens only in poor communities.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and I add the Labour Party's congratulations to Scottish Women's Aid on its anniversary—more power to its elbow as the years go on. I reflect on the women who, at the beginning, saw the need for an organisation such as Scottish Women's Aid and who delivered support and compassion at a local level to women who had nowhere to go. Christmas and new year can be an emotional time for all of us as we reflect, remember Christmases past, think of people who have gone before us, look to the future and think of what might be. It is a time to think of the goodness in people and the hope that we all have for the future. As the minister reflected, there is something deeply depressing about the gap between the idealised view of the family that we sometimes have, particularly at this time of year, and the all too stark reality for women and children when violence has been brought into their home, where they should be safe, and for women who have to flee their homes and become refugees in their own country. We understand the terrible pressure that domestic abuse puts on families, but we also recognise that it goes beyond the home. Violence against women is expressed in many ways and forms. This is a good opportunity to reaffirm our understanding of the experience of women and children who face violence and to recommit ourselves to harnessing the power of government at every level and the talent and energy of women's organisations and the voluntary sector to support women in challenging that violence and educating our children—our boys and our girls—about a better way to live. I hear what the minister says about male victims of abuse, but when we are talking to our young people we need to reflect on the statistics. If we do not understand that there is a pattern to such abuse, which is overwhelmingly male abuse of women, our boys and girls will not be in a position to challenge it—to have young men challenge the attitudes of other young men and to ensure that girls do not feel the pressure that they sometimes report and do not experience, as all too many  young girls do, forms of violence at a very early stage in a relationship. As we look back on the year, we see that the figures on the reporting of domestic abuse are steady. Some of that is because we are in a culture in which women can come forward, but we know that every one of the figures reflects hidden suffering by individuals and families. We also know that there have been many expressions of the spectrum of violence against women. We are aware of the persistent reality of violence against women in Scotland, throughout the UK and around the world. We reflect on how tragic the reality is of reports in the papers again and again of women dying at the hands of their partners—women killed because they finally had the courage to leave; killed at the point when they made the decision; or pursued and chased down after they had gone. How terrifying it is to think that, as we read the headlines and shudder, women who are experiencing violence and are thinking about doing something about it, by leaving, turn away from their planned escape because they fear for themselves and their children. When they see the headlines in the papers, they understand that the threat, "I will kill you if you go," is not an idle one. I welcome what the minister said about the GPS initiative, but what does it say about the perpetrators of violence that to protect women we need to use such technology? It is the same for initiatives to protect women by giving them mobile phones that do not show up on a telephone bill—I have referred to that before. What kind of world are we living in where a woman has to have access to a mobile phone that does not show up on a phone bill because her partner might see it and punish her? Violence against women is a horrific crime and we need to reaffirm our determination to understand and challenge the violence that women face and the way that it impacts on women's lives. Violence is used as a weapon of war around the world—the 16 days against violence against women is a reflection of that broader international aspect of women's experiences—and it daily shapes the lives of women and young people and destroys their life chances. I am interested in the information that the minister gave about the voice against violence project, because we know that young people have a great deal to say about their experiences but are all too often silenced by either the perpetrator of the violence or the shame or feeling of isolation that it brings. It is critical that we continue to support such young people in school, where they maybe have someone they can speak to.  We should guard against complacency and it is important to ensure that the policy approach articulated by the minister is delivered on the ground. There ought not to be a separation between our aspiration and how we deliver it, which is why I welcome the commitment to continuing the dedicated funding that was identified. Whatever our views on spending and ending ring fencing, I believe that it is too much of a risk at this stage not to dedicate money to tackling violence against women. We must ensure that services are delivered throughout Scotland to protect women. I want to raise a number of concerns with the minister, which I hope he will address. In the spirit of Christmas, I will not make them too hard, but there are issues that we must reflect on. As I have said, I welcome the certainty of funding. That choice shows the power of women's organisations in the debate, because it reflects a strong campaign by women to highlight how important dedicated funding is. We have to look at the single outcome agreement process. Again, people have different views on that, but there is a concern that the single outcome agreement process does not sufficiently reflect a commitment to tackle violence against women. Scottish Women's Aid highlights concerns that, at a local level, women are stuck in refuges—if they can get a refuge place—and cannot move on because of the unavailability of appropriate housing for them. I would welcome the minister's comments on how he might address that issue. There is also the issue of women who have no recourse to public funds. It is frightening for women who have come to this country and then want to leave a violent situation but are unable to be supported. Women's aid organisations and Amnesty International have highlighted their plight. I know that it is a matter for the UK Government, but I would welcome an update from the minister on the discussions that he has had with Westminster. Another issue is prostitution, which Trish Godman will talk about later in the debate. In addressing prostitution and the trafficking of women, it is critical that we tackle the purchaser—the person who creates the demand in the first place. Prostitution underpins an attitude to women and power relationships that must be addressed. To those who say that prostitution will always be with us, I say that such an attitude would mean that children would still be up chimneys. It is a counsel of despair. Trish Godman will say more about that critical issue. Although there is agreement in the Parliament, there is still hostility on these issues in society. We  may have won the argument in here, but we have a long way to go in our broader communities. It is about the power that men have, which is why, in talking about violence against women, we must talk about not just the what but the why. When we understand the why, we will finally be able to eradicate it.

I welcome the opportunity to open the debate and I thank the members who have supported the motion in my name. It is important to reflect on the issues that are highlighted in the motion. It is worth noting that a similar motion was lodged in Westminster by my colleague Cathy Jamieson, in recognition of the fact that the challenges that face kinship carers have been and are compounded by decisions or lack of action at every level of government—local, Scottish and United Kingdom. I acknowledge the powerful role of the kinship carers who have forced the debate into the public domain. Kinship carers in my constituency and far beyond have found a voice and demanded that we listen. We should pledge to ensure that the solutions to the challenges that they face should be developed with and by them, for they know more than anyone what the reality of their experience is, despite the claims by some that their problems have been addressed. All members recognise the critical role of many kinship carers. Day and daily, grannies and granddads, aunties and uncles, cousins, brothers and sisters and sometimes simply family friends do everything in their power to protect and nurture often very vulnerable children. We should be aware of the degree of sacrifice in time and energy  by families in supporting those children. Sometimes, grannies even give up their beds when they should be putting their feet up after a long working life. Often, when grandparents look after their grandchildren, the issues are compounded by the emotional involvement that they experience when their son or daughter is the parent who is failing. Such people have spoken to me about their determination to ensure that, having lost one generation to drugs, they will not lose the next one. The final decision to bring a child into their home will often have been preceded by years of anxiety and stress, and fear for the children. Kinship carers deserve more than pieties or congratulations from us, especially when we consider what they save the public purse and the better outcomes that they provide for needy children. Kinship carers need and deserve a proper understanding of the challenges that they face. The debate on the issue is too easily distilled into an argument about financial payments and how those are fixed. I have been struck by the voices of kinship carers who feel frustrated by that description of their plight. First, they say that the financial support that they fight for is not for them, but for the children, to meet their needs. Secondly, the issue is not just about financial support, although many of the families involved live in poverty. It is also about a proper understanding of the emotional, psychological and educational needs of children who have endured hardship and neglect. For kinship carer families, the issue is the rights of the children. It is not a debate about adult entitlement. Let us imagine that two children make the same journey through abuse and perhaps neglect. Unnurtured, they are denied the normal hugs and sense of security that family life brings, and they are affected and marked by all that goes with living in a family where parents, for example, are drug addicted. The two children end up in the same place, where for their own safety and wellbeing they have to be taken from the family home. It is impossible to understand why the support that is then provided to the two children is defined not by their care needs but by the relationship that they have with the person who takes on the job of caring for them. One child goes into foster care and has access to one level of support. The other child goes to granny, and there starts a battle for that family to get any help at all. That is a simple and irrational injustice for that child and every other child in those circumstances. There is on-going frustration that there is not equivalence between foster and kinship carers. There is still a postcode lottery in the level of payments in different parts of Scotland, and indeed in some places there are no payments at  all. There is no tackling of the further discrimination against those who take in a child, accepted and sanctioned by social work but in an arrangement not made by social work, where no payment is made because there is no formal measure of care. There is a concern that there is an incentive for social work to encourage family arrangements, rather than making the arrangements more formal, on the ground of cost. In addition, there is still no proper addressing of the problem of the relationship between benefits and kinship care payments. All those problems remain, and until they are addressed and sorted we are all culpable in celebrating kinship carers' role but not willing the means for their lives to be made a little easier. There is a temptation for us all, of whatever political stripe, to talk up what our own party has done in this regard and leave our sharpest criticisms for the efforts of others, but it is impossible for me to overstate the clear message that I have been given by kinship carers when I meet them at the Poverty Truth Commission, in my constituency or elsewhere. All of us, as politicians, need to stop blaming each other, stop passing the buck, and get together to get this sorted. I say gently to Bob Doris that the amendment that he lodged, presenting his Government's actions as positively as he did, falls absolutely into that category. We have failed these children at every level of Government and we ought not to miss the challenge that that presents to us all. There are, of course, those who tell us that this is a complex or difficult area, but that is a counsel of despair. If kinship carers can hold traumatised children to them in love, it cannot be beyond the wit of our collective endeavour to find a way to support them in that critical job. There is a lot of talk these days about preventive spend. The reality is that a little support to these children and their carers now will pay dividends in allowing the children to reclaim their childhood, and in the future to achieve their potential. It will also help to sustain those carers through the tough times that they face in dealing with the consequence of the abuse that these children have faced in the past, and help them with what they do out of love. At every level of government, energy should be put not into saying what we cannot do or justifying the limits to what we have already done, but into working together. I will be interested to hear what the minister has to say about his capacity to work with other levels of government and co-operate in that regard. It is no longer acceptable at any level of government for people to say, "We have done enough." We need to show how we can work together to solve the problem. The fact of the matter is that that co-operation and focus would be a new year's resolution that is worth making, and it  is one that we should all be determined to keep in the future, not only in the interests of kinship carers but, critically, in the interests of their desire for the needs of the children that they support to be properly met.

Will the minister give way?

I intend my remarks to be relatively brief, Presiding Officer. The whole area of asylum and immigration is a difficult one. By definition, if a country has an immigration policy, it will also have failed asylum seekers. The issue is then how the country treats people with humanity once that decision is made. The issue would be a problem for anyone, whichever position they are in. I note what Anne McLaughlin said about her treatment as a member, but I want to reflect the concerns that exist about the way in which the UK Border Agency treated asylum seeker families in Glasgow when it sent them a letter telling them that they would be going shortly and that they were to take only three bags with them. It seems to me that the agency displayed a lack not just of compassion and understanding, but of awareness of the extent to which those families were integrated in their communities, with their young people attending local schools. I put on record my thanks to Glasgow, my home city, for the way in which it stepped up to the plate when asylum seekers were to be dispersed throughout the country. Glasgow City Council, unlike any other local authority, chose to take those people, I think, because of its long history of showing compassion and understanding for people who have come into Scotland. It was not  always an easy process and the council was the subject of a lot of criticism, but it should be commended for the way in which it tackled the issue, on which it worked closely with communities. I think that members of all parties would accept that there is a sharp contrast between the attitude of Glasgow City Council and the way in which the UKBA has conducted itself. The reality is that asylum seekers were caught up in contract negotiations. The UKBA took a dehumanising approach, whereby it saw people in such circumstances as bargaining chips. I believe that through its letter, it tried, almost deliberately, to up the ante, but the real consequences were felt not by the council, which was wrestling with the problem, but by individual families. Members will recall that during an exchange at a recent First Minister's question time, I highlighted the situation of a young woman at Lourdes secondary school who was being supported by her school community, and the impact that receiving one of those letters, at the very point at which she was studying for exams, had on her family and her mother. It seemed to me that the UKBA's action reflected a lack of understanding of the human and family dimensions of the problem. When interventions on such matters are planned, there needs to be an understanding that families and communities will be affected. I invite the minister to give us an update on the role of the Scottish Government, particularly in relation to its responsibilities for the education and welfare of young people. The First Minister responded positively when I raised that and it would be useful to know how progress can be made in that difficult area. It is important that the minister makes his voice heard on that argument. In addition, I raise with the minister the importance of supporting and funding the integration networks in Glasgow, which were particularly successful when there was tension when asylum seekers first came to the city. An immense amount of work was done by voluntary organisations, church groups and, more broadly, faith groups in welcoming asylum seekers and bringing all the communities together to develop a community understanding and a shared history of change and separation that enabled people to understand some of the dreadful circumstances that asylum seekers had been through. I would welcome the minister commenting on whether he sees the potential for funding such preventive work, which I think has been so important, and I would like him to give us an update on how services can be delivered across communities such as mine, to ensure that when there are pressures on those communities, the allocation of funding recognises and follows that.  At the heart of Anne McLaughlin's position is the need to understand asylum seekers as individuals and families, so that when people make decisions, they understand that they can have traumatic consequences for families that have already experienced a great deal of trauma.

What discussions have ministers had with local authorities about the implications of the decision to close the independent living fund, given that many local authorities—including Glasgow—lever in ILF moneys to support people with disabilities to live independently? What discussions will the minister have with local authorities on how they might meet that shortfall, given the important role of such packages in allowing people to remain in the community, perhaps working, rather than having to go into supported—and indeed more expensive—care? Is that not a very good example of preventative spending that is being lost to many local authorities and families?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am happy to contribute to this important debate. I recognise the desire not simply to dwell on the problems of last week but to reflect on them and learn lessons. I am frustrated that all the evidence of the last period is that the lessons of last year have clearly not been learned. That compounded the problems that we faced last week. The problem with the way in which the debate around the issue was conducted last year, and last month at First Minister's question time, is that the response to anxieties about the mistakes of last year, and the lack of preparedness this year, was to suggest that those asking the questions were attacking the blue-light services, volunteers and neighbours who dealt with the difficult circumstances. That is simply not true. In acknowledging that selfless effort, we also have to acknowledge that those who are charged with protecting communities from the severe weather—ministers and others—compounded the difficulties  and made the circumstances worse for those who gave up their valuable time and made an effort to help others. My concerns go back a year. Since that time, I have sensed a fundamental flaw in the approach of the Scottish Government, which seems to see the issue of severe weather conditions as one of grit and traffic management. It seems not to see the people and the cost and risk to individuals, families and communities. There simply has to be a shift in attitude. Indeed, the report that the Government commissioned last year focused on little else but salt issues. As far as I can see, when the report was consulted on, the Government did not seek to engage with communities, voluntary groups and organisations. That approach was reflected in last week's problems. Even on the roads, as the traffic stacked up, authorities seemed to see the vehicles not the occupants. There seemed to be no strategy for identifying or making contact with vulnerable passengers—those with children and others. Indeed, I have heard that people saw the police only when they were being told to get back into their cars. There seemed to be no understanding why someone with a young child, elderly people or those who needed medicine might want to go to the local services.

I am not attacking any individual emergency worker. I made that point before. As I said, when we raise these issues, it is unhelpful to suggest that. This is about strategy and approach, not individual instances of assistance. The challenge that the severe weather presents demands a response that goes beyond Mr Swinney as the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and beyond the Minister for Transport and Infrastructure. We need a joint ministerial approach in which the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—who, I am disappointed to say, is not in the chamber today—plays a critical role. I regret her virtual silence on the issue. I cite the example of swine flu by way of comparison, for which rigorous contingency planning was rightly put in place. That included a national helpline, and the information sharing from that—not only on practical issues—saw the Government reaching out to people and giving  them reassurance. If we can do that for swine flu, why not for severe weather? The people who were trapped on the roads were visible, but I believe that we have seen only the tip of the iceberg in respect of those who were trapped in their own homes and therefore invisible. We need more rigour. It is simply not good enough to say without evidence that people were helped. There is no certainty in that. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth does not need to take my word for it. In the middle of the crisis, Age Scotland said on the radio that people were phoning its helpline having phoned their local council for help and being told, "You are not known to us. We can do nothing for you." Age Scotland also reported that people who phoned its helpline expressed feelings of isolation and loneliness. Surely, in this context, my on-going call for a national helpline makes sense. The number could be circulated early in the year, including by way of advertisement, so that people had it beside their phone. I agree that people who used such a national helpline could be directed towards other appropriate helplines, but a national number would help where there were local weaknesses, as in the example that I cited. We ask people to surf the web, but the disproportionate number of elderly people and poor people who have no access to the internet means that the most vulnerable are the least likely to have access to information. I have never understood why the Scottish Government is so defensive on the matter. I join others in commending voluntary effort, but what national and local contingency planning has been put in place to harness that voluntary effort? That should be done when the sun shines. We should get such arrangements sorted and learn from local good practice. My local carers centre has a plan in place whereby, when the weather becomes bad, it does a phone-round. Are we recommending that to others? What are we asking general practitioners to do? Are they identifying vulnerable people to contact once the snow comes? What are we asking of our lunch clubs? Are we asking those who are willing to help to clear footpaths to do so in a more rigorous and planned way? The approach does not need to be bureaucratic; it can harness the energy of people who want to help and provide more benefit more consistently across the piece. I want to flag up a number of other issues in the short time that I have left. There is a public transport issue that has not been addressed at all—that of people getting the wrong information, walking for miles to get to stations and then being told that the trains were not running. A final, critical issue is that of some employees in our workforce being discriminated against.  Some commentators have asked why people went on the roads when they knew that the snow was coming, but if you are in a low-paid job and your boss tells you that you must get to your work—

The irony is that managerial people with their BlackBerrys can work at home without suffering any financial impact, whereas the most low-paid workers are forced to go to their work and are condemned if they do not. We must have a dialogue with our employers across the sector to ensure that those people are protected, too.

I, too, congratulate Jim Hume on securing this important debate, and pass on my condolences. He is determined to continue to press the issue in difficult times. Members will be relieved to hear that I do not intend to make a long speech, but I would like to follow on from what Christine Grahame said and make a couple of relevant points. I recognise the critical role of sudden arrhythmia death syndrome campaigning groups and the way in which such groups can inform and shape health policy more generally. In particular, I want to mention the Cardiomiopathy Association and the Scottish support group because of the critical role that they have had in highlighting important issues. There is often campaigning activity and determination to raise issues in times of great personal loss. People are driven and focused even when they face the most tragic circumstances, and they determine that what has happened should not happen to somebody else. I stand in awe of everybody who is able to do that in the face of such thoughts. They are able to look at their experience, to determine that others should not experience the same, and to try to progress things. I want to mention Irene and Bob McConnachie, who are constituents of mine and are now friends. They lost their son and had a particularly traumatic experience following that loss. They were to be tested to see whether there was anything in their  genetic make-up, and the journey proved to be horrendous for them. It involved having to go, until very recently, for screening and testing and follow-up work in London. They realised then the extent to which the medical profession is unaware of the condition’s potential to affect the broader family. Perhaps we are not talking about across-the-board screening, but family screening where there has been an impact on the family and finding a way of supporting people through it are critical. It is understandable that there is a lot of coverage in newspapers when a high-profile footballer or athlete loses their life as a result of the condition, but the question is what should be done for the broader family to find out whether they are at risk as well and whether they can be supported. I recognise that there has been a significant development in Scotland. Bob McConnachie, whom I mentioned, is in a group that has been developing the familial arrhythmia network for Scotland, which has done a presentation to Helen Eadie’s cross-party group on heart disease and stroke. The critical issue for it is supporting families and bringing together clinical geneticists, cardiologists and families to try to develop protocols so that people do not have to go on the horrendous journey that my constituents went on. I would welcome any comments or information from the minister on how that work is being progressed. As in many other areas, people’s energies, commitment and understanding are being harnessed so that they can come together and say where there is a flaw or gap in health provision. The health professionals can then respond in a positive way and, critically, maintain understanding and awareness of issues among our young people and, more broadly, among families and the medical profession. I commend Jim Hume for his motion, and everybody who has continued to make all the political parties focus on the matter, and would welcome an update from the minister on how matters are being progressed at Scottish Government level.

I am sure that the minister is aware of the connection  between the trafficking of people into this country and the demand for prostitution. Indeed, there is evidence of women who are brought in for domestic services and who end up being forced into prostitution. In the light of that connection, will he make a commitment to consider the proposal for a bill lodged by Trish Godman, which seeks to address the whole issue of criminalising the purchasing of sex, and to do all that he can to support the intention behind the proposal? Such a bill would have an impact on the likelihood of people being trafficked into the country.

The minister says that there is a role for the voluntary sector. Can she respond to the point about the need to support the people who support volunteering? We currently have people who want to volunteer, but the projects that organise volunteers are struggling financially. Voluntary sector organisations are slightly different from organisations that support volunteering. Can she see a way forward for those organisations?

I am delighted to participate in the debate. I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing the debate and highlighting the various issues that she covered in her speech. I thank the WRVS and Age Scotland for the information that they have provided for the debate. I have the great privilege of being Labour's older persons champion, but I am conscious that organisations such as Age Scotland and the WRVS do that job far better than I can do it. It is critical that we listen to such organisations when they flag up issues to do with our elderly population. Projects such as that which Karen Gillon highlights in her constituency exist throughout Scotland. I am grateful to all the people in my constituency who volunteer and give up their time to support people in the way that she described. There is a fabulous community transport project in my constituency. It is fabulous not just because it takes people from A to B, but because it understands a community in which people are less likely to have cars. It understands that the issue is not just getting elderly people to hospital appointments or visits, but enabling them to feel safe when they go to hospital, which is a situation in which we all feel trepidation. It is about being compassionate and supportive. I have had the privilege of meeting volunteers who go far beyond what might be expected to support people. We must find ways of recognising the critical role of such volunteers and bus transport projects. As the cold weather continues, I am anxious. Earlier today members talked about the visible problems that the cold weather brings, but there are also invisible problems. What we are hearing might be the tip of the iceberg. We do not know about older, vulnerable people who are isolated in their own homes and are perhaps not getting the help that they should be getting from their local authorities. As the minister thinks about the issue,  I urge her to talk to Age Scotland, the WRVS and other organisations that are highlighting the isolation and vulnerability that people feel. Perhaps we need a more co-ordinated approach to reaching out to people. In the short term, we do not know what problems and difficulties people are facing. I agree that preventive spending has a critical role. That is why we argued for transparency in the budget process. How do we shift attitudes towards preventive spending and make the case that a project that keeps people together is cheaper in the long term? It is not just an issue for Government; I think that everyone understands that there is a challenge to do with how we make the transition from one attitude to another. It is important that we work our way through the issue, because decisions that are being made now might counter the ability to secure benefits in the longer term. In the short term, people will get rid of funding for projects that would have a long-term benefit if they continued to receive support. We need a means whereby we can organise and support people who volunteer. The Community Service Volunteers project for older people who volunteer services has already gone. There are anxieties about funding for voluntary projects, although there are people who are waiting to volunteer. We have to tackle the issue. It is clear that we need a refreshed volunteering strategy, which addresses anxieties about funding and understands the needs of the voluntary sector. We need to understand how to support people who want to volunteer so that they can join an appropriate project, which will be sustained. That is about more than just funding. People who are involved in volunteering and the voluntary sector have a critical role, not just in meeting needs but in showing us what the needs are. We need to work closely with those people, who understand the anxiety that older people experience. With their help, for example by providing a library service or lifts to church or hospital, we will not just contain but sustain people in their homes. I am sure that we all agree on that.

Does the minister accept that individuals and families who were stuck on motorways, without information and advice, fearful of running out of petrol—with no effort apparently having been made to identify and prioritise help to vulnerable passengers, including children and people with medical problems—will simply not accept his statement that the Government responded quickly and will see his complacency and lack of humility as part of the problem that they suffered? When did the minister realise that his back-to-work strategy was not working? Where was he from that point, and what did he do before the belated meeting at 8 o'clock at night? Will he respond to the man on the motorway hard shoulder who said that someone should pay and that, in his view, it should be the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change? If not the transport minister, who should take responsibility and go in response to the dreadful circumstances that people face?

I welcome the minister's comments on the funding. Will he clarify that he is continuing the dedicated funding for the services that Malcolm Chisholm mentioned in his question? A degree of anxiety has been generated that the funding might be rolled up in the local government settlement, which would put the services at risk. I would welcome clarification of that. I also raise the critical issue of the provision of services at the local level through single outcome agreements. The minister will be aware that analysis of single outcome agreements suggests that there is not a commitment at the local level to specific funding on the issue of violence against women. Will he clarify the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's intention to provide an analysis of the implementation of single outcome agreements for 2009-10? Thus far, he has simply said that he has not yet decided. I understand that the decision remains with him. If we had that analysis, it would give confidence to those who seek to deliver services locally.

I am happy to contribute to this important debate. It is the second week in a row that I have been involved in a debate on the economy, which in itself is hugely unusual. The issue of what we can do to support the Scottish economy, create jobs and generate economic growth is a critical one. I start with a confession. Unlike Linda Fabiani, I have not managed to read Jeremy Purvis's 47-page document. However, given the stimulating pitch that he provided, I can assure him that it will  move to the top of my to-do list as soon as I leave the chamber. I was interested to listen to Jeremy Purvis's critique and to his proposals for the infrastructure to create a stronger economy. There is a danger of being blinded by the science and losing the purpose of the debate. We can have a long, thorough discussion about the infrastructure but perhaps miss why we want to get that infrastructure right. I am concerned that we may focus on structures and lose the opportunity to reflect on how we might support individuals, the private sector and voluntary organisations to create economic opportunities. In stimulating innovation and entrepreneurship, we need to think not just about the process but about people. The issue of social entrepreneurship—the idea that there are different models for how people can contribute to the economy—is critical. We need to feed that in to any debate about infrastructure and its purpose. I recognise the fundamental point that we need to get the infrastructure right to will the means to the ends that we seek. Government has to assert that it is an active agent; it is not enough for it to stand by. It is not enough for the Scottish Government to claim that it is doing things; it must focus on delivery. I was rather depressed by an intervention from Mr Mather on the facts of the economy, in which he seemed to retrench further into the SNP comfort zone of explaining why the Government cannot do things and what is not its fault. Instead of doing that, ministers should be grasping the levers that are available to them and focusing on their responsibilities.

After I have made the point. The minister may want to respond to it, too. The minister said that the Scottish Government is committed to a transparent process. When will we get the conclusion of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's reflections on the significant vote last Thursday in which the chamber agreed that local authorities, public bodies and voluntary sector organisations in Scotland need spending plans for the next four years, just as bodies across the whole of the United Kingdom do?

I certainly want to put on record the fact that the Labour Government saved  the banks and made a significant contribution to the Scottish economy as a consequence. The fact of the matter is that having four-year plans is not an academic process. We need answers. People are making decisions now, and making them in the dark. As the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities indicated, as a consequence of that, unnecessary cuts may be made. The voluntary groups that I met yesterday told me that they are in exactly that position. They are losing people because their staff do not know what the future holds and so are looking for other jobs, which leads to an increase in recruitment costs, a loss of capacity and weakened service delivery. We need a Government response to that. I am interested in the reforms that Jeremy Purvis outlined. I appreciate the importance of Government agencies in supporting the economy and Co-operative Development Scotland, which was set up by the former Scottish Executive, has an important role to play in that. We need to review its activities and consider the opportunities that it could create for co-operative businesses across a whole range of areas. Doing that would reinforce our ambitions for this country. I welcome the minister's views on the direction of travel for Co-operative Development Scotland. I am hugely frustrated by the changes that have already been made to the purpose of Scottish Enterprise, which no longer has a role in people or place. Any future plans for our infrastructure must have that. I recall asking a Scottish Enterprise official what Scottish Enterprise could do to support economic generation activity in my community, where few people start up businesses and more people are likely to be unemployed. When I asked what Scottish Enterprise was doing to create local lobs or to recognise the barriers to people in my constituency—including people with disabilities and the disadvantaged—getting into work, the answer was, "Nothing. That is not our job." The current strategy for Scottish Enterprise represents an absolutely failed strategy. It spends a lot but has no role in local communities. That needs to be changed. Supporting specialist sectors and big and highly profitable businesses to bring in work should be tested as an approach. We are all aware of the small and medium-sized business argument that we get a far greater return in economic activity and employment opportunities if investment is directed at them. The most significant businesses in my constituency are housing associations and housing co-ops. The lack of information from the Government on its spending plans, combined with cuts to the housing and regeneration budgets, are creating a destabilising effect for those critical community anchors and generators of economic  opportunity, a situation that must apply across the country. In its economic enterprise budget strategy, the Government needs to understand the disproportionate impact of its decisions on particular groups. I will highlight two: women and school leavers. On average, women make up 70 percent of the local authority workforce. In the health service, the evidence is that women predominate in jobs that are more likely to be lost. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is asking for pay restraint, but he will not will the means for local government to protect low-paid women workers who earn under £21,000. My colleague, David Whitton, highlighted the disturbing situation of school leavers going into employment, the figure for which is lower than at any time since 1992-93. We also see the continuing trend of vulnerable school leavers being less successful in securing work. Any strategy around infrastructure and enterprise has to find a way of releasing that potential and addressing the lack of opportunity across our communities. That is why I believe that Labour's proposed Scottish future jobs fund is so important. We must reflect on whether the commitments on infrastructure bodies are being delivered in the real world. A couple of weeks ago, in response to a question from Iain Gray, the First Minister spoke about his commitment to apprenticeships. Within an hour, I had received a phone call from someone in my constituency who a month ago, three and a half years into his apprenticeship, had been laid off and told that no one could help him. There has to be a commitment to infrastructure engaging in the real world and taking things forward. I would welcome the Scottish Government's response on all those critical areas, including how its equality duties are shaping choices. Those duties are about not just describing the impact on groups but changing choices to ensure that they are fair. In particular, will the minister comment on the fact that, at UK level, the Government has not enacted the socioeconomic duty? Will the Government ensure that, in the spending plans that it takes forward, the socioeconomic duty is a central part of its approach to the structure—whatever we come up with—for enterprise, employment and creating economic opportunity that will address the needs of people who are economically disadvantaged?

Will the minister explain why unemployment figures in Scotland were ahead of those for the United Kingdom and are now behind them?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Can the member explain why Wales and Northern Ireland have produced spending plans for more than one year but it is beyond the wit and ability of his minister to do that?

With respect, you are in government and you have an obligation to meet the needs—

The minister has an obligation to meet the needs of the people of Scotland. Will he, in a spirit of compromise and consensus, confirm that if the motion is agreed to at 5 o'clock, he will produce the spending plans for which we have called?

I am pleased to open the debate on behalf of the Labour Party. I recognise that it is an important debate for the people of Scotland. It is not our intention for this to be a yah-boo debate; it is not a debate for the sake of it, but one that is of significance for all Scotland. As members might be aware, I am not an aficionado of budget debates. However, this is not simply a debate for the parties' finance spokespeople—which is why I am opening—but one that is at the heart of Labour's concerns and, I believe, the concerns of others about the Scottish National Party's approach and attitude to the development of the budget and the consequences for individuals, families and communities throughout Scotland. Our motion recognises the reality in Scotland of uncertainty, anxiety, stress and fear for what the future may bring. Our job—the purpose of the Scottish Parliament—is to protect people and to take action that offers greater stability and certainty. The evident uncertainty is corrosive; it is a threat that is not easily captured in a ledger but which fundamentally impacts on people's lives. Our central argument is that the Scottish Government is compounding that uncertainty. Yes—Mr Swinney is demanding efficiencies and outlining his spending priorities for the next year, but the reality is that he is preventing a wide range of public and voluntary bodies and local authorities from being able to plan and make informed choices about the future. The Scottish Government has the information. It can help, but chooses not to by refusing to give spending projections for the period of the comprehensive spending review. When the Scottish Government is challenged about its many failures, broken promises or incompetences, it often says that it is a minority Government. That is not, in itself, the problem: the problem is that it is a minority that is incapable of seeking compromise  and consensus. Instead of seeking co-operation to support people in these tough times, it acts in a way that keeps MSPs in this Parliament in the dark and, more important, which keeps in the dark crucial public bodies and organisations that are striving to deliver front-line services. It is our contention that that is a dereliction of duty and an abdication of responsibility: those are sacrificed on the altar of party interest, not in the country's interest. At decision time today, there will be an opportunity for the Parliament to assert itself against that minority control over the Parliament's powers, and to confirm its disapproval of the approach and its consequences for the people whom we represent. If successful, it will be a challenge to the Scottish Government to accept accountability and to act accordingly to create more certainty and give people more protection. I expect that, if the motion is supported at decision time, the Minister for Parliamentary Business will report as a matter of urgency on how he plans to enact that decision of the Parliament. We want the Scottish Government to take an approach that recognises the challenge not only for ministers but for all those who depend on the Government's funding. Mr Swinney said in his budget statement that this is not a one-year problem and then revealed that he would provide only a one-year budget. That contradiction is as odd as it is unacceptable.

That intervention was self-evidently ludicrous. We make the point—I will make it again later—that this is not about elections but about serving the people of this country. Mr Swinney says that it is difficult in these unprecedented times to do as we suggest, but in Wales people have the information and in England people have the information. Earlier in the week, the Northern Ireland Government indicated that it would provide spending plans for 2011-12 to 2014-15 as part of its budget process. I even understand that in the Republic of Ireland—despite the system there being under terrible pressure—the Government has made it clear that  any budget that it produces will provide plans for a period far beyond the next year. In a previous debate, when Mr Swinney was being asked to produce an indicative budget ahead of the comprehensive spending review, he replied that Wales had taken the same approach as he had; that he and the Welsh finance minister were as one and had decided "to wait until the comprehensive spending review had been undertaken". Mr Swinney asked Andy Kerr: "If that approach is good enough for Welsh Labour, why is it not good enough for Scottish Labour?"— [ Official Report , 4 November 2010; c 29972.]  In the same way, we might now ask: if a spending review for the comprehensive spending review period is good enough for England, for Wales and for Northern Ireland, why is it not good enough for Scotland? Why, uniquely, are we incapable of doing it? What is unique about our civil servants that renders them incapable of identifying options for spend beyond the next year? Is Mr Swinney really saying that no work has been done, or is being done, to prepare spending plans? If the work has been done, why could it not be done as part of the budget process? Were civil servants instructed not to do the work? If they are doing that work, why is it not being harnessed to create certainty for all those who seek to meet need in our communities? The truth is that Mr Swinney has that information; he just does not want to share it. "But", says Mr Swinney, "we can't because there are big issues here. We have asked Campbell Christie and his commission to look at them and we can't give details until Parliament has had the opportunity to consider the commission's proposals." We might say that there is evidently no rush, but Mr Swinney is asking us to set aside the fact that the logic of that position, given the breadth and depth of the commission's remit, is that no decisions could be taken on anything. At the same time, Mr Swinney has blithely ruled out much of the independent budget review and has made significant spending commitments at his party conference. To accept Mr Swinney's position, one must also disregard the fact that the commission has been told by the Scottish Government that its purpose is long term and that, in an earlier debate, Mr Swinney said that that purpose would allow "the focusing of medium-term financial priorities."— [ Official Report , 4 November 2010; c 29976.]  We all know, however, that the reality is that Mr Swinney is now using the commission as a short- term alibi to get him through the winter and into election time. [ Interruption .]

I call in evidence someone whom I would not necessarily happily quote. In an interview in Holyrood  magazine of 18 October, Alex Salmond argued that what is happening in Westminster in relation to cuts is about election timetables. He reflected that "electoral, political and economic cycles don't always fall in the same way and politicians should have a higher duty and the duty is more to the economic cycle than the political cycle." Mr Salmond clearly needs to have some firm words with Mr Swinney and himself. I recognise many of those who have agreed to serve on the commission and the qualities that they bring, but the slightest glance at its remit, which embraces not only delivery of services, but improvement of services and tackling of inequality and its causes—among a host of other things—makes it clear that its purpose is not just about rationalising the landscape in tough times in order to inform immediate spending decisions. It is about far more. So substantial is its work that it is entirely illogical to call it in aid against publishing spending plans and giving people the information that they need to plan. I am sure that the commission will make interesting recommendations, but its remit is, in my view, so substantial that it is, in fact, one of the central purposes of Government. We have to ask what Mr Swinney and his colleagues have been doing for the last number of years. Why did they not notice that challenging times were ahead and act then by harnessing the talents within government, in the Parliament and throughout Scotland to prepare, rather than cobbling a commission together now, with a glorious remit and short timescale, which reflects not on the commission members but on the motives of those who have set it up and on the short-termism of the Scottish Government? Mr Swinney may try to dismiss the issue at the centre of our motion as being some kind of academic issue about budget processes, and as being of interest only to the pointy heads. It is not, however, academic or obscure; it is not just for the number crunchers. Budgets are living documents. They are the expression of priorities and, in their delivery, they give shape and direction to the society we wish to live in and they shape people's life chances. In the tough times, these choices are ever more critical. Local authorities, health boards, voluntary organisations and police boards, which are all on the front line, want and deserve some certainty and the ability to plan. They want that not for the  sake of it but because they care deeply about their health provision, their care services, their responsibility for people with learning disabilities, their ability to create economic opportunities and their creation of sustainable communities. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Strathclyde police authority, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, Consumer Focus Scotland and a range of other organisations have all asked for the certainty of a spending review. When they ask for that certainty, are they all wrong? My colleagues will focus on the impact of the budget in more detail, but it is self-evidently contradictory to demand efficiencies without a timescale in which to make those demands realistic and achievable. I predict that, instead of demonstrating increased rationality in their decisions, organisations will become risk averse and perhaps cut services that might otherwise have survived, thereby creating the worst kind of short-termism. In its written evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, COSLA said: "This puts Scottish Local Government at a disadvantage compared with other parts of the UK ... Had we been able to see the resources over a longer time frame this would enable Local Government to plan more effectively and perhaps avoid cuts which may hurt our communities unnecessarily." That is the charge. Not only is it displaying short-termism, but the Government is creating a situation in which people are making cuts that may be unnecessary.

This is a serious debate about the Government's choices. The historic concordat suggested that the SNP listened to local government. The charge is very serious. Who pays? I will give just one example: the care worker who is waiting to find out whether they have a job as the result of a commissioning agreement, while the voluntary organisation that has made a bid waits for the decision of local government, which is waiting for the Scottish Government's decision. What is the impact on that individual worker and his or her capacity to deliver the service? They do no know whether they will have a job or should look for another. It is  demoralising and reduces the local capacity to be efficient. For some, it is much worse. I understand that Employers in Voluntary Housing, with the help of the Scottish Housing Regulator, has issued guidance for housing associations and co-operatives about the challenge of the current economic situation. Banks are reported to be eagerly seeking to review deals for risk, and will possibly increase costs and charges, while the housing association grant has already been cut, increased and then cut again and is unpredictable. In such circumstances, the lack of information for future planning may have a devastating effect by undermining the sector's capacity to thrive and deliver economic opportunity. The call for the sector to be more efficient is entirely undermined by the Scottish Government's approach, which hampers housing associations' attempts to do what they do best—planning, preparing, delivering and maintaining. The Government's approach to the budget disregards the needs of local people and is symptomatic of the SNP's overall approach, which is that it is cynical, self-serving and incapable of separating the country's interests from the party interest. If Mr Swinney is to be worthy of his office, he should use the powers that he has to help people throughout Scotland. At the very least, he should stop being a hindrance to those who want to make a difference to individuals and their families. In refusing the spending review, he is not taking a technical step but making an active choice. Mr Swinney lacks the political will do what his office demands, and his purpose is to serve his party, not his country, and to put his own interests ahead of the future of people in our communities. That is his narrow, SNP party-political choice, but—

The consequences of that choice will be felt by those who are weakest in defending themselves—the people who seek jobs and who rely on services. [ Interruption .]

I ask members to support the motion. The people of Scotland deserve better. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Scottish Government has been presented with its spending budgets for the four-year spending review period yet has chosen to provide local authorities, NHS boards, universities, colleges, the voluntary sector and the wider public sector with only one-year budget proposals for 2011-12; believes that such uncertainty is corrosive as it does not allow those organisations to plan effectively; believes that this inability to plan will have an adverse impact on services, individuals, families and communities, and calls on the Scottish  Government to follow the example of the Welsh Assembly Government and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body and publish indicative figures until at least 2013-14, in addition to its planned one-year budget for 2011-12.

It is a problem that you created.

I welcome and agree with the First Minister's comments about the role that Glasgow citizens and Glasgow City Council have played in their long-standing support for asylum seekers. The First Minister may be aware that young people from Lourdes secondary school in my constituency are at the Parliament today to highlight the impact of the issuing of those awful letters on individual school students and the school community. We know about the work that has been done on the matter by Glasgow MPs and the Scottish Affairs Committee and their broad approach to it, which the First Minister mentioned. Will he consider how he and his education minister might intervene in relation to their responsibilities for the young people whose schooling is being disrupted and for whom the actions that are being taken at UK level have huge personal, social and educational consequences?

I am sure that members across the chamber recognise the significance of the housing budget in stimulating the economy, supporting construction jobs and meeting housing need. Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that his decision to present only a one-year budget is to the detriment of those who are trying to bring forward social housing projects in a planned way? Will he further acknowledge that, because of uncertainty, those cuts may impact on the level of risk and cost, and will—logically, therefore—reduce the ability to develop projects efficiently? Will he clarify what proportion of the money in that budget that has already been committed—which is estimated to amount to £249 million—is being spent up front by housing associations and others? How will that impact on the need for moneys to be available to deliver 6,000 new affordable houses in the next year?

The First Minister will recall the concern that was expressed during last winter's fearsomely bad weather about the lack of Scottish Government action to assist in the identification of vulnerable people, particularly older people, who were trapped in their homes without the support that they needed, because carers were unable to reach them, despite their best efforts. Will the First Minister agree to establish a Scotland-wide telephone helpline in preparation for a recurrence of the weather that we experienced last winter, so that there is no repeat of last year's situation, when people had to access information via the web, despite the fact that disproportionately fewer older people have access to the internet, and when in some circumstances people phoned local numbers that were not staffed?

So it is somebody else's problem.

Suitably chastised by the minister, I will do my best to be consensual. However, when I express different views, I do so because I disagree with him. As we move forward, seeking a false consensus is probably as much of a problem as anything else. We have indicated that we are happy to support many of the bill's provisions. In particular, I note and concur with the minister's comments on veterans' entitlements. However, I do not think that the bill deserves to be described as radical. Some of members' disappointment about the bill arises from the overblown rhetoric that the minister used in the early days about his plans to abolish the right to buy. When we voted on the issue, it was recognised that the minister had overstated the case and that past changes had made the really big difference. There is an overall challenge in relation to housing. It is about the availability of housing to individuals and their families, but it is also about housing's role in sustaining communities, especially at this difficult time. The minister will be  aware of the term "community anchors". Often, housing associations play that role. We should tread gently when we move into that area, to ensure that we do not damage the role that housing providers—housing associations and councils—can play in communities. We will have a tough budget decision to make, and housing providers will play a critical role in determining what happens in the future. The plans for housing benefit at United Kingdom level have many implications both for individuals and for those who are planning and making decisions at community level. For example, a housing association might be faced with a tenant who has rigorously paid their rent, who has been unemployed for a year, and who discovers that their housing benefit is to be cut by 10 per cent because they have stayed on jobseekers allowance. That sort of situation has implications for housing associations and other organisations that generally manage things in a businesslike way. I have no doubt that the proposals also have implications for people in supported accommodation—there are people with learning disabilities who are currently supported, and we do not know what the proposals will mean for Women's Aid refuges and so on. I am sure that we will have to revisit the impacts of the housing benefit proposals on housing as a whole. Tough decisions have to be made, of course, and one of the frustrations felt in my party comes from the silliness of some of the things that the minister and the Scottish National Party have said in the past about the division between our support for council housing and RSLs. We took a tough decision to support stock transfer in Glasgow. We brought £1.2 billion into the city. If ever there was a Labour legacy for tough times, it is the fact that properties are still being improved there and there is still new build. There is a new-build development in my constituency, which is creating jobs in the construction industry, and the private sector has embraced that. The idea that spending through the public purse does not support private investment and activity is false. We should be careful about making false divisions, which do not help the debate. I am genuinely disappointed about the decision to remove the whole question of the private sector. The minister says that it is water under the bridge, but the single most significant concern that is brought to me and others in our casework is to do with the quality of rented accommodation in the private sector. Sarah Boyack highlighted the question of party flats, and Pauline McNeill mentioned houses in multiple occupation. There is also the matter of addressing antisocial behaviour, which Charlie Gordon raised. It is unfortunate that, when it was indicated at stage 1 that there was a problem, the minister did not sort it out. There is a  sense of urgency. People do not want those issues to be dealt with slowly. I am concerned that the HMO provisions are not coming until 2011. There is an issue around the regulator. We know the importance of having solid regulation, but there is a concern that the regulator will increasingly focus on community-controlled housing associations, despite the fact that they generally perform better in inspections. The fear is that the regulator will get a notion that bigger is somehow better, so that there could be forced mergers, although we know that the lesson from the community-controlled movement has been that managing things locally, with control going down to local communities, makes a difference.

I welcome that, but we should ensure that the regulator's approach is light touch. We do not want to kill innovation at a local level in housing. There is uncertainty about the fact that housing association grant has gone up and down. It has been put to me that there is a fear that banks will use that as an opportunity to intervene and review, and perhaps change the arrangements that they have made with housing associations. That is of concern. We have already discussed the controversial issues around homelessness, but I reiterate that the issue is the provision of support at the right stage. We have been talking about preventative spend. If we can address the issue at an early stage, ensuring that other agencies are engaged, that will be significant. We welcome the Scottish social housing charter, but it has to be real. We need to listen to what tenants say about allocations policy; about the difficulties of evicting difficult tenants, particularly drug dealers; about the need to address antisocial behaviour, and the need to bring back a community aspect to how antisocial behaviour is addressed; about sensitive lets and people being told that they cannot identify categories of housing for older people, whose whole lives might be disrupted by younger people being placed in a way that is inappropriate for both of them; and about the role of private landlords. The social housing charter should reflect those concerns of tenants. It should also reflect the fact that tenants want there to be mixed, safe communities. There is a gap between that and what the regulator says. There are also concerns about rent levels going up more quickly for councils and about increased debt being masked by low interest rates.  We are happy to support the bill for the limited changes that it creates, but we trust that we can engage with the minister on the many issues where action is necessary.

I just want to make a couple of points. On the role of stage 2 and the role of the minister, I have to say that I find it absolutely bizarre that, given that the minister thought that  there might be significant issues with the cost of Mary Mulligan's stage 2 amendment, not only did he not ask members not to vote for it, he encouraged others, including SNP members, to vote for it. That does not make sense to me, because the critical voice to which we have to listen at stage 2 is that of the minister, who will have information and advice that other members will not have. If the minister had had concerns about cost, he ought at that stage to have urged the Local Government and Communities Committee not to support the amendment and to ask Mary Mulligan to withdraw it so that the issue could have been debated further later. If that had happened, we would not have got into the pickle that we are in now, whereby—

Unfortunately, I was talking and now you have put me off.

Too much talking and not enough thinking. I apologise. The point that I was making was that the committee might have been minded to support something that was ill advised, but stage 2 is the time when people step back if the minister says that there is an issue. It is not clear why the minister was not properly briefed about the implications of Mary Mulligan's amendment at stage 2, given that he later expressed concerns about it.  My last point is on the substance of amendment 55. The minister is right to say that all that some people require is a house. The assessment stage's purpose is to identify people for whom simply being given a tenancy is insufficient. Too often, people who are allocated a tenancy on the basis of their homelessness fail that tenancy, fail another tenancy and fail another tenancy. The people who are left to address that problem are housing providers. A challenge must be made to other organisations and agencies that should be supporting individuals to assess not just people's housing need but their capacity to sustain a tenancy. The debate captures that. In that spirit, we will support the minister's amendment. However, we should recognise that critical issues could have been sorted out earlier.

I urge the minister to support the amendments for reasons that are very much along the lines of what members have already said. Undoubtedly, one of the strengths of the community-controlled housing association movement was that effective regulation and its strong asset base gave it deep and real credibility and encouraged banks to lend; however, it was also strengthened by the sense that it had to respond to its tenants and community and the fact that, because of the close scrutiny of local tenants, it had a different way of doing business and making spending decisions. I am concerned by the fact that the measures have been described as draconian by not only the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, but the Glasgow and West of Scotland Forum of Housing Associations, which is very serious about this business and recognises that there is a particular problem. It feels, for example, that there is an issue about micromanagement and independence. I ask colleagues throughout the chamber, who I know support the housing association movement and are opposed to overregulation, perhaps to reflect on what the powers will do. We should be celebrating the achievements and power of housing associations, but their anxiety about the lack of full consultation on the provisions has led them to ask us to think again about them. It would be good if the minister took heed of that by supporting Patricia Ferguson's amendments, so that we can ensure not just that the movement is properly regulated but that we do not squeeze out the very thing that has made it most effective.

You leave me to do the sums, then. I repeat my earlier apologies to the Presiding Officer's office. Due to circumstances beyond my control, I was slightly late for the beginning of the debate. I was delighted not to miss any speeches, other than part of the speech by my colleague Lewis Macdonald [ Laughter .] I had a good sense of what he was going to say, so it was fine. This is an important debate but we must put it in context. In their briefings, Leonard Cheshire Disability and others reflected that challenging the scandalous level of unemployment among people with disabilities must be about more than tackling the issue of sheltered workplaces. I could not agree more. There is a demonstration today in the Parliament highlighting the need to recognise the human rights of disabled people at a time when budget choices are being made. That understanding of the broader context of the needs of disabled people has meant that we on this side of the chamber continue to press for a skills strategy that understands inequality in the workplace, the lack of opportunity for people and the challenges faced by disabled people in particular. That is why we have been so critical of the single outcome agreement process. I am sure that Bill Kidd will agree that the Government has persistently refused to ensure that single outcome agreements that determine spending in local authorities are equality impact assessed. If that is not done, how can we ensure that the needs of disabled people in relation to education, employment strategies and every local authority service are being met, and that the political choices that are currently being made do not disproportionately disadvantage people with disabilities? That is the reason for our commitment to the broader issues of disability and it is why we continue to express concern that the changed role for Scottish Enterprise means that it is not working to address the employment needs of people with disabilities in the way that it might have done in the past. We look to Westminster with dread as we see the downgrading of a commitment to tackle inequality and the possible dismantling of the bodies that monitor progress in equality. Not only is it possible that people will be more disadvantaged, but there will be no machinery to ensure that decisions on that are challenged. However, the fact that we cannot do everything does not mean that we cannot do anything. I was surprised by the defensiveness of some members in their speeches. Dr McKee, especially, seemed to expend more energy on explaining why things  could not be done than on considering the positives. That is in sharp contrast to Frank McAveety's contribution, in which he explained precisely how someone who has political power can make political choices that can make a difference. It is disappointing that action on supported workplaces, using article 19, has not been properly recognised. Despite what the minister said, I remain disappointed that the huge project at the Southern general has done so little. The minister says that it is a problem if we make one person het. I say to the minister that he is het. He is the minister. He has the capacity—a capacity that some of us long for—to drive things forward. We want the Government to lead by example. The minister is not a dispassionate observer of what is happening at Blindcraft and how we can make a difference using article 19. There is a huge issue about mainstreaming employment opportunities for people with disabilities. We should challenge employers on their disgraceful record. We owe it to people who work in sheltered workplaces not to say, "You can only go that way." We must recognise that there is the opportunity to go either way. I accept what Gavin Brown said about the importance of debating in measured tones. I am a good example of how that is done. However, I wonder whether people in the disabled community sometimes feel that our measured tones reflect complacency. No member would want that. In the Tory amendment, Gavin Brown talks about balance and the importance of reflecting the challenges for some public bodies. We recognise that and we would hope that the timetable would reflect the fact that some bodies will be unable to move as quickly as others. However, that must not slow the process down; we must recognise the power of the measure. We understand the differences among various bodies, but we expect speedy action from the minister on publishing the timetable. We do not want Gavin Brown's amendment to be a get-out clause, but we acknowledge that in speaking he made a number of positive suggestions about subcontractors and, on that basis, we can support his amendment. Mike Pringle talked about how difficult it is to support sheltered workplaces in tough economic times, but the reality is that when we are in tough economic times, because of what is happening at a UK level, people with disabilities are particularly vulnerable. We must do more and not use the economic situation as an explanation for doing less. Tackling inequality is not a task just for when the sun shines; at this time, we need even more  positive action to meet the needs of disadvantaged groups. Ian McKee made the same point. He said that we are in tough times and so perhaps we should expect that the more vulnerable people will suffer. However, that should be not an excuse for not acting, but an imperative to act. The implication of what Ian McKee said is that we are talking about good works, charity and doing people a favour. It is not about that; it is about allowing people a level playing field on which they can show and prove their potential. In a decent society, we owe it to people with disabilities to support them; it is not a question of our feeling good about offering them an opportunity, in the way that was suggested.

In tough times, the Government should redouble its efforts to make a difference and should use the powers that it has to do that. I agree absolutely with Bill Kidd in commending Glasgow City Council and its work through the Commonwealth group and City Building, but we know that it did not happen by accident. It happened because active political choices were made. We can make a difference to disabled people through the use of specific contracts and I was disturbed by the minister's blinkered view, which he has given in Parliament before, that the Scottish Government does not really need anything that sheltered workplaces make. If there was a disabled champion in the Government, they would look at the contracts, speak to the sheltered workplaces and have a dialogue about the potential for them to meet the Scottish Government's desires. I made a point about the concerns about the Southern general hospital, where a huge opportunity was missed.

I listened all too carefully. I accept that the Government has used community benefit clauses; what I am saying is that not one contract has been reserved under article 19. A huge opportunity, which would have increased the benefits that come from the community benefit clauses, has been missed.  No one is in favour of tokenism, but if every public body in Scotland reserved one contract to a sheltered workplace, let us imagine the difference that that would make to the workplaces and what it would tell the public body about how things can be done. It would make a seismic change that would move such contracts from tokenism to common practice. There is a broader issue about understanding the power of the public purse to drive change and create opportunities, especially at a time of economic difficulties. The idea that public spending is problematic is promulgated at a UK level, but we know that public investment can stimulate private sector activity. In housing, for example, the Scottish Government rightly brought forward its budget because the private sector understood that public money could sustain jobs and skills in the short term. It is simply not good enough for ministers—this is a feature of the SNP—to go on at length about what they care about and develop strategies and then not do the hard work of delivering on those strategies. It is a question of tough action and getting the contracts in place. That, rather than reflecting on the discussion and explaining how somebody else is not doing the work, is how we can make a difference. With a budget of £8 billion, the reservation of one contract—possibly—is abject failure and it speaks of the values and priorities of the Scottish Government. It is hardly surprising when the Government's entire mindset is to talk about the powers that the Parliament does not have. The Government should use the powers that it has to create economic opportunity and to drive good practice into the private sector. We will support both amendments because of the key recognition that the Government has not done enough so far and that a timetable will be produced. This is not a question of tokenism. The minister said that the Government does not rely on article 19 alone, but the problem is that it does not rely on it at all. That is about its priorities.

I will make just this last point.

The minister mentioned Donald Dewar. Donald Dewar understood that we get power to make a difference to people's lives. The Government should use the power that it has to make the difference and to support sheltered workplaces.

Does the member agree that that is exactly why we need more urgency on article 19? The aim is to give businesses work. It is not about people giving them a hand by perhaps buying something from them; it is about giving them stability from which they can show that they have business acumen and capacity to deliver. We must recognise the failure to do that. I am sure that the member will recognise the importance of article 19 in that regard.

In the members' business debate in January, which I am sure the minister recalls, I asked him directly whether he would consider reserving contracts in the huge Southern general hospital development. He agreed at that stage to consider every option. Will he confirm whether any contract has been reserved at the Southern general? If not, when will he examine the options so that contracts can be reserved to help supported businesses?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to make court processes more efficient and better serve the needs of the victims of crime. (S3O-11499)

I think that from time to time all members meet constituents who have horrific stories to tell about their experiences in court as victims, when they felt that they were treated with a lack of compassion and a lack of understanding of their experience and interests. Such people have a strong feeling that nobody stands with them in court. I acknowledge that work has been done in the past in that regard. The minister is perhaps aware of the case of my constituents the Porterfield family, who have described a catalogue of incidents that left them distraught and with no faith in the justice system. Will the minister agree to meet my constituents with me, so that by hearing about their experience he and the Parliament can ensure that the rights of victims are placed at the centre of the justice system and are not marginal to it?

To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-2555)

I am delighted to welcome our guests to the country and to my constituency. I will welcome to Bellahouston park anyone else who is heading there, too. This week's Scottish unemployment figures showed that a shocking 50,000 more Scots are out of work now than at this time last year. The Salmond slump is hurting families across the country. Our unemployment rate is 8.9 per cent, compared with 7.8 per cent for the rest of the United Kingdom. The gap is growing and is a clear sign of Scottish National Party failure. Will the Deputy First Minister take any responsibility?

The SNP was left £1.5 billion in the kitty for the rainy days, but the SNP's problem is that—unfortunately—it squandered that when the sun was still shining. It is one thing to express concern in government, but the Government needs to take action. Yesterday, we were appalled to discover that 3,000 fewer teachers than in 2007 are in our schools now. [ Interruption .]

The Deputy First Minister's feeble education colleague is presiding over the lowest number of teachers for eight years. Those jobs are needed by our economy and by our children, to help them. Is that what Nicola Sturgeon calls protecting jobs?

We do not need an English teacher—me—to tell us that that was not an answer, but we might need a maths teacher to help us count the alibis. It is a different minister but the same approach: "It wisnae me." What of Nicola Sturgeon's own area of responsibility? Already, with the biggest budget ever in the life of the Scottish Parliament, what do we see in the health service, for which she is responsible? Four thousand national health service jobs gone. Fifteen hundred nursing jobs gone. Twelve hundred of those jobs have been lost in the city of Glasgow. We are in serious  circumstances. What is Nicola Sturgeon doing to protect jobs, not get rid of them?

I hate to think what would happen if Nicola Sturgeon was not taking responsibility. If she defines that as taking responsibility, what would she do if she were not taking responsibility? Her complacency is stunning. If someone takes responsibility, they act on the powers that they have. Unemployment in the city that we both represent is growing month on month but, as we all know, the only Glasgow job that Nicola Sturgeon is worried about is her own. She is the Cabinet member who is cutting 670 nurses and midwives in Glasgow. She also cancelled the Glasgow airport rail link, and with it 1,300 jobs and apprenticeships that mothers and fathers in my constituency and across Glasgow are desperate to see their sons and daughters get. We know that she is on work experience today, sampling the job that she really wants more than anything else, but the real question about being responsible is, when will she and the SNP stop fretting about their own prospects and start putting the people of Scotland first?

I was stunned to discover on a visit to Northern Ireland on 11 August that the serious systems failure had occurred. I am even more stunned now to discover that not making that public was not accidental and that the cabinet secretary chose on a balance of judgment not to make public what happened. I would like her to reflect on that. Given the importance of confidence in the call-handling system, the cabinet secretary's welcome announcement of a rigorous review and her apology, will she meet me to discuss how she is ensuring that systems issues that arise from two tragic constituency cases of mine of which she is aware, which involved Nikki Williamson and Mackenzie McManus, are being addressed? Have those cases been subjected to the same rigorous review as she committed herself to today?

I am glad that I am greeted with such pleasure by Opposition members. In his statement, the First Minister said: "The people, when they voted for this Parliament, voted for a legislature that would be bold and would act to protect their values." No one would disagree with that. We recognise that Labour's legacy to Scotland has been a Scottish Parliament that can protect and work for people in these difficult times. I was struck by the contrast between—if I may say so—the overblown and rather self-regarding language of the First Minister and the thinness of the programme itself. The statement was, as usual, full of expressions such as "lead the world" and "being in the vanguard". It also referred specifically to the exceptional, laudable qualities of the Scottish character, and how compassionate and innovative we are at a time like this—peculiarly so and unlike others, I presume. I think and suspect that, like all previous statements, this one is not to be taken seriously, because, on the past record, they have never been delivered. It is ever more evident to me that Mr Salmond lives in the moment. That is an interesting way to be as a leader, but it creates problems for those who need the Government to act in their interests, because being bold is not only about shouting; it is about taking tough and serious action. Here we have Mr Salmond's problem: he may wish to govern, but he is also always alive to a choice. He can choose to make the Scottish Parliament work for the people of Scotland in these tough times and show how it can make a difference, but his problem is that it is his party's interest ever and always to talk about what cannot be done. Alex Salmond will never make the Parliament work, because his wish for independence relies on showing that it cannot .  I was fascinated by Mr Salmond quoting Edwin Morgan and what that might suggest about his lack of self-awareness. Was there not a civil servant bold enough to say that perhaps it was not the best idea to quote Edwin Morgan disdaining the "it wizny me" mentality? Does he not know that his Government is the very embodiment of the "it wizny me" mentality. We regard as shameless his constant response that he is blameless. I say to Mr Salmond, "O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us To see oursels as others see us!" It is a serious point because, when the issue was raised earlier, examples of people to blame came from many SNP members. Times are too serious for us to have government by alibi. We need people to take the circumstances seriously. As has been indicated, there are a number of bills that Labour can support. We recognise certain measures that we can support in the Alcohol etc (Scotland) Bill and I trust that, in turn, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will confirm that she will look seriously at the recommendations of Labour's commission in the way that her colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning took seriously our commission on education. I urge her not to make minimum pricing the whole picture. The reality is that, given the parliamentary arithmetic, the proposals on minimum pricing will not get through. It demeans the debate to say that minimum pricing is the only test of people's commitment to tackling alcohol. Is it not a curiosity that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing will persist, knowing full well that it will come to defeat? I am sure that some of her fundamentalist colleagues, such as Sandra White and Bob Doris, must wonder why the same persistence does not apply to the referendum bill. We were all surprised by the ditching of the bill, but I understand that we were not as stunned as the Government back benchers who have cheered to the echo over the past three years every turn and shift of their front benchers. They defended the action when the Government ripped off Glasgow. Did they not, at any point in the last week, finally say to Mr Salmond, "Stop acting the goat and get on with governing this country"? We are told that they are lukewarm on the proposals, but it took Margo MacDonald to say what they have all been thinking and to argue a case that they did not have the courage to come into the chamber and argue themselves. There is a case for arguing that, as others have suggested, Mr Salmond is like the grand old Duke of York. That is all right for a kids' party, but that silliness is not what these times deserve. On the budget, there are pages of defensive lines in the statement about why it is not possible  to share with the Parliament the information that would allow us to come together and have a serious understanding of the issues that face us. On the housing bill, I welcome the proposals on private landlords and ask the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing whether she would consider supporting Mary Mulligan in bringing those elements of the bill forward into the current Housing (Scotland) Bill, where some elements of the private sector are being addressed. On the justice system, I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to perhaps look at the continuing problem of the rape conviction levels. He would get great support from the Labour Party if he addressed some of the ways in which the legislation we passed to protect victims is now being used against them. On child poverty, the Government is boldly publishing a strategy, but publishing a strategy is not enough: it is necessary to deliver. A difficulty for the Government is that it has delegated entirely any responsibility for delivery. One might say that the whole point of the concordat was to be able to say, "it wizny me". We need to address that issue with local government. How will we ensure that we tackle the needs of the most vulnerable? A simple example of something that has been missed out altogether is action for kinship carers. The Government committed itself to equality and parity between kinship carers and foster carers. That was signed up to in the concordat, but Mr Russell airily signed it away in order to get a deal on class sizes. That is unworthy of a Government that wishes to tackle child poverty. There were grand words in the statement about community benefit, but if we ask the Scottish Government what it is doing now to deliver community benefit clauses in its contracts, or indeed whether it is reserving any work to sheltered workplaces, there is an absolute silence, and in that silence there is an indication of the Government's attitude—"We make the grand statement, but don't ask us to do the hard, deliberate work of making it happen."

I will continue. The statement says that the Government's priorities are economic recovery, protecting front-line services and developing a low-carbon Scotland. We wish that that were true. The problem is that it is not. We know that the Government is squandering money on the Scottish Futures Trust rather than finding ways of creating a stimulus for construction. It is talking about schools instead of building them. It is talking about jobs rather than making a difference in our local communities and expecting Scottish Enterprise  and others to work in communities to find jobs and opportunities for our young people. We are in serious times and we need a First Minister who takes his job seriously and not just himself seriously. Mr Salmond says that he will appeal to the people because he cannot win the vote in the Parliament, but a dialogue with the people works both ways. Perhaps Mr Salmond should start listening too. If he had listened to young people, he would not have prioritised independence over acting on jobs. If he had listened to the victims of knife crime and their families, he would have supported Labour's demand for action on knife crime and supported minimum custodial sentences for those who carry knives. If he had listened to women's organisations, he would not have put victims of domestic abuse at further risk by opposing short-term sentences.

Mr Salmond says that he will appeal to the people. He could have dumped the referendum bill two years ago on the basis that he could not get it through and got on with serious business. Instead, he has taken the disturbing attitude that it is the purpose of the Parliament to deliver him lines for his election campaign. The people of this country need more from the Parliament. They need serious business. The sooner we get people in here who will do that, the better.

Will the member confirm newspaper reports that, when his group was told about the decision by his leader, the response was lukewarm?

That is very good, Presiding Officer. I am happy to accept the minister's undertaking in relation to resolving the matter and will not press the amendments in my name.  Amendment 195, by agreement, withdrawn.   Amendments 196 and 197 not moved.

We do not need to call prostitution the sex industry. It is not a job or a lifestyle choice. If the amendments in the group are not the way forward, it is incumbent on the Government to propose something else. We will not necessarily eradicate prostitution, but we have to address who the victims are. Marlyn Glen's amendments 6 and 7 focus our attention on that—they do not accept that we have to live with prostitution or that there is something inevitable about it. There are no exchanges of jewellery for prostitutes on the streets of Glasgow. We need to give them help and support rather than implying that it is another job choice when clearly it is not.

Stewart Maxwell said that we should not have a straw-man argument or debate positions that are not being put, and should instead reflect seriously on what people are saying in the chamber today. I am therefore surprised that Robert Brown chose to describe those who oppose the proposal as "doomsayers". I do not think that we should call Scottish Women's Aid doomsayers. I think that we should reflect on the fact that, over the years, women's organisations have managed to persuade the legal establishment that the way that things are done does not work in the interests of victims. The Scottish Government's position is that short-term sentences do not work and that we should use community sentences instead. The logic of that position is that, if community sentences are put in place, short-term sentences will wither on the vine. However, what is being proposed is that the presumption against short-term sentences will be put in place, leaving victims—not the people in this Parliament—to face the risk that that approach will not work. In the short time that I have, I will not appeal to the minister, as his complacency and arrogance are evident to us all. However, I will appeal to his back benchers, who listen to women's  organisations, to listen to what Women's Aid has said. It believes that the criminal behaviour of perpetrators of domestic abuse does not fall into the category of people with chaotic lifestyles, for whom prison is a revolving door, and that a presumption against the use of prison "will only serve to increase the risks to safety for women, children and young people experiencing domestic abuse" and will undermine the work that is done within the criminal justice system to address the issues of domestic abuse, and that "It would be disastrous if the proposals were to foster an attitude amongst abusers that their behaviour was no longer being taken seriously in terms of sentencing". I know that there are people on the Scottish National Party back benches who are concerned about the issues of women, children and victims of domestic abuse. Do not allow this debate to be characterised as an academic theoretical debate between people who hold different views on prison sentencing. Listen to people on the ground who say that the Government's proposal will put people at risk. If the Government wants to prove that short sentences do not work, it should put money into community payback and let short sentences wither on the vine; it should not do it in the way that is proposed, which is short-term political expediency dressed up as a strategy. Listen to the women's organisations and oppose this proposal. The SNP listens to women's organisations on some issues; it should listen to them on this one, too.

Will the minister take an intervention?

There is an issue to do with private landlords who perceive their job to be an investment and not a business and therefore do not take their responsibilities seriously. As well as considering letting agents, I urge the minister to consider housing benefit departments, which should not pay out housing benefit for properties that are not registered.

Does the member share the concern of members on my side of the chamber about the rise in rent levels? It makes renting a council house untenable for some people in work and makes council housing a last resort. Partly what drove the uptake of the right to buy in the 1980s was the fact that people were paying less for a mortgage than they would have paid in rent. Now rents are going up and debt levels might be going up as well. How would the member address that?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree with the voluntary organisations' call to the minister to put in place proper reporting that will allow for the monitoring and accountability that they say are absent?

I acknowledge the point that is made in the Liberal Democrat amendment, but does not the Government also have a role in influencing the private sector to pay properly? Will the member support the calls to use the levers of Government to ensure that a decent wage is paid in, for example, the tourism and retail businesses that are critical in his constituency?

I am happy to participate in the debate, and I join Alex Neil in supporting the aspiration that he described at the end of his speech. However, the test for us is not our aspiration, but what we do to deliver on it and address the serious issue of poverty, particularly at a time of great change. The reality of what precipitated the economic crisis—the failures in the global private markets that led to the banking system requiring Government intervention—has curiously been transformed into an argument that the crisis was caused by big government and a public sector that was too big, as if all public sector workers were useless bureaucrats rather than people who are employed to deliver services for some of our most vulnerable and disadvantaged citizens. They are people such as care workers, classroom support assistants and those who work in child care, employability and educational support, and they work directly to address issues around poverty. I trust that our Lib Dem colleagues will bring their pressure to bear on the coalition to ensure that the hostility to big government does not involve attacking services that are required by the poorest in our communities. Labour's amendment acknowledges the existence of the framework approach, but argues that it is not enough to have an approach; we need to be serious about delivering on it. I wish to say something about the weakness of the Scottish Government approach and the gap—not for the first time—between words and action. I will speak about some of the key challenges and provide some examples of how a national approach can be national and how the powers of the Parliament might be used. The Scottish Government presided this year over an increased budget, but the reality is that whatever the size of the budget, it is simply a dereliction of duty not to maximise its impact among the poorest in our communities. A useful starting point is provided by the Child Poverty Action Group, which argues that the Scottish Government and local government budgets should be poverty proofed. If the Scottish Government took even a moment to poverty proof one of the critical elements that it often identifies in its poverty strategy—the council tax freeze—that would reveal that whatever it is, it is not an anti-poverty strategy. It is disappointing that the Government continues to resist the idea that single outcome agreements should be poverty proofed. I urge the minister to consider taking that  approach, because it would cause a shift from asserting good works to doing what works. The Scottish Government does assertion—indeed, the minister is a master at it—but it must trouble us all that a written answer to Bill Butler revealed that the centrally held poverty budget has been cut by a third. I understand that that funding could be used to support financial advice work, benefit uptake work and so on, which are all important to poor families. If one claims to take a national approach, one needs evidence of its effectiveness. There needs to be monitoring and assessment to test the gap between saying and doing, but also to allow government at every level to reflect on and amend what it is doing to address weaknesses or ineffectiveness. There is a well-rehearsed debate on the concordat and single outcome agreements. It is not an academic debate; the framework approach is predicated on its being delivered through locally determined single outcome agreements. We can put aside the ludicrous haste with which the concordat and single outcome agreements were cobbled together as an approach; the lack of consultation with, for example, the voluntary sector; and the total lack of thought-through indicators. The reality is now serious. There is no effective monitoring, no reflection on input and clear evidence that too many services are subject to a postcode lottery. We know that local authorities are under pressure and are not helped by claims by the Scottish Government about resources and a lack of funding, and that local authorities are making difficult choices, but surely those choices should be shaped by basic standards across local government throughout the country. In this carers week, the problem is highlighted by a clear example of what the lack of a national approach means. Information that we obtained under freedom of information legislation about the lack of assessment of unpaid carers showed three staggering elements: the huge variation in approach across Scotland; the apparent reluctance to assess unpaid carers, perhaps because, once assessed, the need has to be met with resources; and the number of local authorities with no information about the number of carers in their area.

It is also not a policy. There was a green paper and the response to it was unhappy. I am asking us to look at what we can do  here. The fact is that currently, only 3 per cent of unpaid carers have their needs assessed and most local authorities do not even know how many unpaid carers they have. That is a simple example. If we acknowledge that, as in the words of the motion, we have a responsibility "to take long-term measures to tackle drivers of poverty", what is the Scottish Government doing to address the needs of carers whose caring responsibilities often hold them in poverty? It is simply not good enough to look away or to blame others. If the Government is to take a national approach, it must address the problem of carers' wide variation in experience across the country. As I said, the framework is underpinned by single outcome agreements. We all acknowledge the role of the voluntary sector in reaching out to communities and understanding how poverty is lived and what needs to change. The sector is pivotal in that regard. However, when voluntary sector organisations persistently express their concerns about the lack of specific indicators to test and shape local government and national priorities—for example, on disability—they are simply ignored. There is a lack of seriousness in the Government's approach that includes a cavalier disregard for any process of reporting, which means that voluntary organisations have to fund their own interrogation of single outcome agreements. If the Government is serious, that cannot be acceptable. In my remaining time, I will flag up some areas in which the powers of this place could be used more effectively. The minister acknowledged the critical role of work and talked about the concentration of unemployment in some communities. Does he still think that it is acceptable that Scottish Enterprise no longer has any geographical role to support community regeneration and create employment opportunities for people in our poorest communities? It is important to support those who lose their jobs, but we need commitment and evidence of action to deal with those who are further away from work. The danger is that while supporting people who have lost their jobs, those who are further away from the market move even further away as the tougher employability actions of the Government become deprioritised. I urge the minister to reassure us on that point. The minister spoke about pay issues. We need to establish what is being done to tackle problems around equal pay. I would welcome an update on the role of the Scottish Government in helping women who are currently trapped in equal pay tribunal processes. I would also welcome some progress in what the Scottish Government is doing with regard to the living wage.  Low pay is particularly prevalent in the tourism and retail industries. What is the Scottish Government doing in its tourism strategy to tackle that? What levers are being used to advocate for and reward those businesses that have a living-wage approach? The minister says that the national health service is a living-wage employer. Will he confirm that, in the Scottish Government, the living wage extends to agency and contract workers? We all recognise the power of public spend. Can the minister confirm that the public procurement process includes a positive assessment for bidders who include commitments to the living wage? Can the minister give examples of how public procurement procedures incorporate the provisions of article 19 of the European directive on public procurement, which allows contracts to be reserved to sheltered workplaces? I would welcome some examples of current spending by the Government where that has been done, as it is an obvious way of tackling poverty among people with disabilities. In recognising the importance of the Scottish Government's role in tacking poverty, I ask the minister whether he and his colleagues have reflected on what constitutes front-line service—I refer here to the point that I made about the education maintenance allowance. The most vulnerable people need services from mental health groups, carers groups and voluntary organisations to get them to the point where they can access front-line services, and my fear is that those services will be the first to go, and that most vulnerable people will not even get to the point where they can use front-line services in future. I urge the minister, together with us, to wrestle with these tough questions. What are our priorities? How do we balance the roles of local government, central Government and voluntary organisations? How do we ensure that financial pressures do not impact disproportionately on those who need small amounts of enabling support in order to access services? I also urge the minister to ensure that what he says is followed by action. If he does that, we will certainly support him. I move amendment S3M-6581.2, to leave out from "to take" to end and insert: "; further notes the findings of research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Joseph Rowntree Charitable Trust that child, pensioner and overall poverty fell faster in Scotland than in any other part of the United Kingdom during the period of the previous UK administration, led by Labour, but notes concerns raised by anti-poverty organisations, such as Save the Children and the Poverty Alliance, that single outcome agreements do not give sufficient priority to meeting shared poverty targets and have created further problems in terms of monitoring progress and accountability; therefore urges the Scottish  Government to review the impact of the concordat and single outcome agreements to ensure a clearer focus on reducing poverty and that measures are put in place to monitor progress made at the national level, and further, in this European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion and given the critical role for the Scottish Government in tackling poverty, calls on it to report to the Parliament detailing how it will use all the powers at its disposal to tackle poverty and disadvantage."

On educational attainment, does the minister recognise the assertion by the Educational Institute of Scotland in its document "Poverty and Education" about the role of the education maintenance allowance in producing positive outcomes by allowing people to stay on in school? Does the minister regret the fact that his Government reduced funding for the education maintenance allowance?

Will the minister give way?

In respect of services that are delivered at local authority level, can the minister confirm the importance that is given to equality impact assessments in single outcome agreements to ensure that people with disabilities have the entitlements and the services that they need?

I intended my contribution to be a serious one, and I hope that that is how it came over. I wanted to say things that some people might not agree with, but I genuinely wanted to engage with what I think is a serious debate. Although Hugh O'Donnell suggested that the debate was polarised, I was trying to put in context the experience of individual victims of domestic abuse, in relation to policy. I am a bit concerned about some of the comments that were made about my attitude and the attitude of my party. Mary Scanlon talked about the impact on children and seemed to suggest that my position is that we should discriminate against the children of male, rather than female, victims. That is simply not true. Pioneering work was done by the previous Executive and continues to be done to support those who want to work with children—boys and girls—who have lived with domestic abuse. Children are not screened out because it was a man who complained that he was a victim of female abuse. Mary Scanlon also conflated a separate issue, which is our capacity to reach out to boys who witness domestic abuse. It is simply not true that I do not want those boys' voices to be heard. Indeed, I have been vocal over many years in attacking the lazy analysis that there is a circle of violence whereby boys who witness violence will go on to be violent men. I have been vocal in condemning that approach because I have worked with young boys and I know adult males who have lived in households where there was domestic abuse. They tell us that it is to their abiding shame that they could not protect their mothers, and they do not know what to do because of that. The idea that Labour members would support a policy that did not give voice to those boys or that we would not recognise that, whatever the situation, there is a critical role in addressing children's needs is frankly offensive. Members should reflect on that. Regardless of the other issues, we should all welcome the progress that we made in addressing children's needs and recognising that dimension.

I ask the member to let me make this point first. John Wilson said that violence is violence. That might be true, but on one level it is also meaningless. We have to reflect on the fact that there are serious arguments on, for example, provocation. In cases of murder, men have been able to go to court and argue that they had been nagged incessantly and, in a heated moment, had killed their wife. We know that there are examples  of men in those circumstances who secured a reduced sentence.

I ask the member to let me finish the point. Meanwhile, women who murdered their husbands and planned it because they were living in fear went to jail. I do not necessarily say that, in the individual circumstances, all those women should have gone free, but we have to accept that there is a serious argument around provocation. Somebody mentioned that contact is sometimes abused by women, who use it against fathers. I absolutely accept that point. In my constituency, I have worked with fathers and fought for them to have access to their children. However, we also have to understand that there are men who abuse the contact system, according to women's organisations, to continue the abuse of the women. It is not a simple issue of men and women. In none of the debate have I denied that violence is perpetrated in homes by men and by women, but when we are talking about domestic abuse, in order to move from the particular to the general, as Malcolm Chisholm said, we have to understand the context in which we live and the context of power. Individual power relationships will be different, but the pattern of power relationships is one of men having power over women. That is recognised in the United Nations declaration on the elimination of violence against women, which acknowledges and confirms the basic tenet "that violence against women is a manifestation of historically unequal power relations between men and women, which have led to domination over and discrimination against women by men". To believe that is not to gainsay the experience of individual men.

One thing on which we can all agree is that we need more research in the area. I accept that the role of women in society has changed. I celebrate that. I contend that it has not brought more violence, because men, whose roles have changed and who are now more likely than ever to be a proper father to their children and take responsibility for them, are less likely to be in violent relationships. We should recognise and celebrate that. I commend Gil Paterson for his speech. He said something that is quite difficult to say—that, while  we recognise that male victims exist, we have a responsibility to address the bigger picture. That is not about ignoring the individual but about, in policy terms, understanding the broader message that we need to take out to our children in schools. It is frustrating that simply to identify the pattern is to be accused of diminishing people's experience. That is not what is intended. I thought that, in the debate, we would hear that there is a flaw and a failure in the system because we do not recognise the exceptional. Many people who talk about the hidden problem of male victims of domestic abuse say that such abuse is exceptional but that we should nevertheless address it. However, things have shifted for some people, and the debate is, as I have said, a proxy for something else: the contention that there is no pattern of abuse or that males abusing their power over women through domestic abuse is not an overwhelming or serious problem. However, that problem is recognised internationally and by all our agencies. Christine Grahame, for example, said that she would always commend those who have championed the rights of women. She should listen to women's organisations. They are anxious that we are shifting from one position, which is that there may be male victims, to a different position, which is that there is no gendered approach. That is important. She said that if we insist that the issue is a gender issue, we do harm to all victims. Labour contends that if we do not understand that there is a gender issue—for women and for men—we will not eradicate it. It is a fact that men feel stigmatised because they are not prepared to be macho and violent. There has to be an impact on them as well, because of that. One might have thought that the state invented and created women's organisations and refuges, but they came out of needs. I promise members—and this is absolutely true—that Labour members will change our minds on any issue if needs emerge. It is not about our having a closed mind and being in denial. If we accept that there is a scourge and a challenge, we must consider the pattern and the context. Doing so is in the interests of our boys and our girls.

That is quite a significant shift from the Liberal Democrats' position in the past. What does Jim Tolson estimate is the actual  proportion of men and women victims? How hidden does he think the problem of male victims is? Does he think that absolutely equal numbers of men and women are victims of domestic abuse?

That is true.

You do not have to tell me that.

I am happy to contribute to the debate and I thank the minister for his grace in allowing me a second chance when I remembered what I wanted to say the first time—I genuinely appreciated that. In speaking to the amendment in my name, I should indicate that we would have supported the Tory amendment, in the name of John Lamont, but for the fact that agreeing to it would in fact delete our amendment. Therefore, it will not be possible for us to support the Tory amendment at decision time. Labour starts from a position that all victims of violence need support. As a society, we need to challenge violence, not tolerate it. When it was in office in the first eight years of this Parliament, Labour's approach was focused, in dealing with violence and crime more generally, on listening to victims, giving them a voice and understanding how they were affected by violence. We focused on how victims were affected by lack of action or support by the agency that should have acted on their behalf and how they felt reporting crime, going through the court process and afterwards. We wrestled with the implications of repeat victimisation and how that can damage the individual and disempower communities when intimidation goes unchecked. At no stage have we sought to silence the voices of any victim, man or woman, in confronting violence. The debate should not be cast as if some people had been somehow wilfully and deliberately excluded because of our approach to violence and justice. I would argue that such an approach, which involves listening to direct experience, offering support through Victim Support, providing information for victims and so on, and then trying to understand the why of that violence, by looking for patterns and ensuring that those patterns shape policy and action, is central to changing a culture in which violence can blight communities such that victims—male and female—are left feeling helpless. It is evident that, in taking such an approach, we cannot and should not say that violence happens and that we are all potential victims in a very generalised way. That would take us nowhere. In tackling crime and the causes of crime, it is self-evident that not all causes are the same. Therefore, we need to talk about the way in which violence is experienced, such as the way in which community bullying is used to silence older people and leaves them feeling besieged. We need to understand and speak out against racist attacks, sectarian violence and homophobic bullying and  threats. In all those, victims might be subject to the same weapon of choice, such as a fist, but we will not change matters if we do not look beyond the immediate weapon or wound to an understanding of what drove that fist in the first place. That is no more evident than in knife crime, in which the overwhelming majority of perpetrators and victims are young men. We owe it to those young men—perpetrators and victims—to address the issue with a gendered analysis so that we can understand what it is about being a young man that makes him more likely to be involved in knife crime. That is what a gendered analysis means. So it is with domestic abuse. We cannot eradicate it if we look only at the bruises, or if we ask about and understand the what of it, but we do not ask the why. I do not dismiss the concerns and pain of male victims, and I am sure that the helpline will improve our understanding of their experience. Many of those who champion the needs of those victims do so simply because they want those needs to be met.

I will make my point first. However, we must be alive to the fact that, for some, this is a proxy debate for a far more contentious and perhaps fundamental political argument that seeks to deny the reality of women's inequality in work, opportunities, and life chances. That argument does not accept that male violence against women is a fearful expression and consequence of that inequality.

I do not accept that representation of what happens to male victims. I have described and characterised how we advanced the rights and interests of victims. Although the motion talks of support for male victims, and we recognise that, our amendment affirms what has been accepted for a long time, which is that the problem is overwhelmingly one of gender inequality. We affirm that because a gendered analysis of the problem is central to addressing it, not just one point of view among many others. It is a reflection of international agreements and obligations relating to gender inequality and violence against women. There is also international recognition of women's experience of domestic abuse. We know about it from our communities and our surgeries. The police, doctors, housing officers, social workers and schools tell us about the disproportionate  number of women who are victims, and the disproportionate number of men who are perpetrators. That is not to deny one right of a male victim of violence in his own home. I have a stark statistic that must shape our policy. Of men who are murdered, 5 per cent are murdered by a partner or ex-partner. Of women who are murdered, 44 per cent are murdered by a partner or ex-partner. When anyone asks, "Why did she not leave?" that is the statistic that keeps a woman from going through the door and out of violence because it shows the consequences for so many women when they leave. I recognise the demand for further research, and I reflect on some of the commentary that we have already that, when men report domestic abuse, there are stark differences. I ought not to have to repeat that I have compassion for all victims of violence, men and women, but there is a difference in the levels of fear and panic that men and women report. When victims are male, a disproportionate number of the perpetrators are also male, and—

I am not saying that anything is okay. We have to understand the problem in order to tackle it. The argument is put at its gentlest when it says that men do not report because of the stigma and because it is humiliating. I appreciate that that will be a motivating force for some of the men who are caught in such circumstances. The argument is sometimes more strongly put that the women's lobby and women's organisations are resistant and hostile to the idea that we have a responsibility to men. I rebut that latter argument just as strongly. Women who have been confronted daily by the pain caused by violence are already shaped by compassion and anger about what the abuse of power can do. It is interesting to see how exercised feminists in particular are about antisocial behaviour in our communities, for example, because they understand the abuse of power and powerlessness. I acknowledge that the issue of stigma strikes a serious chord but, when a man feels that he is stigmatised and humiliated because he suffers violence at the hands of a woman, that confirms that we are all shaped and affected by the gender roles that we are expected to take. Their experience also describes that gender challenge. Women's equality is freedom for men too. The argument confirms the underlying issue of gender inequality and the unacceptable roles that we are expected to take.  We should be clear that domestic abuse is not about poverty or about alcohol; it is about power and the way in which people abuse that power. In some circumstances, it will be women abusing power over the man with whom they live. We must talk about provision, and an assurance about funding for next year would be welcome. We must also talk about protection and recognise the progress that the police have made in acknowledging that the home is not just a private domain. However, crucially, when it comes to prevention, this understanding is central. In speaking to our boys and girls about what a damaging, corrosive problem this is for us all, we must also get them to confront the why—it must never be "just the way things are". In conclusion, this is not an argument about resources predicated on some kind of battle of the sexes or some sort of fight for attention between men and women. It is an argument—in the interests of women and men, our daughters and our sons—that, in dealing with the lived experience of domestic abuse, we confront the ideas that trap women with violence and the messages to men that this is what they do and that they are a lesser kind of man if they are the victim of violence at the hands of a woman rather than a man. It is in naming the crime that we expose the inequality and create a fairer, more equal and safer society for us all—men and women. I move amendment S3M-6531.2, to insert at end: ", and reaffirms that domestic abuse is rooted in gender inequality, that overwhelmingly victims are women and that eradicating domestic abuse will only succeed where that pattern is acknowledged."

On the issue of—I have forgotten the point. I will sit down. I will come back to the minister.

rose—

It is certainly an affliction for women of a certain age. The minister referred to the police saying, "It's just a domestic." I accept that part of the point was that the police had no idea that men could be victims of violence in that way. However, surely the serious point was that the police did not regard it as part of their responsibility to do anything about violence inside the home, which was regarded as a private domain and not a matter for anybody else.

Does the cabinet secretary agree with women's organisations that argue that we ought not to be seduced by the false belief that violence against women is caused by alcohol? If he accepts that view, why does he not accept that violence against workers is not excused by an alcohol problem?

I congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing the debate. Like him—although perhaps for a shorter time—I was a minister with responsibility for veterans. Of all my responsibilities, that was probably the one that I regarded as being the greatest privilege and the one for which I felt most inadequate. I regarded the job as being very serious; there is a huge responsibility on whoever has that job. The reality is that whatever we say in the chamber or elsewhere will be insufficient to match the courage and sacrifice of a generation that fought against fascism, defended the country, put their own lives at risk and paid the ultimate sacrifice. It was clearly a battle of good against evil. As we reflect on those times, we remember how quickly the ideas of fascism could catch hold and what a challenge they were to everybody's lives throughout the world when they did so. It is important not only to mark the celebration but to acknowledge the struggle and what caused it. We have a people's history of the experience at that time and it is important that we capture that. There are records not only of the experience of those who fought, but of the impact on families and communities. They record the impact on large communities in the west of Scotland and on small seafaring communities, such as the one from which my family came in Tiree. Such small  communities suffered a huge impact because they lost a generation of young men. The small monuments in those communities, along with the large ones in our big cities, reflect respect and commitment to a generation that fought on our behalf. As we pass on from the general election, it is interesting to reflect that that generation not only fought fascism, but it came back determined to shape the world in which it lived. A disproportionate number of those people still go out to vote and understand the importance of doing so. It is important to acknowledge that we now have veterans of all ages. We owe a duty not only to the elderly veterans; we must also recognise the particular needs of those who are involved in, or are recovering from, more recent struggles. It is important to recognise the role of veterans organisations such as Veterans Scotland and Erskine that campaign and challenge those who make decisions about veterans' needs. We must recognise the huge housing needs that have been mentioned, the health needs and the need for support for families in caring for veterans. I heard on the radio the other day people talking about the impact on families after the second world war, when fathers came back to families where the children did not know them. That is still true today, and we need to ensure that the services to support them exist. In these challenging funding times, we need to listen to veterans organisations and give assurances that, in the times when there are pressures on funding, veterans services will not miss out and that, in shaping services, we will talk to those who understand the needs and priorities. Not a few years ago, on a visit to the United States I was struck by how that country manages to celebrate its veterans and soldiers regardless of the purpose or cause of the conflict: they are owed a duty of care and should be treated with respect regardless of what Government decisions had led them to conflict. We must find a way of doing that in our discourse so that it is about recognising not only what was done in the second world war or what is done now, but that people live daily with the consequences of decisions over which they had no control. In the practical delivery of services to those veterans, we will honour those who, a long time ago, fought fascism in Europe and those who now take on serious responsibilities on our behalf. Because it is a cross-party issue, I look forward to the minister identifying the ways in which funding can be secured to meet the needs that veterans organisations have identified.

Following the "Panorama" programme on the abuse of older people in their own homes and the exposé in The Herald  on neglect in residential care, I asked for details of discussions within the Scottish Government and discussions with the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, to establish whether what ministers were saying they were doing in relation to this serious matter was actually being done. Does the minister agree that it is entirely inappropriate to use a court ruling to prevent that information from coming into the public domain, given how important it is to give people confidence that older people are protected wherever they are cared for?

I congratulate all those who were involved in the living wage campaign throughout the United Kingdom—I think that it started in London—and those in Scotland who have pursued it. They have played an important role in addressing and in asking us to challenge poverty and low pay. Tackling low pay has not always been an area of consensus. Indeed, even inside the Labour and trade union movement, there was a long argument about the extent to which free collective bargaining would ensure that low-paid workers would be properly remunerated. There came a time when we considered the fact that there was a disproportionate number of women among the low paid and we recognised that the trade unions in themselves could not protect low-paid workers. Therefore, our movement came to the view that Government intervention was necessary to protect people's entitlement to a basic level of pay to save them from the exploitation that some of us remember all too well, such as security guards being on £1.50 or £2 an hour. Such exploitation was justified in the name of the economic growth and prosperity that are mentioned in the Tory amendment. It is significant that, when the economic crisis emerged, the first solution that some people within the business community proposed was that the national minimum wage was a problem, so perhaps we should get rid of it. We should commend the businesses that are responsible and that recognise that part of good business and their being in partnership with our communities is that they ought not to exploit people. The briefing from the Poverty Alliance recognises that, in the debate, the living wage is not the same as the safeguards that have been put in place through the national minimum wage and the tax credit system. One is not a substitute for the other, but they reinforce our commitment to ensuring that people do not languish in low pay. We have to consider whether any measure will make a difference to the people about whom we purport to care. The Tory amendment talks about economic growth as being the best way out of our difficulties but, beside that, we must have shared prosperity, which will not happen by accident. Government must introduce measures that will make that difference. The national minimum wage presents such an example, and the living wage  creates such a challenge for us all, wherever we are. Rob Gibson talks about the big picture—the huge issues—but that cannot be an alibi for not doing what we can, where we are. The Scottish Government must be challenged on its priorities. It usually describes its anti-poverty strategy in terms of three issues: the council tax freeze, the extension of free school meals, and free prescriptions. Any equality assessment of that strategy will tell us that those do not benefit the poorest people in our communities. Jeremy Purvis's party talks about exempting from paying tax anyone who earns less than £10,000 a year, but the Institute of Fiscal Studies tells us that the beneficiaries of that policy would be three of the four wealthiest groups in the income table. I wonder what equality assessment has been done on that. We need an honest and focused approach, and we need tough targets and monitoring. I regret that the Scottish Government has not continued the challenge of producing an annual report on whether it is meeting its targets on poverty, because such reports can be a spur to action. I would like the minister to clarify what has been done by the Scottish Government. I understand that although Nicola Sturgeon costed a package for introducing the national minimum wage to the NHS, it was vetoed by John Swinney. Is that true? Has the Government considered how it can use procurement policy not just in its powers to address the needs of public sector workers but to challenge the private sector to improve the scandal of private sector low pay? Will the minister support Glasgow's approach? Will he acknowledge housing associations that are implementing the minimum wage? Will he, when he sums up, identify not just the principle that he believes in, but the areas in which he has control and power in terms of that principle's being implemented?

Will the member give way?

Will Jeremy Purvis take an intervention?

If the minister is arguing that people on low incomes are suffering particularly and that there should be greater equality, does he therefore agree that the council tax freeze has exacerbated inequality? Given that it does not benefit anyone who qualifies for council tax benefit, a disproportionate amount of the money that the Government has put into the freeze must, by definition, be going to people who are better off.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it supports community arts initiatives. (S3O-10190)

I am sure that the minister wishes to recognise and celebrate the many community arts initiatives that are making a real difference in my constituency and across Scotland. Will she acknowledge the anxiety of some community arts groups that they may be disproportionately affected by local cuts in funding because they may not be seen as front-line services? What action will the Scottish Government take to identify the impact of local funding decisions on community arts initiatives? What action will the minister take, and what resources will she provide, if local community arts initiatives are suffering disproportionately?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to address Scotland's low rape conviction rate. (S3F-2348)

I thank the First Minister for that reply. I am sure that he will acknowledge the grave concern that conviction rates for rape are at  their lowest level since 1984. Rape Crisis Scotland tells us that there is no reduction in the level of demand from women seeking its help. Is the First Minister aware that Rape Crisis tells us that seven out of 10 women can now expect their sexual or medical history to be introduced in evidence in rape cases? That could have an impact on conviction rates and will certainly have an impact on the confidence of women victims to report the crime at all. Will the First Minister ask the Scottish Law Commission to examine how the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Act 2002 is being interpreted, given that the consequence seems to be the opposite of the intention? Will he indicate how he will explore the possibility of affording women victims of rape representation of their own in court, given that, currently, it seems that their character can be attacked and they are unable to defend themselves?

This is another important issue, and I regret that it has come up at such a late stage and that the committee did not have the opportunity to consider it in more detail. Regardless of their view of amendment 77, I do not think anyone should use it to judge the voluntary sector's view and the critical role of partnerships. Indeed, my party takes the view that there should be parity of esteem. We have a record of developing local and national compacts in relation to the voluntary sector that try to make partnership real and genuine. The test is what the Government is doing in relation to the voluntary sector. I am not sure whether the amendment enhances the Government's approach or sets it back, and I am interested to hear what the minister has to say about that. I agree that the voluntary sector should have a role in community planning partnerships, and I would like to hear the minister's view on that. I am not sure who Derek Brownlee was speaking about when he said that the joint statement was broadly welcomed. It is not my view that the voluntary sector across Scotland broadly welcomes the approach that has been taken by central and local government. The challenge is that we are in the odd position of having a joint statement, but signatories to it have no confidence in its delivery. The SCVO and COSLA have expressed concerns, which highlights the fact that paper statements do not deliver policy changes. I  am not sure about the benefit of reflecting such statements in legislation. We need the minister to commit to real engagement with the voluntary sector. She also needs to address the point that, despite the fact that the budget is growing, too many voluntary organisations are reporting real difficulties at the local level. The Government has a responsibility in that regard. The SCVO has already said that it is concerned that the minister will not intervene when voluntary organisations have expressed concerns about their experience at the local level. The SCVO has also said that the Government's decisions are putting pressure on the sector's capacity to deliver services and secure funding locally. We need the Scottish Government to commit to act on the real concerns that voluntary organisations have expressed at the local level. We know the added value that such organisations bring, but all the joint statements in the world will not deliver unless there is a proper partnership between the Scottish Government, local government and the voluntary sector. To an extent, this debate on amendment 77 has been useful because it has given us the opportunity to highlight the issues. I am not convinced that putting into legislation a joint statement whose signatories all seem to be expressing concerns is the way to go. I expect the minister to commit to coming back to the committees of the Parliament, to look at what happened to the compact process, to listen to what voluntary organisations say about their funding in the context of a still growing budget, and to say what the Government can do about its decisions and priorities, which are putting voluntary organisations under so much pressure. I would welcome the minister's comments, not on his willingness to make statements, but on his willingness to act and to change his priorities and the decisions that he has made, which clearly present real difficulties to voluntary organisations at the local level.

The SCVO has asked the minister to intervene in particular circumstances in which it feels that voluntary organisations are suffering, but he has not done so. Will he now make a commitment to intervening when voluntary organisations feel that they are being particularly disadvantaged as a consequence of what is happening at the local level?

I am not clear about why Derek Brownlee has introduced housing associations at this late stage in the process. Perhaps if he had thought about the issue a little earlier, he would have been more aware of the implications that amendment 71 would have for housing associations and their diversity. We can have confidence that they are regulated and transparent. It is rather rich of the Tory party to lecture others about transparency and accountability given the approach to that by some in the private sector in relation to their finances. Housing associations are a model of transparency and accountability. At their heart, they have tenants who are interested in the services that are delivered. I assure members that, certainly in my area, every penny is a prisoner if its spend is not justified. Big organisations could learn something from them. Even if we had reservations about housing associations, Derek Brownlee must be aware that a bill is currently before the Parliament that deals with the role of the regulator in relation to housing associations. We can look there to ensure transparency in spending and proportionality in the burdens that we place on housing associations, particularly small ones. At present, housing associations could tell us their spending plans for the next 30 years, which is why they are successful. Amendment 71 is inappropriate, as the regulatory issues can be considered elsewhere. Members can have confidence that housing associations and co-operatives are a model of good practice on spending that others would do well to follow.

It may say something about my very sad life that I have enjoyed this afternoon's debate. In relation to what Jamie Hepburn said about fresh faces, I am always reluctant to admit my age but, sadly, my face confesses it for me. I can attribute this particularly unfresh face to the work of the committee only in small part; it is probably mostly the result of a life too much of which has been spent having arguments about politics. The issue of acronyms and what we call things is important. For the life of me, I found it extremely difficult to keep in my head what the proposals were and to understand them. It was like reading Tolstoy and always having to go to the back of the book to find out who everyone was. There is a serious point at stake. If we do not understand the system and do not get it, how on earth do we imagine that anyone who wants to use the services in question will have any confidence that they know where to go? There is a general point about setting up bodies and then not willing the means to ensure that they make sense to those for whom they are supposed to address problems. The proposal for an annual report is important and, in that respect, I urge committees to have a proactive relationship with commissioners and  commissions. Although the debate over independence and accountability is difficult—after all, people sometimes claim independence when they are asked to justify what they are doing—the balance can be managed if the committees themselves play an active role. I repeat that these bodies must not only serve the individuals who go to them but teach general lessons about our standards in public life and the quality of services that are delivered. If that does not happen and we continue only to address individual complaints without recognising patterns of disadvantage or inequality where people are unable to be proactive on their own account, we will be serving those people badly. On whether Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People and the Scottish Human Rights Commission should be brought together in future, Jackson Carlaw was entirely right to point out that the current situation might not be for ever. The members of the committee came to the same conclusion for different reasons, with some saying, "Maybe, but not yet," and others highlighting the reason why they were separate. However, the people in those roles will have to make the case either for staying as they are now or for change. If they are doing their jobs as they are at the moment and if they are not duplicating each other's work, they will survive. After all, the test will be whether they are working, which brings us back to the issue of accountability. In response to Ross Finnie's concerns about the future and Stewart Maxwell's comments, I have to say that I find it interesting that the SPCB gave committee members the task of testing their thoughts against the SPCB's own plan. In the end, we did not agree with it and the concern is that, in future, such scrutiny might not happen. Although the SPCB served a very important role, the Parliament did not entirely agree with it, and that should be reflected in tomorrow's stage 3 proceedings on the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill. Given that we need to put in place a process that reflects on what we have already done, we would be well advised not to paint ourselves into any corners or to entrench our positions simply because we said something in the past, even though, in the real world, it no longer makes any sense. Instead of recognising that it was appropriate for the Parliament to reflect on what it had done, on the fact that the commissioners and commissions had grown up in a higgledy-piggledy way and on how we might rationalise things, some people characterised the committee's work as a way of getting rid of troublesome bodies We were not threatening functions, particularly those of the children's commissioner, that we had agreed were important. In public life in general, people must  have more confidence in the fact that, when we say we want to revisit past decisions, we are not trying to silence anyone but are thinking about how we can do things better. Again, I thank the clerks, who will certainly play an important role going forward. Jamie Hepburn talked about fresh faces; some of us thought we would get off for good behaviour after serving on the RSSB committee, but we were obviously misguided. We should all thank Trish Godman for taking on the role of taking the bill to its conclusion in the Parliament.

For once I am not devastated to discover that my time is tight and that I must keep to it. I will have done remarkably well if I manage to speak for four minutes. On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate and to record our support for the general principles of the bill. If I came into the chamber with a spring in my step it was because of the opportunity for a reunion with my good friends on the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee. We may divide on many things, but I think that our shared experience will go with me to the grave. To be serious, I recognise the role of the clerks and the convener in supporting us and taking us through a difficult process. The process was difficult simply because the language that was used to deal with the important issues was not easy. The bringing together of those things made the process such a challenge. It is true that most of the debate on the general principles of the bill has been rehearsed and that there has been agreement. I do not think that there will be a dispute about those general principles. The committee had to adjudicate and come to decisions on difficulties, challenges and conflicting views. Not everyone will be happy with those decisions, but they reflected the balance of concerns throughout the Parliament and beyond about what was suggested. No one can disagree with the aim of increased efficiency, but as I said in the previous debate we must be careful that efficiencies are not made at the cost of the service we wish to deliver and that the service itself, accessibility and transparency are real, not theoretical. We must also ensure that commissions and commissioners are supported to do their job properly and that their role is understood beyond this debating chamber. Reflecting again on these issues, I believe that we must remember that these bodies came into existence not out of malice or with some malevolent intent but for a purpose. As a result, it will never be easy to declutter the landscape by trying to get rid of them; people will always want to be reassured that the need for their existence is still being met. That is particularly true of the commissioner for children and young people. We must also remember that commissioners play a variety of roles. Although they grew up in different ways, they were established for a particular purpose and we must ensure that, no matter what structure is put in place, that purpose remains.  There is no point in having the kind of one-stop shop that people have suggested and discussed if no one knows where it is, understands its purpose or realises that it exists to help them in their everyday lives. It would be a problem for the bodies that deal with complaints or rights if it turned out that those who understand how to complain or to fight for their rights are able to access support while those who need the confidence to do so are absent from the process. The challenge will always be to ensure that, instead of simply giving people a place to go at the end of the process after things have gone wrong, these bodies reach out into communities to those who deserve support and services that meet their needs. I support the suggestion in the bill, as recommended by the committee, that the test for any further proposals for commissions or commissioners should be whether the particular function can be done by existing bodies and whether it is possible to do things together or in a different way. Finally, just because there are external champions fighting for children, older people or whatever, that does not mean we should not have champions inside Government—and, indeed, inside Parliament—doing the same. We need to structure the responsibilities of Government in such a way as to ensure that those champions exist. I thank those who have helped us to get to this stage and am happy to lend our support to the bill's general principles.

Given that you are aware of the issue, have you spoken to your colleagues at Westminster about how matters can be taken forward?

I absolutely acknowledge the need for physical regeneration to be supported by economic regeneration. Therefore, is there not a critical role for an enterprise agency to identify geographical areas in which the Government should sustain, support or stimulate economic activity? Rather than leave the matter to the free market, should not an agency have a role in identifying areas that need jobs to match their physical regeneration?

On how community planning partnerships and the voluntary sector are critical to regeneration, what should be done to ensure that there is voluntary sector representation on CPPs in Scotland? Is there a role for the Scottish Government in ensuring that that happens?

The minister's motion is straightforward. Indeed, despite my best endeavours, I could not find anything in it with which to disagree. We will therefore support it and the other amendments. In the interests of consensus, I am keen that we have a substantial debate about regeneration issues rather than a more aerated discussion—I am sometimes involved in such discussions. The minister must accept that the budget that he has to spend this year has grown. I do not think that the Scottish National Party's position is that the UK Government ought not to have bailed out the Scottish banks. It is recognised that the consequences for the public finances of doing so must be dealt with across the United Kingdom. There is concern that there may be a gulf between what is said about regeneration and what is happening at the local level. I want to raise several issues that I hope the minister will address. As the minister has said, we must recognise the connections between economic, physical and social regeneration. In focusing on economic development, we must understand the need for the physical and social development of communities. That means that we must take a strategic, Scotland-wide approach. We must look across Scottish Government departments' budgets and resources, and not simply talk about regenerating a community from one budget; we must recognise that that has implications for justice department spending and health budgets, for example. We must also recognise that there are links and that things are interdependent. There has been concern in that regard. When the Scottish National Party came into office, set up its directorates and separated community planning, which was under the minister with responsibility for local government, from community regeneration, which was under the communities minister, I remember discussing the dangers inherent in such an approach and the likely disjunction that would emerge.  There is a genuine fear that we are now beginning to see the result of that mistaken decision, which is that community planning is regarded not as a catalyst for community regeneration and as a vehicle to revitalise communities, but as a mechanism for the distribution of resources. The minister must address that. Physical regeneration is important, which is why time and again members raise concerns about what is happening in the construction industry. Public building through the construction industry is an important part of challenging the recession but, from where we sit, it looks as though there is paralysis in Government policy in that regard, with the consequence of lost opportunities for jobs and apprenticeships and for people to retain their skills.

I recognise that moneys were brought forward and that there was two years' spend in one year, but only 40 per cent of that spend went on new build. There is a concern that a significant amount of money was spent on off-the-shelf housing that was languishing on the market. A broader issue is that not one hospital or school has been built through the Scottish Futures Trust. That is a lost opportunity in our local communities. We talk about the importance of economic activity, but it is critical to link that to local opportunity. There is concern about the fact that the Scottish Government does not have an employability strategy and that its skills strategy is entirely blind to the barriers and discrimination in the employment market. We must recognise that it is the Scottish Government's job to address economic, social and personal barriers. I am all in favour of the go local message, but we still need national support. The levers at the Scottish level must be used to support that local activity. If there was ever an example that captured the lack of understanding of how all those aspects come together, it is found in those who criticised the Glasgow airport rail link for being simply a train line. The frustration at the loss of GARL was that it was an opportunity to create jobs and to provide community development and regeneration in a deprived community. The scheme would have created 1,300 jobs for local people, which would have made a huge difference. That regeneration issue must be addressed. The same issue arises in relation to the role of Scottish Enterprise. The minister said that Scottish  Enterprise never had responsibility for a social remit under the legislation, but the fact is that, in the past, when there was physical regeneration in the constituency that I represent, Scottish Enterprise was at the table talking about how to link the training and employment opportunities to the people in the community. Scottish Enterprise has told me that it no longer has that role. It does not have responsibility for training or for directing economic activity to deprived communities, which is a huge problem. Deprivation has a geographical dimension, so an agency that is so well funded ought to have that geographical responsibility. Scottish Enterprise should not be led simply by demand from companies; it should actively support local economic activity. I make the same point about community development in Scotland. There are huge opportunities, but I am not convinced that those are recognised in Scottish Enterprise. I want to flag up issues about the planning system, because regeneration at all levels must be supported by a strong planning system. However, people in the planning system who are committed to working in communities tell me that local authorities are deciding to make planners redundant and to reduce their planning departments. I am told that community engagement with the planning process is not as rigorous as it should be. In the current times, planning is a critical job. To an extent, we will plan our way out of recession, so we must have strong planning departments to do that. As someone who supported community planning, I have a great fear that it is being honoured in the breach. There is an issue about the role of the voluntary sector in community planning partnerships. They are not at the table. I ask the minister whether that will be sorted and whether voluntary sector representatives will, as of right, sit at the table in every community planning partnership. One of the big issues in the old social inclusion partnership process was the extent to which we were able to bend the spend sufficiently. I recognise that we did not do that; mainstream budgets were not directed sufficiently into communities. However, it seems that the process now is even worse. We need real community engagement, but the feeling is that less community engagement is happening now. Community engagement is critical in relation to prioritising budgets, understanding need and knowing where the real challenges are. To be fair to the minister, he referred to that in his opening speech. However, he will know that the study of the fairer Scotland fund by the Scottish centre for regeneration, which was based on case studies in a number of local authorities, concluded  that many respondents felt that, in comparison with the more local, geographic and project-focused approaches of previous programmes, it has become more difficult to engage communities in the more thematic community planning partnership-wide approaches that are becoming more common. I am sure that we would all be interested to know how that problem is being addressed. The minister said, quite rightly, that local government is a critical partner, but it is facing severe financial pressures now—not in the future—despite a growing budget. There will be a time when we will have to ask whether a centrally imposed council tax freeze on local authorities is the best approach when we need to sustain communities and the groups that Robert Brown rightly identified. There is a particular issue around single outcome agreements and the extent to which they are delivering on the local priorities that would support regeneration. A report by Audit Scotland states: "The audits showed many CPPs to be overly bureaucratic and not focused ... on outcomes for local people." It has also been said that "There is a need for Community Planning Partnerships to make clearer the impacts that their SOA (and specifically the FSF related elements) will have on equalities groups in their areas." There is a disjunction between what the Government has said it wants to do with regeneration and the vehicle through which that is being delivered. Single outcome agreements are still not equality impact assessed. In those circumstances, I am not confident that there is a rounded view of community regeneration. Robert Brown mentioned the impact on voluntary organisations locally. Will the minister confirm his willingness and that of John Swinney to intervene where they feel that voluntary organisations are disproportionately feeling the impact of the financial squeeze locally? That in itself seems counterproductive when we are talking about regeneration. Regeneration should be part of an anti-poverty framework. It is unfortunate that single outcome agreements emerged ahead of the achieving our potential framework, the equally well framework and the guidance on equalities. As a consequence, spending on regeneration locally has not been shaped by anything other than the warm words of the frameworks. We are not seeing any delivery at the local level that is influenced by the frameworks at the Scottish level.  An example of that is the supported employment framework, which is important in relation to regeneration. The framework has come out, but there is no role for Scottish Enterprise, no money and no evidence that, where the Scottish Government has let big contracts, work to support those who are further away from employment is being recognised. I would welcome the minister's comments on how he sees the Southern general hospital contract providing community benefit and employment opportunities. Is there an opportunity to use article 19 of the European Union public procurement directive to support sheltered workplaces? Those are examples of how thinking at a local level can support a regeneration strategy. I recognise the minister's important comments on how regeneration works and the fact that it should be central. However, he will understand, as we all do, that saying that does not make it happen. The levers have to be used more extensively to ensure that we do not have just warm words, that there is a Scottish strategy that recognises the geographical nature of deprivation and the challenge facing some of our communities, and that, therefore, genuine local partnerships can be fostered, alongside the work of the Scottish Government, to ensure the regeneration of employment and the economic, social and physical regeneration that the minister talked about and which we in the Labour Party supported. I move amendment S3M-5852.1, to insert after second "regeneration": "; notes in particular the importance of an effective planning system and the necessity of genuine community engagement to secure real change".

What discussions have there been with Scottish Enterprise about the role of Co-operative Development Scotland, which sits within that organisation, in supporting such initiatives and ensuring that the number of co-operatives with the community dimension that the minister has identified can grow?

It is not enough.

I am sure that the Deputy First Minister would not have wished to mislead the court when she wrote the letter. In answer to a question, she said that she spoke to no one else about the matter. I would be grateful if she would indicate how she satisfied herself that her constituent's circumstances were as he described them? In particular, when she told the court that Mr Rauf was  "heavily involved in his community", how did she check that? Will she indicate what that involvement entailed?

I welcome the debate and congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee on the important job that it has done in producing its report. As Elaine Smith mentioned, the Parliament has wrestled with the issue of female offenders over a long period of time. The Equal Opportunities Committee has always been an important forum for addressing such questions, particularly with  regard to understanding that the justice system often treats women most unfairly and further victimises them, and the committee has debated those broader issues over the years. The committee's report and today's debate highlight the need for us to pursue a gendered understanding of the justice system. We need to understand why women are overwhelmingly the victims of domestic abuse and male violence, and we need to address our policy with regard to that understanding. It is a simple truth: if we do not ask why, we will not change behaviour and create circumstances in which we can eradicate domestic abuse, for example. It is important to speak about women's experiences. We need to ask why women suffer disproportionately from mental health problems and end up in jail, and why their offending behaviour is remarkably different from that of men. The minister referred to the issue of knife crime. Women are rarely the perpetrators of knife crime, but many women are mothers who will sleep easier at night if we address the problem of knife crime and the risk that it poses to our sons. I would be grateful if the minister could confirm that he and his department will continue to take a gendered approach to the issue of male violence against women. As is the case with understanding why women end up in the situation that they do, the answer involves addressing the pattern and then eradicating it. That attitude explains why we on the Labour side of the chamber resist a mechanistic approach to sentencing, which the minister has advocated—as if the different needs of men and women could be captured by taking a blanket approach to sentencing. The irony is that a sentence of six months or less might keep a woman who has been abused by a man safe from male violence. It should be recognised that short sentences can have a different impact for women victims of male violence from that which they might have for men.

We have made it clear that that is appropriate, and we need a justice system that asks those questions. I return to my point about sentences of six months or less. Ninety per cent of aggravated domestic abuse crimes do not attract a custodial sentence at all, and the remainder attract a sentence of less than six months. The respite that women get when men are sentenced, even if it is  only for three or four months, can make a life-changing difference for them. Therefore, any sentencing policy cannot involve the type of blanket presumption that the minister makes. The cabinet secretary referred to the period during which I was Deputy Minister for Justice. I was aware back then of the temptation in the Scottish Executive, as it was then, for departments to operate in silos. I urge the minister to ensure that his justice policies are shaped by an understanding of equality issues and by the views of the equality unit and the national group on violence against women. We all recognise that women offenders often represent failures of systems to support women at an earlier stage in their lives. It is essential that local services understand women's needs. That is why I continue to press the Government to ensure that single outcome agreements are subject to equality impact assessment. If they are not, the problem of some services not meeting women's needs will be compounded. I was troubled when I read the following in the committee's report: "Members of the Committee were deeply concerned to hear that some women deliberately commit offences purely to access the services provided in Cornton Vale prison." How scary a comment is that, and how serious a comment on the lives of far too many women? It shows what their lives outside prison are like. We have to redouble our efforts to ensure they have access to services and to refuge, our efforts to tackle offenders, and our efforts to support those who face abuse. We need certainty in funding. That is a challenge for the Government, as it would be for any other. However, it highlights the importance of considering the role that prisons play in supporting women. I understand why people say that prison cannot help everyone who goes in for short periods, but I do not accept the view that nothing can be done and that short sentences are therefore a failure. I refer the minister to the routes out of prison project, which is run by the Wise Group. James Kelly mentioned that. In that project, life coaches work with people while they are in prison—sometimes it is the first time that it has been possible to capture them—and provide a bridge out into the community. I urge the minister to provide that service for women prisoners as well, because such support is critically important to them. Families Outside, the group that Robert Brown mentioned, is right to talk about the disruption to families and the shame that they experience. It is critical, then, that we ensure that there is sufficient funding for the voluntary organisations that people trust. Statutory organisations are often dangerous places for families in such circumstances. I also urge the minister to reflect on what we should be  doing in schools to support young people. We need to understand the barriers to learning that can exist when children face such circumstances.

I finish on Elaine Smith's point that we have to consider the issue in relation to an equality perspective. It is about women's lives, their education and employment opportunities and their lives as young people. We need to fund services as much as making pronouncements on justice policy if we are to ensure that we address women offenders' needs.

If it is the case that a disproportionate number of women in prison have mental health problems, in comparison with men, should not part of policy be to ask why that is the case? That way, we could ensure that we have a gendered approach to tackling the problem. If we are to eradicate the problem, we must understand not just that there is a difference but why that difference exists.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in tackling fuel poverty. (S3O-9475)

Does the minister share my concern about how the energy assistance programme is being run? One reason for my concern is the significant underspend—I understand that only £20 million from a budget of £60 million has been spent. Will he, as a matter of urgency, review the way in which stage 4 referrals are being handled? I refer in particular to the figures that were revealed in answer to a parliamentary question on the subject from Duncan McNeil. Those figures showed that, of 599 appeals against the decision to reject an application, 529 were upheld. That stunning figure calls into question the assessment process. Given that many people whose applications were rejected may not feel able or confident to pursue an appeal, how will the minister ensure that people—past, present and future—who are  entitled to a central heating system can secure one?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government's response is to the survey by Unison that predicts that local authorities are facing a  £305 million drop in income and the loss of 3,000 jobs over the next year. (S3F-2217)

I am sure that the First Minister would wish to acknowledge the authority of Unison, given that it represents workers who are committed to delivering critical services in our communities, rather than dismissing it, as his answer suggests. What steps has the First Minister taken to meet Unison to discuss its concerns and, in particular, its troubling findings that care assistants who support vulnerable people in their own homes will be the first to lose their jobs? The First Minister clearly shares his Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth's complacent view that the Scottish Government is funding local services with, as I think he said yesterday, some style. If he does, will he explain why local authorities, the unions, voluntary organisations and worried families in our communities all report, and are fearful of, significant cuts at the local level? Are they making it up? Can it be that they are all out of step, bar the First Minister? Will he respond to those serious concerns rather than dismiss them?

Does the minister recognise that the pattern shown in the figures is that domestic abuse is a crime that is overwhelmingly committed by men against women? Does he agree that if we are to eradicate domestic abuse we have to understand and challenge the attitudes that cause that pattern of behaviour? Will he confirm that in offering support to male victims of domestic abuse he remains committed to tackling the underlying gender nature of this crime?

Will the minister commit to the use of article 19 by, for example, saying that he will guarantee that in the Southern general hospital development, a number of the contracts will be reserved?

I add my congratulations to Richard Baker. I also particularly congratulate the employees of sheltered workplaces and Community union representatives who are in the public gallery on forcing the issue on to the political agenda, confronting us as politicians and ensuring that action has been taken. They are to be commended for that tireless work, from which many people will benefit. A danger is that such debates can sometimes be soft and involve kind words and expressions of concern—having heard Maureen Watt's speech, I exclude her from that. In fact, the debate is tough and we should be obliged to confront it, because it is about real people and real discrimination. Government at every level is obliged to find solutions to that. Unemployment levels among people with disabilities are a scandal. We are talking not about  doing people a favour but about meeting an obligation and entitling people to achieve their potential. We need to shift from simply expressing concern about the position in which people find themselves to finding ways of delivering. Maureen Watt gave us a load of explanations for why things could not be done. We should listen to people who have solutions, capacity and talents but who have been denied opportunities. Sometimes, a false debate takes place about whether we are in favour of sheltered, supported workplaces or mainstreaming access to employment. Given the unemployment levels among people who are disabled, I understand why anxiety is felt about a shift to mainstreaming, because mainstream employers have fallen down on the matter, as has the public sector. The notion is also held that we can have only supported workplaces or mainstream employment, but it is possible to move from a supported workplace into a mainstream workplace—that is a huge opportunity for people. I ask the Scottish Government to recognise in its mainstream thinking what it says about its obligation to people with disabilities. What does it say in its skills strategy? Such documents do not happen by accident. I am concerned that Scottish Enterprise as now recast has no responsibility for people and place. The consequence of that for disadvantaged groups and communities is evident, but that also applies to people with disabilities. Such strategies will not operate simply through the market; political will is required at every level. The Government's priority is the economy. We must show where people's needs and entitlements are placed in the economic strategy. Equality must inform every Government priority. That is why I and others maintain the critical importance of having a champion for disabled workers at the table when an employment or economic strategy is discussed. I congratulate Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries in my city and City Building on embracing the notion of using the European legislation. RSBI has done critical groundbreaking work with young disabled people. It runs a yearly school vocational programme to provide more than 30 schoolchildren with special learning needs half a day's training per week as part of their curriculum. At the end of the year's training, they receive a Scottish vocational qualification. We cannot measure the confidence that that gives those young people and the opportunity for them to be role models for other people with disabilities in the issues that they face. We are examining the challenge to us from the people in the gallery and in our communities about how we ensure not just value for money but value  for people. I urge the minister to take that challenge in his response.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth last met the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and what was discussed. (S3O-9288)

When the minister met COSLA, did he discuss the impact of the severe weather on the capacity of local authorities to deliver their services? I understand, for example, that maintenance and care budgets will have had to be used to deal with the immediate emergency that the severe weather created. What will the cabinet secretary do to help local authorities to address, for example, the impact on the regular road maintenance budget of the spending of money to mitigate the effects of the severe weather and the fact that the challenge of maintaining the roads has been heightened by the consequences of the severe weather, such as the increased numbers of potholes?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has had with women's organisations about the Scottish Government's proposals for sentencing reform. (S3O-9177)

I remind the minister that consulting widely is not necessarily the same as making a point of ensuring that we hear particular voices on an issue of concern. Is the minister aware that, in 2007-08, in only 39 of the 579 cases in which a person was convicted of an offence with a domestic aggravator was a custodial sentence of more than six months imposed? Will the minister confirm that he will not dismiss the concerns of women's organisations in that regard? Specifically, what advice did he seek from women's organisations on the impact that his proposals will have on women and their families who face domestic abuse? What advice did he seek from the equality unit and, more specifically,  the national group on violence against women in order to allay their fears that a presumption against sentences of six months or less will leave women and families vulnerable and perpetrators able further to abuse families?

I take that serious point about how we deliver on the rhetoric that we hear throughout the chamber and elsewhere and how we make the personalisation of care real. Does the member think that there is a difficulty in developing a care service that establishes minimum standards and reasonable charging throughout Scotland? To what extent does that mean that we would have to cut across the individual role of local authorities?

Will the member give way?

I come to this debate more in sorrow than in anger—which reflects the dispiriting instinct of the party of Government to do what it does best, an example of which was embodied for us in Alex Neil—not because of the critical issues around care of the elderly, which all of us throughout the UK need to address, but because, again, the Scottish National Party is talking about what others are doing, rather than what it will do. It is settling for a bit of misrepresentation, coupled with a touch of scaremongering, mixed up with that signature SNP approach of a trumped-up feeling of self-righteousness. That demeans this Parliament and those throughout the UK who are exercised by and concerned about the issues at hand. What we have from Alex Neil is a non-debate about an imagined slight by the UK Government in a Parliament that, with the SNP, is becoming characterised as having a lack of real engagement with the key debates and anxieties of the day. More and more decisions are being taken away from this Parliament and priorities are determined by the ability of ministers to make decisions away from the Parliament, which is reducing it to a place where politicking is the only thing that really seems to matter and where we rather get the sense that ministers are more exercised by identifying alibis than by developing solutions.  This is a week after a number of long cold weeks in which the Scottish Government showed its extraordinary inability to act in the face of the national emergency that was caused by the severe weather by failing to act in the interests of vulnerable and elderly people who were trapped in their own homes. The most striking feature of the discussion and the debate on that issue was the fact that ministers had obviously not even thought about it and saw no role for themselves in co-ordinating the response as the extent of the problem emerged. Given the Government's default position of talking and not acting, that was perhaps entirely to be expected. Far from caring about older people when it really mattered, the SNP Government was complacent, defensive and absolutely lacking in leadership.

I certainly am speaking to the debate, rather than to the nonsense that Alex Neil mentioned. Last week, John Swinney was unable to defend his lack of action and the explicable and damaging silence of his health colleague Nicola Sturgeon. He claimed that I had missed the mood, but he was wrong. [ Interruption. ]

The contention is that at a UK level we are moving to deal with the attendance allowance to the detriment of older people. I simply make the point that we have a Scottish Government that is comfortable talking about that, but which will not address its own failings during the recent, and current, emergency in relation to cold weather. I hope that the Scottish Government will consider appointing an older person's champion for that purpose. It is important to listen to groups on these matters. I will outline the context—for me—of the debate, explore some of the key issues and perhaps identify a number of areas for action by  the Scottish Government. If the Scottish Government believes that there is an issue with what is happening at UK level, I am sure that it is more than capable of drawing together the views of the people of this country and representing them. It does not require a motion of this Parliament to do so. Indeed, the SNP's own Minister for Public Health and Sport has already made a commitment to making a joint statement in response to the green paper. The SNP knows as well as I do that there is no decision on action. I assume that it understands the status of a green paper. The Scottish Government has said that it has developed a response. Perhaps the substance of the debate could have been the Scottish Government's response. We could have discussed that, rather than a theoretical position and its view of something that has not yet been implemented. There are obviously those—

Let me make this serious point. It is obvious that some people are concerned about the implications of some policies that the green paper outlines. The consultation is the place to explore those anxieties.

Let me finish my point.

The Scottish Government has misrepresented the debate about attendance allowance and has categorised it in one way, so it finds it difficult to deal with somebody who wishes to explore seriously the policy's implications. The reality is that green papers are used in the way that the document that we are discussing has been used. It is understandable that ministers wish to consult on potential approaches without being obliged absolutely to pursue them. Shona Robison understands that. When challenged on the fact that the voluntary sector had not been involved in her policy on elderly care, she said: "it would be dishonest for us to go out with a blank sheet of paper and say to people, 'What do you think?' We need to be able to put down some ideas to gauge and guide that discussion, and that is the stage that we have reached."— [ Official Report , 28 October 2009; c 20547-8.]  Shona Robison understands the role of a green paper. She makes it clear that the Government's responsibility is to shape debates and test ideas. That is what consultations are for. The UK ministers involved have made it clear that they are continuing the process and that nothing has been decided. The motion implies that no discussion has taken place—

I am now addressing the motion—[ Interruption .]

The trouble with SNP members is that they think that shouting something loudly makes it true, but what has been said is not true. The debate is serious and people deserve to have it taken seriously, so let me continue. The motion implies that no discussion has taken place and that Scotland will not only suffer as a consequence of the proposals—

The minister made even more explicit the implication in the motion that Scotland will somehow lose funding, which will be directed to care in England. That is why the motion calls on the UK Government to consult. Consultation is, of course, good. In our debate on elderly care in October, Shona Robison, the Minister for Public Health and Sport, said: "We are, of course, also working with the United Kingdom Government in the light of its green paper 'Shaping the future of care together'. Given that any changes to the benefits system, particularly attendance allowance, will have profound implications for the way in which social care is delivered in Scotland, that dialogue is important."— [ Official Report , 28 October 2009; c 20548.]  We recognise the challenge of the issues. According to Shona Robison, dialogue is taking place and the Governments are working together. I am therefore curious to establish what today's debate is about. The Westminster Government has rebuffed the argument that the proposal will involve a reduction in the moneys that are available to support people's care. The Minister for Housing and Communities should have confirmed that that commitment was made. The UK minister has said that using disability living allowance for under-65s has been categorically ruled out and he has made it clear that those who receive attendance allowance and over-65s who receive DLA will  continue to receive an equivalent level of support and protection in any reformed system. The minister must be aware that a key issue that drives the debate has been the examination of how a national care service for England might be created. We might wish to—I agree that we should—interrogate the implications of that for Scotland, but we might as seriously ask why the Scottish Government has nothing to say about minimum care standards, a fair charging regime—for which attendance allowance is used—and the reasonable expectation that charges and the care service should be the same wherever people are in Scotland. From work that Jackie Baillie and others have done, we know that the charging regime varies widely throughout Scotland. It is suggested that the quality of care is as varied. How does the minister propose that we address that problem, given that any consideration of single outcome agreements reveals a lack of priority for the needs of elderly and disabled people? I welcome Nicola Sturgeon's invitation today to a meeting to discuss those serious issues, but it is depressing that the minister does not recognise their significance, too. What is the Scottish Government doing to develop meaningful self-directed care? I am very committed to the idea of personalised budgets, but it sits ill with any commitment when waiting lists for direct payments are growing and when it is feared that care in Edinburgh is being categorised artificially to reduce support levels. This is a critical issue. Indeed, it reflects the concern of many that self-directed care is not being developed. The lack of confidence among people who need support and those who care for them is reflected in much of the anxiety about the possible ending of the attendance allowance and the use of the money to develop care packages. That anxiety remains even when the Government has given the assurance that doing so will not mean a diminution in the level of support. Carers and people who use the services are anxious that none of us is serious about self-directed support. The minister has to answer these questions. Why are there waiting lists for direct payments? Why are payment levels being reduced so that people cannot direct their own care? I am interested in hearing what the minister has to say on the action that is being taken in the concordat to encourage the process. Will there be a step change in services for older people? I am also anxious to highlight concerns that have been reported to me on the drop in respite provision. Respite is part of the context of the debate; elderly care is not only about charging. Will the minister tell Parliament how respite figures  are monitored and what work is being done to ensure that the cut in respite is not being masked by a lack of reference to the length of time that is offered? One example is in-home care. Carers groups are telling me that people who would have been given two to three hours to have an afternoon away from their care responsibilities are now being told that they can have only an hour or less. I am aware of the work of the Scottish Government in developing its own proposals on delivery of care for elderly and disabled people. I will flag up a number of issues in that regard about which older peoples groups are particularly concerned. People are concerned about the false connection of volunteers—people who want to support their neighbours—into care packages, making them an obligatory part of a package. There is also the entirely different matter of making the assumption that those who care for their loved ones do so on a voluntary basis. The Scottish Government has emphasised the importance of telecare, but that cannot be a technological fix for all. In the recent severe weather—

If I may, Presiding Officer, I will finish the point.

I acknowledge that, Presiding Officer. I am genuinely concerned that the minister's scaremongering may mean that we lose sight of the key issues that every level of government needs to address in terms of care for the elderly. I urge the minister and his colleagues to reflect on them. The debate on how we treat our elderly people is of critical importance and it speaks volumes that the SNP wants to use it as a vehicle to play games. The Government needs need to address seriously the ways in which to develop minimum standards across Scotland and meet the needs of our elderly population. I move amendment S3M-5515.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert, "welcomes the opportunity afforded by the UK Government's Green Paper, Shaping the Future of Care Together , to contribute to the debate on issues concerning the future provision of care services; welcomes moves to address the postcode lottery of care and recognises the need for a similar debate to take place in Scotland, taking into account specific challenges and opportunities arising from a growing population of older people; notes that the consultation on the Green Paper closed in November 2009,  and looks forward to ongoing dialogue with the UK Government to achieve shared objectives of ensuring that older and disabled people have fair access to good quality services and support."

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met  representatives of COSLA and what issues were discussed. (S3O-9114)

Has the minister discussed in her meetings with COSLA the implications of the statement that emerged from yesterday's meeting on the concordat? We were told that there would be "a step change in the range of services available to elderly people". Will the minister clarify whether that will end the postcode lottery in the cost and quality of care for older people throughout Scotland? How will that change be evident in the process of single outcome agreements, a troublingly small number of which refer to issues that relate to older and disabled people? Will it end the waiting list for direct payments?

There is clearly a big issue about adult illiteracy and the impact that it has on families. What expectation does the cabinet secretary have that the single outcome agreement process will ensure that literacy is given an appropriate place, not only for children but for adults?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Does Jackie Baillie agree that some accessibility issues are about the attitude and the discrimination that underpins the fact that somebody would use a disabled parking bay or be hostile towards disabled people? I have experience of a pub being hostile to people who were not wheelchair users, but who were perceived to be different because of their disability.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last met voluntary sector mental health service providers and what issues were discussed. (S3O-8701)

When the cabinet secretary last met voluntary sector health providers, did she discuss their fears about the impact of the concordat and single outcome agreements on their capacity to access funding and to deliver high-quality mental health services in communities? She will recall that she promised that an analysis of the implementation of the first round of single outcome agreements would be available in September, but we are still waiting. When will that report be made available, to give those groups confidence? What will she do to address the concern that the membership of community planning partnerships, which are  critical to the development of single outcome agreements, is not sufficiently open and accessible to voluntary sector organisations?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

On the issue of repeat victimisation and the role of domestic abuse courts in addressing that, does the member want to see a domestic abuse court established in her constituency to match the services that are delivered there and to ensure that the perpetrators are dealt with timeously so as to protect families?

Will the member give way?

Will Christine Grahame reflect on the conundrum—it has been mentioned in this chamber and was mentioned in the old chamber by her colleague Kay Ullrich—that it is odd that men can stand intoxicated in a pub and touch nobody but exert violence against their partner when they go from the pub to their home? The problem is not the alcohol but the man's attitude to his partner.

Given the concerns about single outcome agreements that Scottish Women's Aid identified, does the member agree  that it would be helpful if the minister were to refuse to accept a single outcome agreement unless an equality impact assessment has been done on it, in order to protect those services?

Does the member agree that statistics and the evidence from testimonies show that some of those young men feel guilt at not being able to protect their mothers and that, although they are damaged, they do not necessarily become violent themselves?

It has been a mark of this Parliament that, since its establishment, it has sought to build an understanding of the causes and consequences of male violence against women. I believe that a consensus has been created across the chamber about the significance of the issue for the health and wellbeing of far too many women and children in our communities. I recognise the significance of that consensus, but I believe that we owe it to our shared commitment to tackle violence against women not to settle for a cosy coming together. Rather, we should see the debate as an opportunity not only to acknowledge that but to reflect on a number of critical issues that need to be addressed. On Monday, we marked St Andrew's day. For some, it was a day to acknowledge our Scottishness, for a bit of flag waving and perhaps for some sentimentality. I was privileged to hear Alastair McIntosh—a Quaker, author and fellow of the centre for human ecology—on Radio 4, providing a fascinating insight into and a challenging view of our patron saint. I will quote, or rather abridge, his words. He said: "Today is the day of Andrew, the patron saint of Scotland, but for some people—men and children, but I am thinking especially of women—it won't be a happy day to wake up to. It will be a day of nursing last night's wounds. In many ways, domestic violence is the most confusing type of assault, because it comes from those who are supposed to love you. We learn of St Andrew in the Acts of Andrew. These tell how he became the spiritual teacher of Maximilla, wife of the Roman proconsul, Aegeates. She confided how, every night, her husband came home drunk and forced himself on her. Andrew—whose name means 'manliness'—encouraged her to treat this with zero tolerance. Aegeates had him flogged, specially tied to an X-shaped cross to prolong the agony, and crucified at Patras. Here, domestic violence links to the ugliness of empire and strikes out far beyond the home. It profoundly distorts a person's sense of what is normal and acceptable. Andrew stood by Maximilla as she broke that spell of violence. May his gentle manliness be our inspiration. Let us today remember Andrew—patron saint of a woman's right to say no." That wonderful contribution reflects a powerful message about the long existence of male violence, but it also gives us hope that male violence is not inevitable. Perhaps, in Andrew, we see a more optimistic view of what manliness might be. In our various debates about what a future Scotland might look like, we are determined to ensure that, whatever the constitutional arrangements, we must seek to create in our  communities and our country a place where women and children are safe, where rape and abuse of women through trafficking and prostitution are tackled and women are protected, where perpetrators are challenged not tolerated and where our young people are taught to grow up together in safe and respectful relationships. I will highlight a number of areas of concern that I would like the minister to address, given our shared commitment to protection, provision and prevention. Our amendment notes that we are still awaiting a report on the implementation of single outcome agreements, despite a commitment that that would be available in September. If we cannot analyse what is happening with single outcome agreements in relation to violence against women, how can their effectiveness be assessed, how can confidence be given to those who were fearful of the consequences of the end of ring fencing for consistency of provision, and how can there be certainty that any problems with the agreements will be addressed? The minister will be aware that I have fought hard to get John Swinney to agree not to accept single outcome agreements without evidence of an equality impact assessment having been carried out. I believe that that approach would respond to the concerns that were highlighted by the Equality and Human Rights Commission in its briefing. The minister will also be aware of the analysis of single outcome agreements that was done by Scottish Women's Aid. That must ring alarm bells about the safety of women in our communities. Women's Aid tells us that its analysis of single outcome agreements raises questions about whether the protection of women and children from violence is one of the highest priorities across Scotland. It points out that only 11 single outcome agreements state that addressing violence against women locally is a priority; that only 10 single outcome agreements include a specific reference to children affected by domestic abuse; and that only five single outcome agreements make reference to violence against women in relation to gender equality. I am sure that the minister will agree that that is a troubling trend for those who are committed to consistency of understanding and provision across Scotland. Linked to that are the concerns that have been highlighted to me that the work on violence against women is being diluted and increasingly subsumed into a more generalised community safety role. I am all for putting energy into addressing disorder and antisocial behaviour, but we all know that a fundamental of our  understanding of violence against women and domestic abuse is that the crime needs to be named so that it can be tackled. It is essential to maintain a sharp focus on the distinctive nature of male violence and its consequences. With regard to the protection of women and children, we must welcome the continued focus on multi-agency working, in which education, police, housing, social work and health all play a role in supporting women and minimising the impact on children. However, it is the justice system that is central in protecting women. We should never forget the horrific statistics on the murder of women, which show that women are most at risk from a partner or ex-partner and most vulnerable at the point of their decision to leave. I commend Rhoda Grant's proposed members' bill, which will give women increased support and access to legal support; I believe that she will say more about that today. I welcome the Tories' amendment, which acknowledges the role of domestic abuse courts and repeats Labour's call for Kenny MacAskill to ensure that such courts are rolled out beyond Glasgow. It will be essential that the courts, in whatever form they are developed, allow for partnership working and effective risk assessment. That approach is currently provided in Glasgow through the advice, support, safety and information services together—ASSIST—project. We need to explore the availability of perpetrator programmes, and, connected to that, programmes for the families of perpetrators. Women's organisations resisted the push for pre-court diversion for men who had committed domestic abuse offences in the past, as women believed that the crime should be recognised as precisely that: a crime. Today, we need to take heed of what women's organisations are saying about the plans to end sentences of six months or fewer. We need to deter men by marking domestic abuse as a significant offence. There is no doubt that for some families, a sentence—even if it is for less than six months—can afford not only respite but, more critically, enough space for a woman to make a life-changing decision, and to get out and be supported to do so. I raised that issue with the First Minister at First Minister's questions last week, and he replied that serious offences should attract serious sentences. I seek clarification on that. Does that mean that domestic abuse offences would be exempt from the presumption against sentences of six months or fewer, or that all domestic abuse offences would attract sentences of more than six months? How would such approaches be enforced?

In the 10 years that we have been debating the issue, we have argued precisely the opposite. We have argued that we need to understand domestic abuse and violence against women in the context of the power of men over women in the home and in the community. What action has the minister taken, and what work has been carried out by the equality unit, to ensure that that dimension of the justice proposals is taken seriously? Women's organisations say what they are saying because of their experience of working with women. That is why our amendment asks for a statement on how, across Government, policies are tested against their impact on those vulnerable women and children. It must be a concern to us all—indeed, the minister referred to it—that the incidence of domestic abuse continues to rise. I acknowledge that that is due, at least in part, to more confidence among women and more rigour by the police. However, I ask the minister to reflect again—and I say this gently—on one explanation that he gave on television. He suggested that the rise in incidents was in part because we live in a time of economic recession. We know that male violence is not caused, or excused, by poverty, and that male perpetrators are no respecters of class or income. I seek an assurance from the minister that he does not seek to perpetuate such a distorting view of where the problem manifests itself and what causes it. I do not doubt the desire of members on all sides of the chamber to address violence against women, or their heartfelt wish to see women and children safe—and we must welcome anything that recognises the particular impact on children. However, we have a responsibility to bring together what we say and what we do. Caring is not enough, and will not in itself protect one woman, give one child back their childhood or open the eyes of one young man to a life of respect, not violence. Not one step on the road to greater equality was ever made by accident. We need aspiration that is delivered locally bit by bit, wherever need is, throughout Scotland. The aspiration to deliver through the practicalities of action is laid out for all of us each week in the ASSIST bulletin. The reality of violence against women and the statistics may overwhelm us, but the results of the project give us great hope. The Scottish Government must address the concerns and not dismiss them. If the current  processes to secure protection, provision and prevention are examined and found to be wanting, they must be changed. The Scottish Government and the minister would have our support if that happened. That would be a legacy of listening and responding of which we could all be proud. I move amendment S3M-5307.2, to insert at end: "and regrets that a report on the implementation of the first round of single outcome agreements has not yet been published, given the concerns of Scottish Women's Aid about the level of provision across Scotland; believes that the strategy of protection, provision and prevention remains central to the tackling of violence against women, and agrees that the Scottish Government should produce a joint statement from across its directorates to ensure that all its key policies are tested against their impact on women facing violence."

I congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing this important debate. I had the good fortune to participate in the gude cause march in October, which was a powerful reminder of the struggle that had to take place to secure the vote. It brought together a wonderful alliance of women from all political parties and none, older women, younger women and women with children, all of whom came together to celebrate the fact that, in the past, our sisters fought for us to have the right to vote. It was a timely reminder, too, of what a powerful force we can be if we are united in identifying issues for  women. I particularly congratulate all those who made the day such a great success. It was colourful and entertaining. Clearly, such events do not happen by accident, so we should place on the record our thanks to the organisers. Reflecting on and reading about the campaign for votes for women brought back to me the extent to which it was a struggle. There was nothing inevitable about women securing the vote. There was, of course, individual political action and there were individual decisions by women—and notably some men, too—to be involved in campaigning and take up the cause of votes for women, but underneath that is a powerful message about the strength of solidarity and sisterhood that it took to secure that change. It is important to recognise and understand the degree of resistance to giving women votes and the measures that people were prepared to take to resist it. We heard some of those described earlier. Of course, that reflects the broader battle for suffrage in general and people's rights to vote and to shape their own lives. That is why I, for one, do not regard the Parliament as a reconvened Parliament. The difference between the old Parliament and the new Parliament is a reflection of the struggle for radical change. Those who were involved in that struggle said that, in our world, people have rights and entitlements and that democracy and the rights of women must be at the centre of that. There is also an important message about the whole issue of equality. No step in securing political change was ever made easy for women or other disadvantaged groups. Power was never given away lightly. It is important to recognise that and to be strong in our determination to secure equality. We should think about the importance of women's votes. I think that I, too, would have been a suffragette. We need to say to women, "Use your vote" and encourage them to understand what a battle it was to get the vote and the importance of using it in women's interests. We have to address the issue of women's representation. We started on a high note in the Parliament, but it is slipping. Across the Parliament, all parties need to look at their levels of representation and ask whether they pass the test. We have to look at positive action and resist the temptation to accept, as some would have us believe, that the preponderance of men at every level of government and in every place of power is somehow a reflection of their ability. What it reflects is positive discrimination in favour of them in the past. We need to resist that—and that also applies to public bodies. In reflecting on the changing role of women over the years and their securing the vote, we must also recognise that we still have a long way to go.  Women are still more likely to be low paid. They are still suffering from violence, and they still disproportionately carry out carers' roles. The test for us is to ensure that the Parliament, which made its name on the level of women's representation, remains open to women and to women's priorities. We have redefined what is political. In renaming our committee rooms, perhaps we should not look only at the powerful women in our history, who often go unrecognised. Perhaps one of the committee rooms should be named to reflect what did bring change and votes for women: sisterhood, solidarity and courage. Those seem like three pretty good names to reflect the power of women to secure the vote and use it in the interests of women and a more decent society.

Will you clarify why you are taking that approach? Why do you presume that nothing can be done with people who are literally a captive audience for six months, but expect it to be possible for those issues to be addressed in the community, even though the organisations that would provide that service are suffering cuts in their funding?

Will the member take an intervention?

My comments reflect the concerns of many of my constituents about some aspects of the bill. I regret that, this morning, the cabinet secretary seemed simply to dismiss those concerns rather than take them seriously. Before I get to the substance of my speech, I will flag up a few issues that I trust will be revisited at stage 2. They include the issues that Sandra White flagged up in relation to trafficked women; prostitution and men who abuse women and prostitute them; and lap dancing. A further question that I hope we will revisit is how we make a connection between communities that suffer under the cosh of serious organised crime and the money that is secured as a consequence of that under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. There  should be a direct link, with funding going back to the communities that have suffered the most. On the broader debate, it seems that nothing is easy. It is unhelpful to try, as I think Dr McKee rather complacently did, to create the impression that somehow only those who are wilfully stupid wish to ignore the policy that the Scottish Government is taking forward. It is most unfortunate to demonise those in our communities who are demanding action and those of us who wish to highlight how victims often feel let down by the system. To do that is to deny a voice to those who, because of their day-to-day experience, feel that the justice system is unfair, irrational and out of touch with the way in which they have to live their lives. Yes, we have to try to understand what causes people to commit offences, but we also have to stop infantilising people who choose to terrorise their partners, their families and their neighbours. We owe it to the young men who carry a knife, as much as to their potential victims, to do everything in our power to stop them doing that. I have worked with young men who, in later life, ended up either in prison on a murder charge or dead. If we take steps to address the needs of such young men as well as those of their victims, we will be doing something important.

I recognise that, but I do not think that there is recognition on the other side of the importance of deterring young people who are outside the core group that carry knives, who see that nothing happens to those people and who then carry knives themselves. We owe it to those young people to say, "This is serious," in the same way that we punish people who drink drive to prevent others from doing that. I am always struck by the degree to which people who come to me to ask for help because of disorder, crime and violence in their communities do so not simply because they want us to put people in jail and throw away the key but out of desperation about their circumstances. It is unjust and contemptuous to sneer at those who want tougher action on knife crime because of their direct experience of those who use violence to silence people, harm them and intimidate them to the point where they phone the police in a whisper. We owe it to those people to empower rather than disempower them and to listen to them. In that context, I urge the minister to reflect further on the action that he is taking and to test it  against people's need to have certainty that their communities will not be more dangerous and that the measures will not put them at further risk. The scrapping of six-month sentences raises a number of issues. At First Minister's question time, I highlighted the implication of the policy for the victims of domestic abuse and the fears of many people that it might increase risk. Following the First Minister's response, I seek clarification on what the Scottish Government's policy actually is. The First Minister said that serious offences should attract longer sentences. Is it the Government's view that all domestic abuse cases that currently attract sentences of less than six months should attract longer sentences? If that is the case, how would that be enforced?

I am sorry, but I have only a minute left—the minister can answer the point when he sums up. Would that policy apply to other serious offences? There is an issue around resources. It is not enough simply to say that the resources are available. We could end up with an experiment with no safety net, the costs of which will be borne by individuals and communities. The obvious fear is not just that there could be an increase in offending behaviour, but that there could be an increased lack of confidence in the justice system's ability to serve people's needs. At the heart of the matter there is a puzzle. It is illogical to say that the only way to encourage community sentences is to end short sentences now—it could be done the other way round. It is also illogical to say that people can be rehabilitated in their communities working with them only five or 10 hours a week, yet absolutely nothing can be done with them over six months when they are in prison. I have never understood the logic in assuming that the Scottish Prison Service has no responsibility towards those who are in prison serving shorter sentences. I would have more confidence in the minister if we were not hearing that Sacro, Apex Scotland and other organisations that work with prisoners who come out of prison are being told that their funding is being cut. In those circumstances, the lack of confidence in our communities must be addressed, not dismissed.

I am sure that the First Minister will share my concern about the 8 per cent increase in the incidence of domestic abuse reported by the police in the past year. Over many years, women's organisations have demanded that men who abuse their partners and terrorise their families should face the full force of the law. Does the First Minister think that it is acceptable that only about 10 per cent of men who are found guilty of domestic abuse go to jail? Will he reflect on his plans to scrap six-month sentences, given the concerns of many who are involved in supporting victims of domestic abuse that his actions will result in fewer of those men being jailed and women and children being put at greater risk?

Will the minister give way?

In that case, does the minister agree that, as I said in my speech, we should talk about the Scottish people and their history, and therefore emphasise the diversity within Scotland, rather than about Scotland and its history as one entity?

I am happy to participate in this debate. I declare an interest as a former history teacher and, indeed, as someone who was taught Scottish history in a Glasgow school 40 years ago. This subject is not new. I am a bit despondent at the way in which some of the minister's comments were largely an opportunity to hook on to the issue of the homecoming. All who love history should resist the temptation to create a year-zero approach to what has been and is being done in this field. More generally, there are loads of opportunities to have an interesting discussion about the role of history in schools, but people want us to wrestle with big issues in, for example, education and the care system. I am concerned that the Scottish Government has chosen this debate, which feels, notwithstanding the quality of the speeches, a bit like a stocking filler. There is a danger that what we see now in this Parliament is Executive action with little opportunity for scrutiny, and this place simply being a debating chamber and nothing more. It has always been the case that, in teaching history, people have wrestled with the balance between history at the level of local communities, at the Scottish level, and far beyond, to give young people an international dimension. That issue is nothing new. It is important that our young people understand how some of the broader movements across the world were expressed in Scotland. On the question that Margo MacDonald raised, I do not think that we teach our young people something as crude as whether the empire was good or bad; we develop in them an understanding and a capacity to think for themselves, with enough information—which in the past would not have been given to them—so that they can come to a judgment. If our history is about anything, it is about developing the minds of our young people in that regard. I believe that we should have described this debate as being not about Scotland and its history, as if it were one entity, but about the people of Scotland and their history, and an understanding of the diversity of experience, culture and values in Scotland and how they have related to the wider world.  We know that some in the Scottish National Party are keen to recast the political debate as being between us and them; between Scotland and England in the past and, perhaps a little more subtly, now between Scotland and London or the rest of the United Kingdom. Some in the SNP seek to capture the language of oppression and freedom for now and our past in describing the relationship with the rest of the UK. That is a political debate, which will be reflected in our understanding of history. I believe that the debate is about a partnership with the rest of the UK, but others believe that it is about oppression and freedom. That is a legitimate debate for us to have, but we must be careful about the way in which we present the priorities for teaching in history. There are fundamental differences. I was concerned about the language that the minister used when she talked about "reclaiming our history". If young people are reclaiming their history, who has taken it from them? Young people will always take the opportunities that are provided in school to learn, test and understand. The idea that our culture has been silenced in some way resonates with the SNP's view of the relationship with the rest of the UK, but few other people recognise that view.

I accept what the member says. My point is that history teaching at its most liberating encourages people to scrutinise for bias and to test it against other information that they are given. We must recognise the importance of taking a rounded view of history and understanding how change happens and why. For example, there are those in the Parliament, particularly in the SNP, who emphasise that this Parliament is a reconvened Parliament, but the interesting question for me is why this place, its elected members, its purpose and its priorities are so different from the Parliament that joined the union in 1707. This Parliament's story is one of a journey of radicalism, of change and of movements in which people recognised that things in the past were unacceptable. The fight for  suffrage was part of that journey and it is, in my view, a far more interesting issue—

Let me make this point. We need to seek to understand the movements that transformed the lives of ordinary people and that tackled injustice and exploitation within our communities—some of which was perpetrated by Scot upon Scot. I was taught about the clearances. If some who were involved in making decisions about the year of homecoming had a better understanding of the clearances, they would not have put the clan chief gathering at the centre of a celebration of the people of Scotland in the modern age. For me, the big issue is how we make history not just about the big history. Too many people in the SNP want to talk about the big history—I recognise that Christina McKelvie identified individuals and movements below that—but, in my view, the big argument that we need to wrestle with in history is understanding the individual, the community and the local, and how events there paralleled with what happened in other parts of the world. History should be a liberating subject rather than being about them and us or oppression versus freedom.

I have not not welcomed anything that encourages young people to think about all of their history. My point is that a separate element to the debate is the overlaying of a template or view of Scotland's relationship with the rest of the world and of Scotland as one entity. Our job is to provide the resources and teachers to ensure that young people are given the capacity to think for themselves and to come to their view of how our history—the history of all the people of Scotland—has shaped our priorities and choices for the future.

I wonder how Christina McKelvie imagines that a greater understanding of Elsie Inglis and Mary Slessor would be gained by a visit to Culloden.

From whom have those young people reclaimed their history? I thought that such education had been going on in schools for a long time.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for the 16 days of activism against gender violence. (S3O-8428)

I acknowledge the important work that continues to be done on the issue. However, I am sure that the minister would want the Scottish Parliament as a whole to resist the temptation to become complacent or self-congratulatory on the issue, given the continuing scale and impact of domestic abuse on individuals, families, public services and our economic and social wellbeing. What discussions has the minister had with the women's Scottish Trades Union Congress, which held a successful conference this week, on how the issues can be addressed in the workplace and on how violence against women can be tackled in order to address the broader issue of the gender gap in Scotland and the United Kingdom?

This is an interesting and important debate. The central issue for all our children is their entitlement to live in safety and security in a loving home, and to be nurtured. It is not just in poor families that children are denied those things. I would be concerned by any implication that poverty means that children are denied a healthy and happy upbringing. In my constituency, there are families who, despite their financial circumstances, could teach us all a lesson about how to parent. As a parent, I often have grave anxieties about my capacity to find a safe place to rear my children. I am concerned at the implication that the issue is one for "them out there" and not for all of us as a society. In that context, a financial incentive to marry is entirely irrelevant. The issue that is of concern is the extent to which we value children and families. Elizabeth Smith talked about Iain Duncan Smith's Damascene conversion in Easterhouse. He may have wished to reflect on the issue a little earlier, in the 1980s, when people were telling him what was happening in communities throughout Scotland and beyond.

It is not enough to create the impression that poverty is a plague in which no political decisions have been made. People live in difficulty because of political decisions—we should reflect on that. The motion "regrets that one in four children" lives in a family in which there is a lone parent. First, there are parents who are widowed who actively choose to spend the rest of their lives bringing up and focusing on their children. The implication that that is the wrong choice is cause for concern. Equally, for some people it is a courageous decision to leave a marriage to protect their children, especially given the financial implications for women of making that choice. There is a dichotomy at the heart of the issue. When we talk about domestic abuse, how often do we hear the question, "Why doesn't she leave?" However, when she leaves, it is implied that she is creating problems for her children. One of the problems for lone parents is not the fact of lone parenthood in itself but the way in which we support them financially and give them economic opportunity. When I was a teacher, there were a number of occasions on which  youngsters were disturbed by the periodic reappearance of their father, who caused mayhem in their homes. One young boy could not, when his father was at home, sleep for fear of what would happen to his mother and could not, as a result, learn the next day. The Tories ought to move away from the glib suggestion that lone parenthood in itself is the problem. If we wish to support families, we need to address how inequality and disadvantage are experienced, and how we can create economic opportunities, safe communities and safe families to allow people to thrive. Yesterday we got information on a skills strategy, which did not reflect that. The enterprise strategy contains no responsibility for place or people and does not address the inequality that disproportionately leaves women as carers in low-paid jobs, with no recognition of their needs. We need an education system that talks about more than buildings and class sizes, and which recognises that some of our children cannot even access education because of what is happening in their wider life. We need to understand the particular pressures on different kinds of families, such as the families of disabled children. I regret that the Scottish Government did not step up to the mark in addressing the transformational change that is required to support those families and which would allow those children and their siblings to achieve their potential. On kinship care, there is an issue with the benefits system, but the Scottish Government has a responsibility to address the huge diversity between what is offered to kinship carers in different parts of the country. It has to recognise that the issue is as much about children's rights as anything else. The SNP Government needs to recognise the vulnerability of funding to the voluntary sector, which will have a consequence for families. There ought to be no sacred cows—nothing should be off-limits. There should, rather, be proper reflection on what is happening, in order that our families can be protected.

I accept what the minister says and the fact that there is an issue around the benefits system. I understand that Jim Murphy and others are  looking at that question. What is the Scottish Government doing to address the disparity between local authorities in Scotland in the funding that is being made available to kinship carers at the moment?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that the issue is not how he reported the decision once it was made, but how he reached the decision and what alternatives he might have explored with stakeholders before he came to that decision? The issue is not about protecting the rights of the Parliament once the decision was made, but about reflecting on the Parliament's view that GARL should have gone ahead.

Will the member take an intervention?

Given all the evidence of inequality within Scotland, for example in the employment of women and regarding the severe challenge that people with disabilities face in accessing work, can the minister explain why her statement is virtually silent on how those and other disadvantaged groups will be targeted and supported? Will the minister specify what steps she and Skills Development Scotland are taking to address inequality in employment? Will the minister review her strategy as a matter of urgency to ensure that it identifies and addresses targets for those who are most vulnerable to unemployment and who  are suffering the impact of the recession disproportionately?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with voluntary sector organisations about future funding issues. (S3O-8189)

In a written answer to a parliamentary question from my colleague, Tom McCabe, Shona Robison said: "We are confident that the effects of the concordat and SOAs"— single outcome agreements— "will have a positive impact on mental health services".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 16 September 2009; S3W-26855.]  Is the minister aware that voluntary organisations that deliver mental health services are expressing concerns about the impact of the concordat and single outcome agreements on those services and their sense that they are not being given sufficient continuity and priority at a local level? When will the analysis of single outcome agreements that was promised by Nicola Sturgeon for September be made available? Will the minister give a commitment that he will act if the analysis confirms the fears of those in the voluntary sector who support people with mental health problems?

I am grateful to the Scottish Government for accepting our request for an urgent statement on elder abuse and I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement. However, I must be honest and express my serious concern about the complacent tone that it strikes. In June, "Panorama" exposed evidence of shocking neglect and abuse of older people in their homes, and more recently The Herald confronted Scots with the reality of abuse of far too many of our elderly and vulnerable citizens. Both are to be congratulated on work that deserves but has not received a commensurate response from ministers. The statement said little of certainty to give confidence to those in our local communities throughout Scotland who are living in fear of abuse in their homes or in care homes. It also said little about what will be done to change those circumstances. What meetings has the minister had with local authorities since June to discuss how services are procured, and what changes have been made as a consequence? What meetings has she had with the care commission to identify what more it will do to protect people, particularly those who do not have family to speak up for them, and what specific decisions have been made as a consequence? What meetings has she had with the justice ministers to decide on action to improve the prosecution rate of those who abuse older people? What specific actions are being taken? Given the brutal reality of elder abuse with which we have all been confronted, does the minister agree that now is the time for an independent inquiry into elder abuse to identify the extent of the abuse and measures to improve the quality of care to give older people a voice and protection, and to ensure that the justice system will act against perpetrators? Does she agree that an inquiry that will not only signal our concern, as the statement does, but make a real difference to the protection of older people is the right way forward at this stage?

Is the minister aware of anxieties among charities that receive money from community planning partnerships and are being told that they have to have match funding? Finding match funding is very difficult because of what has happened to the Lloyds TSB Foundation and others. Does the minister plan to issue further guidance to local authorities and community planning partnerships to ensure that that change is recognised?

I do not think that anyone is arguing for older people to be institutionalised, but the difficulty lies in making the care at home real, so that people are not contained in their homes, but are, rather, sustained in them. Does Ian McKee agree that the support that is given to older people is important—not just medical care, but the sort of care that is offered by voluntary organisations?

I welcome the minister's contribution on this important issue. I also pay tribute to my colleague Irene Oldfather, who has, along with the cross-party group on older people, age and ageing, driven a lot of the work on the issue. Unfortunately, because of to her own caring responsibilities, she is unable to contribute today. In debating services for older people, we must recognise that many older people are active and positive contributors, even though—inevitably—the discussion then begins to focus on care issues. When Malcolm Chisholm and Rhona Brankin, as ministers, drove our older people's strategy, they were keen to ensure that there was an emphasis on the former aspect as well as on care. I hope that colleagues will forgive me if I concentrate on care issues in my speech. Journalists do not often find themselves being praised in the Parliament, but I begin by offering a vote of thanks to the BBC and The Herald for what was investigative journalism at its best. They made an important contribution to opening up a more rigorous debate on the nature of care of older people in our communities by confronting us all with the reality of neglect and abuse of vulnerable older people. The "Panorama" exposé on home care and the more recent Herald investigation have had a powerful impact, but I regret that there has been insufficient evidence of urgency on the part of the Scottish Government in its response to their findings. The investigations revealed the misery and inadequate support of real men and women. Those findings are in tune with the reports of some of my constituents and, I am sure, of constituents of members throughout the chamber. Few of us will be untouched by the realities and frustrations of securing proper care for older people. Too many people—and their carers—describe their search for consistency and continuity of care as a battle or a struggle that is shaped by fear for the future rather than by confidence. When we think of carers' battles for their loved ones, how much more fearful should we be for those without family or those for whom family members, as The Herald identified, are the problem because they are the perpetrators of abuse?  In the face of that situation, the Scottish Government's approach as indicated by the concordat—although certainly not by the broader contribution from the minister today, which was welcome—focuses simply on respite places and funding issues around free personal care. That approach is inadequate and it misses the point. We know all too well of cases in which people are offered inappropriate respite and that, as a consequence, much-needed support is not taken up. It is also evident that we need to go beyond simple repetition of a commitment to free personal care, to addressing the quality of care and, indeed, what we mean by care. The journalistic investigations have highlighted the gap between the reality in communities and the debate that the Parliament has been having over time. We face a massive challenge: if the voices describing physical abuse, sexual abuse, financial abuse, neglect and exploitation of vulnerable people and those who are unable to defend themselves are to be heard properly and understood, we should not—indeed, we cannot—be defensive. Our response must be brutally honest and urgent. This is no time to explain away or defend the situation, or to marshal statistics to prove that everything is better than it has ever been—or, if it is not, to claim that the blame lies elsewhere. I agree with the minister that the huge challenges that face us go beyond our usual politicking: this is the time for members of this Parliament to ask what we can do to address the challenges, and to examine what we need to change in order to respond to this scandal at the heart of our communities. The challenge for ministers, the Scottish Government and the Parliament is to acknowledge that everything that they do must be tested against whether it makes people safer or makes things worse. One example is the Scottish National Party's commitment to a centrally imposed council tax freeze. Although the move has given some older people £1 or so a week extra in their pockets, it has also resulted in cuts to their day care services at a time when the Scottish budget has increased by £600 million. If we are to interrogate the options seriously, we cannot simply leave to one side the reality of the impact of the imposed council tax freeze, with only assertion to defend it. In response to the "Panorama" programme, the minister has said that she will issue guidance on home care that will be "very robust indeed". I would welcome more information on whether that work has been done, on the dialogue that she has had with local authorities on the matter and on concerns that have been expressed about contracts.  As I say, the nature and scale of the challenge demand creative thinking and the acknowledgement that, as far as our society's priorities are concerned, we are in very-big-question territory. Although much of the debate about older people has focused on pensions and funding, and despite our recognition that for many people the fourth age is a time for learning new skills and facing new challenges, the fact is that surveys of older people have repeatedly identified as key concerns loneliness, isolation and safety issues. How should the Scottish Government be protecting those often very low-level but nonetheless lifeline services that are provided by lunch clubs, projects that take people to the library or to church and community transport schemes that allow people to visit hospital—in other words, the services that provide the kind of experiences that sustain people in their own homes, as opposed to care regimes that contain them there? How is the Scottish Government going to support the community initiatives—such as the reminiscence groups run by the Village Storytelling Centre in my area—that seek to intervene early in respect of the impact of dementia, or the services that support elderly carers who wish to keep their loved ones with them as long as possible? The fear is that, despite this debate and discussion, those very services, which provide people with real quality of life, are seen as luxuries when funding decisions are made. We must be concerned by Audit Scotland's finding that local authority spending on care is being retrenched towards high-level needs, so I would welcome the minister's saying what discussions she has had with local authorities on that shift. We have to fear for localised services when the efficiencies that the Scottish Government is demanding might be resulting in the stripping out of the key bits of care that make a difference. We must acknowledge that if such services, which are driven by a compassionate understanding of need, are proving to be vulnerable, and if contracts are being squeezed to the extent that care providers are experiencing high staff turnover, the result can be the unbearable image from the "Panorama" programme—which is, I am sure, seared on all our minds—of an elderly man being washed while his carer was talking on her mobile phone. Such an image will drive everyone in the chamber to tackle these issues. I am interested to find out what the Scottish Government is doing to address staff turnover and the lack of regular contact with the same person, which are particular concerns in relation to quality of care. I cannot be the only member with constituents who still, with all the stress that it involves, go home at lunchtime to check whether  the support for their elderly parents has been delivered in the right way. I am glad that the minister has acknowledged the critical role that the voluntary sector can play in understanding and meeting needs. However, what is the sector's real role in the Government's work streams? I understand that we cannot start with a blank sheet of paper, but liberating those who best understand need to tell us what has to be done has informed policy in the past and can do so again. For example, we know that older volunteers have played a key role in supporting people and that an active interest in volunteering can keep people healthy and involved for longer. It is therefore a matter of regret that the retired and senior volunteer programme had to close through lack of funding. I am sure that the minister will recognise the anxiety of many that the shift in the balance of care will lead to increased pressure on carers, including voluntary carers. I seek from the minister assurances on sustained funding, particularly for carer centres, which advocate for carers and offer a proper understanding of their experience as well as a support and help group for them through very challenging times. Such centres provide proper and meaningful support so that carers can do what they want to do as well as possible. Although I understand that spending alone does not solve problems, stopping spending often creates problems or compounds them. That is my concern about what is seen as the bonus issue. There is an important debate to be had about the limit of technology as a means of supporting people in their homes. Although technology can buttress support in practical ways, it cannot be a substitute for it. Technology cannot hold a person's hand when they are sad. I am interested in what work the minister has done to shape the current approach of the Minister for Housing and Communities, at a time when sheltered housing is reducing—the number of wardens is reducing—and when organisations such as Inclusion Scotland are highlighting the need for local authorities to do more to provide housing to meet disabled people's needs. Another issue is the effectiveness of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care in monitoring and in dealing with those who abuse the trust that we place in them to care for people. We must ask how a dementia strategy can be supported and funded so that we transform the nature of care and provide proper processes in relation to personalised care and who is in control. The future care of older people is a care issue, but it is also a justice issue. We must hear from the minister about the discussions that she has had with justice officials and the care commission about prosecuting those who are guilty of stealing  time from care packages or of abusing older people who are in their care. That is not just in the interests of the identified victims; it will also deter those who might be tempted to prey on the elderly, which we will revisit tomorrow. It is a scandal that the only action by the police as a consequence of the "Panorama" programme was to arrest the journalist who exposed the neglect rather than the perpetrators of it. We should all condemn the treatment of the undercover journalist Arifa Farooq. We must know that the justice system recognises its role in protecting the elderly. If ever there was a need for a national conversation and a big debate, it is for one on future services to support older people. People need consistency, continuity and confidence. The work of The Herald and the BBC opened up a set of circumstances. It is a test for the Parliament to rise to the challenge. I assure the minister that, on the big questions, she will have the Opposition with her in ensuring that we have a proper strategy to protect our older people.

The debate has been interesting, because it has captured three elements of the SNP's approach since it came into government. First, there has been further evidence of its willingness to ignore the will of Parliament. Parliament has spoken before on the issue of ProjectScotland, but the SNP has chosen to ignore its voice. Secondly, we have heard warm words that are a million miles away from delivery or any sense of responsibility for what is happening. Thirdly, there has been absolute silence from Government back benchers, who are unwilling to suggest that anything that ministers are doing may not be absolutely correct.  I was chided by an SNP back bencher when I mentioned their craven compliance. She told me that I did not like the fact that SNP members are united. My problem is that I do not like unity that is at the expense of voluntary organisations and others that need members to speak up for them. The great test of the maturity of the SNP Government is whether its back benchers are allowed and have the confidence to raise even a squeak about the problems that our local communities face.

The member is to be congratulated on having the confidence to oppose the Government once; whether that is followed through in voting is a different matter. The point has been made, and the member may want to reflect on it. I have referred to the Government's warm words. Is the minister seriously saying that there are no concerns in voluntary organisations and among volunteers, and that they do not think that there is a problem? He said that all the pessimism is here in the chamber, rather than in the outside world. What does he think the hearse that was brought to the Parliament was about? Why does he think that Unite, Unison and the SCVO came together to express their concerns? Why, does he imagine, are people talking about the cuts at local level? Are they just making it up, as Tricia Marwick seemed to suggest? I found her comments that the voluntary sector has to be about more than just jobs for those who work in it absolutely insulting to those who have raised issues of concern; she may wish to reflect on that. In relation to Mr Mather's warm words and the issue of ProjectScotland, I do not think that the whole debate is actually about ProjectScotland. ProjectScotland captures an approach. I would like somebody in the SNP to explain to me why its members have such a problem with ProjectScotland. They are supporting a motion that welcomes "organisations that create structured volunteering placements for young people, such as ProjectScotland", and they agree that such organisations "should be recognised and supported by the Scottish Government." Are SNP members seriously saying that support does not involve funding, and that it involves only warm words? If so, they need to reflect on that, too.  We are told that there is a value-for-money test for ProjectScotland. As we have said, 87 per cent of the moneys will go into the pockets of young people in the poorest of our communities. Perhaps the minister would have more credibility on the argument around the value-for-money test if he was not promoting a Scottish Futures Trust that is spending £23 million to deliver absolutely nothing. The minister has spoken about passion. We all have passion about the voluntary sector. However, passion does not deliver services, and it does not in itself make a difference in our communities. The interesting thing about people who volunteer—and about the voluntary sector—is that they have passion in partnership with a hard-headed approach. If volunteers say that they are in dire straits, we should listen to them, rather than dismiss them in the way that has been suggested in the debate. The Government makes great play of the resilience fund. Apparently, it is wonderful and it will help the voluntary sector when it is under the cosh. Actually, that captures a lack of responsibility. The Scottish Government creates the crisis, cutting funding to local government despite its increased budget; it imposes a council tax freeze; and it uses a single outcome agreement model and the concordat without properly funding it, which is the major problem, rather than the model itself, as is suggested in Robert Brown's amendment. Then, when people say that there is a problem, the Government creates a resilience fund of £1.7 million for one year only—from old, previously announced money—which is a sticking plaster, and then trumpets that as a great success and evidence of its willingness to address the problem. The minister talks about how the SCVO, COSLA and the Scottish Government have produced a joint statement. That joint statement, on glossy paper, leaves unspoken some of the key issues that voluntary organisations, voluntary sector representatives and volunteers themselves have been addressing, including the difficult issue of full cost recovery. The minister started by saying that he wanted to accentuate the positive. The problem with that approach, which captures the language of a cheesy song from a cheesy musical, is that the minister is entirely distancing himself from the consequence of his Government's actions. He is creating the impression that being nice about things will make a difference. As I have said, however, the voluntary sector is a tough place, doing tough things, and it deserves a better approach than that. The minister talked about ProjectScotland as a niche product. As that one phrase shows, could there be a bigger gap between our vision, across  the Parliament, of what ProjectScotland is and the minister's view of it? It is a project that has changed lives. The minister says that the Government wants to focus on people who are really difficult to reach, rather than on people who do not deserve it. The figures about the reduction in placements across Scotland show that those reductions are coming about in the poorest of our communities, not in better-off communities. Where ProjectScotland was reaching out to youngsters in deprived communities, it is now less able to do so. I urge the minister, SNP back benchers and the Scottish Government to treat volunteering and voluntary organisations with respect. There is a surfeit of warm words wherever we talk about volunteering, but the test must be whether the SNP is willing to recognise that this is not a trumped-up debate by the Opposition but a reflection of serious concerns across Scotland about the way in which Government decisions and actions are hampering organisations' capacity to do what they do best. When meeting representatives of voluntary sector organisations, I urge the minister to deal with the issue of intimidation and to meet them as genuine partners. We will judge the capacity and effectiveness of such meetings by whether there is a shift in his and his Government's policy.

I am glad that the minister has agreed to meet local CVSs, which are concerned about the situation. If at that meeting they say that they feel that they are being forced into merger, through threats around funding, will the minister do something about that, reassure them and ensure that all mergers are voluntary, not forced?

Will the member give way?

Labour has chosen to use its time to debate volunteering and the voluntary sector both in recognition of their importance and because it is concerned about the lack of opportunities for consideration and scrutiny of the Scottish Government's approach that the Government has afforded. The Scottish Government has promoted a wide range of non-debates in the chamber, but I cannot remember when these particular issues were last debated. We want to give voice to concerns that are being reported to us by people throughout Scotland who are too afraid to speak up or speak out on their own behalf. Indeed, I have been struck by the significant number of briefings that we have received as a result of this debate. I thank everyone who provided a briefing; it is a measure of the subject's importance that they have been submitted. It is right to recognise and celebrate the voluntary sector's role and we salute the volunteers who make a real difference to people who are very often the most isolated and vulnerable in our communities. We know that volunteers can identify need, help to shape services and reach out into the parts of our communities where the state cannot go. Volunteers such as those who work for Home-Start in my constituency can support and be trusted by vulnerable families who might fear more formal interventions by social work or health staff. We know that volunteers make a massive social and economic contribution and that their influence on community life and cohesion is beyond measure. We know, too, that volunteering enriches the lives of volunteers, both young and old; indeed, we have seen how significant the support for volunteering among older people has been. Warm words, however, will sustain neither volunteers nor the voluntary sector and, like many others, I remain concerned that in its approach the SNP has been typically high on rhetoric but weak on delivery, with a separation between what it says it cares about and what it provides resources for. I am also struck by the gap between ministers' approach, which borders on the complacent, and the issues that have been raised at a local level, including funding cuts, fears for the future and  increased concern about the conditions of those who work with the voluntary sector. In the time available, I will try to highlight some of those concerns. First—and I do not say this lightly—I have been struck by the extent to which those involved have suggested that there is an atmosphere in which it is difficult for them to air concerns. I hope that we all believe in and celebrate the independence of the voluntary sector, but the threat of the withdrawal of funding if critical voices are raised seems all too real. That cannot be acceptable, but it has been reflected in the debate on the future of the councils for voluntary service network and the development of local interfaces. Instead of following the principle of voluntary collaboration, we seem to be driving towards a forced measure, with funding being used to create compliance. As I said, that is entirely unacceptable. Secondly, there is concern that the Scottish Government seems to be of the view that the development of volunteering opportunities does not require resources. The national volunteering strategy seems to have come to an end, and the single outcome agreements say nothing about the need for such strategies to be developed at a local level. Thirdly, not that long ago, Unite, Unison and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations came together to highlight to the Parliament the crisis in the voluntary sector. Who can forget the image of the hearse, which captured the fear of the sector's destruction? Well, SNP back benchers will have forgotten it, because they did not have the courage to turn up and speak to the people who were raising these concerns. There is also grave concern at the Scottish Government's lack of understanding of the powerful role that volunteering can play in tackling disadvantage, and we need to be proactive in encouraging such activity in our most disadvantaged communities. After all, volunteering can improve skills, build confidence and form an important bulwark against the consequences of economic recession. We need the Scottish Government to act, especially when we are faced with two contrasting sets of figures. First, 18 per cent of adults in deprived communities volunteer, while the figure for Scotland is 33 per cent; secondly—and in stark contrast to that—the figure for young people not in education, employment or training is 11 per cent for the whole of Scotland, but 25 per cent in our 15 per cent most deprived communities. The Scottish Government must find a way of intervening to ensure that our poorest communities, which would benefit most from the skills that volunteering can bring, are afforded such opportunities.

I regret the fact that Tricia Marwick wishes to attack the United Kingdom Government, rather than join us in contemplating challenges in our local communities. Young people in poor communities could be afforded the opportunity to volunteer, which would address the fact that disproportionate numbers of them have been hit by the recession. The Scottish Government's answer to that situation is to end funding for ProjectScotland, a body that has a focus on reaching out to young people for whom it is more difficult to access volunteering opportunities and who would benefit disproportionately from them. There are examples of that in my community and, I am sure, throughout Scotland. Despite that, the Scottish Government is ending ProjectScotland's funding. The Government says that it is a matter of cost, but the reality is that 87 per cent of the money from the public purse that is used to support volunteering opportunities through ProjectScotland goes directly into the pockets of the young volunteers and, from those young people, out into the hard-pressed communities in which they live. We know that 40 per cent of ProjectScotland's volunteers come from the 20 per cent most deprived communities. At a time of economic recession, it is bizarre for the Scottish Government to make that decision, which shows a lack of understanding of the recession's disproportionate impact on poor communities and individuals. It is time for the Scottish Government to confront the consequences of its decisions. Its budget has increased in real terms by £600 million, but it is devolving responsibility to local level, with a reduced budget. As a consequence, there are cuts in local government budgets. Local government's capacity to find resources is restricted because of the impact of the council tax freeze. The Scottish Government must accept that the funding problems that voluntary sector organisations and local volunteers are experiencing are its responsibility. The Scottish Government should take a lesson from volunteers and the volunteering spirit. It should take responsibility and recognise that warm words mean nothing without action to make the  commitment real. Having created huge problems for voluntary organisations and volunteering, the minister adds insult to injury by walking by on the other side. I urge him to reconsider his position on ProjectScotland and to listen to and engage honestly with all those in the voluntary sector who wish to volunteer but who tell us that there are significant problems at local level. That will give us confidence that volunteers and the voluntary sector can survive and thrive again. I move, That the Parliament recognises and celebrates the role of the voluntary sector and volunteers across Scotland in supporting individuals, families and communities and in shaping and delivering services locally; notes the excellent work of volunteering organisations in encouraging volunteering through offering training and volunteering placements and particularly in reaching out to those who might not otherwise have the chance to volunteer; agrees, given the opportunity that volunteering provides to develop skills and build confidence, that, in this economic recession, volunteering organisations should be given adequate resources to allow them to do that important work, and further agrees that innovative organisations that create structured volunteering placements for young people, such as ProjectScotland, should be recognised and supported by the Scottish Government.

Like Nicola Sturgeon, I am deputising in sad circumstances: the funeral of Bill Speirs, a giant of the Labour and trade union movement who was taken from us all too soon, is taking place today. Working people in this country and throughout the rest of the world have cause to be grateful to a man whose life's work was to fight for the rights of working people, the vulnerable and the exploited. He will be sadly missed. To ask the Deputy First Minister what engagements she has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1930)

It has taken two years for the Scottish National Party Government to produce a school building programme. Some pupils, parents and teachers have, at last, been told that they will get the facilities that they need and deserve. Will the Deputy First Minister tell the chamber when the first of those schools will open and how many children will move into new classrooms in those schools before the next election?

I am sure that that sounded good when the minister read it in her ministerial briefing, but let us return to the real world. In its own press release, the Government admits that the schools will not be built before 2013—indeed, there are only 14 schools on the SNP list. In fact, it boasts that it will build just 55 schools by 2018. In addition, the schools that the Government is starting with are not the worst schools. Right now, 150,000 pupils are sitting in schools that the Government has categorised as falling apart. Will the Deputy First Minister tell the chamber when the SNP will get round to rebuilding those schools?

I am not sure what world the minister is in, but it is not the real world—the world in which my children go to school. In the real world, real people understand that real children are being harmed by SNP inaction. The inordinate delay has come about because the SNP promised to ditch the public-private partnership model and build schools under the Scottish Futures Trust. Will the Deputy First Minister tell us how much money the Scottish Futures Trust is generating for the school building programme?

I am privileged to represent Glasgow and I am disappointed that Nicola Sturgeon is joining her colleagues in attacking Glasgow rather than standing up for the city. The Scottish Futures Trust is a quango that costs a staggering £23 million. We learned today that it has spent £120,000 on consultants in four months, yet it has not generated a single coin for Scotland's schools. What a triumph. It takes a special kind of genius to come up with an education policy that will have built no schools by the next election, that leaves 150,000 children in dilapidated classrooms, that costs at least 8,500 construction worker jobs and that produces 1,000 fewer teachers. It takes a special kind of genius indeed to claim that that record is a rip-roaring success. When she was an Opposition spokesperson, Nicola Sturgeon said: "we would expect to be judged by actions not soundbites." By that measure, how many marks out of 10 would Nicola Sturgeon give Fiona Hyslop?

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met representatives of voluntary organisations and what issues were discussed. (S3O-8042)

The minister will be aware of the serious concerns that local councils for voluntary service have about the development of local interfaces. Many feel that merger is being forced, rather than encouraged. Will the minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth agree to meet those groups to discuss their concerns that the process is driven by funding issues? As a consequence, it is generating an atmosphere in which some people feel afraid to speak up or out.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Housing and Communities last met disability organisations and what issues were discussed. (S3O-7923)

When the minister met those groups, did he discuss the issue of the employment and training of people with disabilities, which is obviously critical to the capacity of many to live independently? Given the low level of unemployment of disabled people, coupled with the fact that in the 15 per cent most deprived communities the number of young people not in education, employment or training is more than twice the Scottish average, what specific actions will the minister, as the equalities minister, take to monitor the budgets of his finance, enterprise and education ministers to ensure that they address the needs of disabled workers? What  discussion has he had with officials involved in public procurement to encourage them to follow article 19 of the European Union directive to encourage contracts to be awarded to sheltered workshops?

When will the equalities statement be made available? Given the disproportionate impact of unemployment and economic disadvantage on Glasgow and the west of Scotland, what equality impact assessment has been done of the decision to strip communities in the west of Scotland of 1,300 jobs through the GARL decision? What equality impact assessment has been done of the effect that a council tax freeze will have on families who depend on the local delivery of front-line services?

I am happy and proud to contribute to this debate as a Labour representative. I think that I have won the good attendance award for sitting through every speech, although members must accept that that endeavour might have challenged my happy disposition a little. I shall attempt to be as constructive as possible, but I point out to Sandra White that robust debate is to be celebrated, not feared. We need to draw a distinction here. It is one thing to disagree with and have a debate about something; it is another to be accused of being negative for having the audacity to say that we have a problem with some of the proposals. I am concerned that, unlike what happened in the first eight years of the Parliament, there has been not one dissenting voice on the Government back benches in this debate. If members take the Parliament seriously, they should seek to be free to criticise not just the Opposition but their own front bench. I will give them some advice on that if they require it. Obviously, it is not sufficient in itself but, in the absence of a Government that takes the Parliament's votes seriously, the legislative programme is one of the few areas in which there is any parliamentary control over the administrative devolution that has been given to ministers. The fact that Government ministers are making decisions on the basis of what they can do away from this place instead of working in conjunction with it is a very serious matter, and I ask them to reflect on that point. In these serious times, we need to focus on the concerns and experiences of people throughout Scotland. I have to say that I found the First Minister's statement insubstantial and his presentation dispiriting. It seemed the statement of a First Minister who does not take his job seriously and, as we saw at First Minister's question time, a man who is complacent about certain very big issues of the day, such as child protection and crime, to which there are no obvious right or wrong answers. This is a First Minister who imagines that a statement full of assertion rather than action that is focused on his party's self-serving and indulgent constitutional priorities instead of the real  problems of real people in real communities adds up to a programme for government. It does not. The gulf between the priorities that he set out in his statement and the problems that people in my constituency bring to me could not be more marked. In the past, we have criticised the Scottish Government's remarkable capacity for telling us how much it cares about those who face disadvantage and inequality while doing not a thing to match its rhetoric with commitments, resources and budgets that have been properly and transparently tested against assessments of equality and fairness. However, in this morning's statement, the Scottish Government went a step further: it talked about the people of Scotland without at any time acknowledging the diversity of experience, the lack of opportunity for some Scots or the discrimination against and loss of potential of too many with disabilities. Alex Neil said that the statement was about economic growth and social justice. No, it was not—and it will not become one simply because he says so. It contained not one word on equality or poverty and not one phrase that reflected an understanding of how this economic recession is impacting disproportionately on some people. It is perhaps not surprising that a First Minister who commends Thatcherite economics should not trouble himself to comment on such matters, but we might have expected him to nod in the direction of his back-bench colleagues who do have such a commitment. He must indeed think that the party's discipline is strong. As far as jobs and training are concerned, there is nothing in the statement to address the fact that, although unemployment hangs as a worry over more people and families than it should, in our poorest communities 25 per cent of young people are not in education, employment or training, compared with 11 per cent across the whole of Scotland. There is nothing to address the fact that only 18 per cent of people with learning disabilities are in work or that less than that work for more than 16 hours a week. In the face of all that, there is nothing on skills; cuts are being made in Skills Development Scotland; and the education maintenance allowance, which has allowed some of our poorest and brightest access to education at the time that it matters—that is, at school—is being reduced. The economic strategy does not recognise that there should be shared prosperity, not just sustained economic growth. Furthermore, there is nothing in the statement on child care; and nothing on how the Government will make real its guarantee to those on apprenticeships that they will be allowed to finish them. It is a cruel  deception to call something a guarantee if it is not going to be honoured. At the same time, Scottish Enterprise no longer has any responsibility for people and place. There is nothing on regeneration and employability, and there is an end to Communities Scotland, which had a focus on the detail and the delivery and the hard work of government. In the Highlands, there is the destruction of Highlands and Islands Enterprise. Where the Government is taking action, it is inadequate. Housing is a classic example of the SNP's approach. We have cheap headlines on the right to buy, despite the fact that the SNP is in favour of the use of public moneys for home ownership through low-cost home ownership. It will not cost a coin.

For all the noise and bluster on the right to buy, the reality is that another proposal is being brought in through the back door.

I advise SNP back benchers to consider that proposal closely. The aim is to bring in private, profit-making housing organisations to be registered as social landlords and to destroy the community-controlled housing association and co-operative movement.

I will take an intervention.

I was talking about Sandra White.

On you go.

As the party that modernised the right to buy, which made a huge difference, we do not have a problem with looking at the policy. However, we have a problem with the housing policy with which it is to be substituted. What hypocrisy from a man who spends money on low- cost home ownership and will not tell us the figures on the number of houses that are built for social rented housing rather than ownership. To pretend that the policy is radical is bizarre. There is to be no action to address the weaknesses in the child protection procedures but, on crofting, the silence is even more remarkable. As has been said, the SNP is to be congratulated on its crofting proposals, as it has managed to unite every authoritative and respected crofting commentator and representative in opposition to its proposals. However, the SNP has the audacity to lecture those who protect those communities and the way of life that has sustained them because they do not agree. There is no radicalism on land reform—in fact, there is a dismantling of that, too. When there is a huge yawning silence on those matters, in steps the First Minister to compound the offence. He used the language of equality and talked of a glass ceiling. That is the language that captures the idea of a denial of opportunity, but the First Minister used it to describe his notion of Scotland and all us oppressed Scots together, who need to be separated from the rest of the United Kingdom. In that one phrase, we have Alex Salmond's refutation of the need for social justice in Scotland. It seems that he really believes that that is the one defining trait and the factor that determines all our life chances. The issue is not about people being left neglected in chaotic homes, disability, women facing domestic abuse or people facing the consequence of being unable to access education. Instead, it is about being Scottish—being a clan chief, a landowner, a crofter or someone from Glasgow. All together, we need to be liberated. What nonsense. That explains why Alex Salmond thinks that the referendum matters and that is why we disagree. We will ensure that the Parliament takes its responsibility seriously to produce a programme that will make a difference to the people of this country.

This is a positive point. I wonder whether the member could press the Minister for Housing and Communities to use the powers that he has to address the issues of HMOs and the tenancy deposit scheme. I think that she would agree that that would be a positive way in which to support people in that sector.

Has the member discussed with the Minister for Environment her comments that she is losing patience with crofters, and will he urge her to take a more co-operative approach to crofters at this time to ensure that there are solutions that meet their demands?

I acknowledge that Linda Fabiani has a record of supporting housing associations. Does she share my concern about the proposal to open up  registered social landlords to private companies that are entitled to distribute and make profits? Surely that is a break with the past that she would resist, as I do.

I am sure that Angela Constance appreciates that many compassionate people do not agree with the decision, although they may acknowledge that it was a difficult one. Does she accept that, if the minister had tested the options for compassionate release within Scotland seriously, those people might have been better able to accept his decision? The problem is that—she can correct me if I am wrong—the compassionate release criteria did not compel the minister to release Mr al-Megrahi to his family abroad; he could have been released to his family within Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on the single regional developer model for affordable housing. (S3O-7568)

I thank the minister for that response, although I am not quite sure whether it confirms my understanding of the issue. Perhaps I can probe a little more. After 17 months, which included two consultations that showed significant opposition to the idea of a single developer model and a vote in Parliament opposing it, I understand that the minister has finally said that the policy has been dropped. Perhaps he can confirm that. When the minister reports in more detail on the issue, will he comment on the impact of that significant change in policy? Will he confirm that the Scottish Government now accepts, in relation to the community-controlled housing association movement, that bigger is not necessarily better, that there are diseconomies of scale as well as economies, and that a one-size-fits-all model makes no sense in relation to housing and community regeneration?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate, which represents an important exploration of several issues that have an impact on the quality of decision making in Scotland. The debate is not and should not be simply about constitutional models. As ever, Kenny Gibson creates a false division between unionism and separatism. The debate should be about good government. I am as happy to condemn the Thatcherites in the SNP as I am to condemn those in the Tory party. The debate is about how power is used, what its purpose is and how accountable we are for what and how we spend. We need to explore how we ensure effective and responsive government and active engagement with individuals and communities. We must work with people on their priorities, recognise conflicts of priorities in our communities and be honest about the choices that we make.

I reject that absolutely. I will talk later about the consequences of minority government, one of which has been silence from back benchers about anything that front benchers have done, which, as a former minister, I assure Margaret Mitchell was not the case in the eight years in which we were in power.

If SNP members' only contribution to tackling their leadership is to shout at me, that is feeble indeed. We need to understand that structures of power at all levels of government are important. The challenge for those who wield whatever power they have is to be open, transparent and focused in what they do. This year marks an important anniversary—10 years of the Scottish Parliament. It is important to  reflect on what has been done and how it has been done. The Scottish Parliament was brought into being by a Labour Government that understood that a link exists between what is promised and what is delivered. It is interesting that the Labour Government had the courage to draw on the Scottish Constitutional Convention's work and to open itself up beyond its own decision making. The Labour Government went a stage further by supporting the development of the Parliament's workings through the consultative steering group rather than imposing structures on the Parliament. Structures were therefore established that challenged the executive, whoever was in power. In the same way, the central power at Westminster devolved and delegated power away from itself to the structures of devolved Administrations that could and do challenge Westminster. That is in stark contrast to the role that Mr Russell perceives for his party and to how he operates. The debate about the Scottish Parliament should not simply be about powers or be defined by the idea that the more powers someone has, the more powerful they are. It should be driven by the purpose of powers. We say that the Parliament is reconvened, but we should recognise that it is and should be an entirely different body from the Parliament as was, because what matters is using powers in the interests of the many and not the few. Central to the review of the Scottish Parliament and the devolution process is building partnerships across the United Kingdom and creating economic and social opportunities by harnessing resources throughout the United Kingdom to ensure basic minimum rights in these islands. I particularly welcome what the Calman commission highlights about the social union: not only the social ties—the family, professional and cultural ties—that bind the United Kingdom together but the common expectations for social welfare. That refutes Dr McKee's argument that it is possible to have the strength of the United Kingdom's social union without its political union. If one of the strengths is the welfare state—pensions and so on—one wonders what upheaval would be caused by ripping it apart. I do not see what the social union can be if Scotland is independent.

I am quite happy if Mr Russell finds what I say puzzling. The social union that is recognised in the Calman report and which we recognise is also about the welfare state, social security and mutual protection. It would be exceptionally difficult to maintain that if Scotland were to break away from the union. It is important to recognise that, as Calman says, devolution works. I contend that that is because its creation was open and inclusive and involved people. We must also acknowledge the importance of making it work by keeping the Parliament's structures alive and energetic. We have seen the importance of that in Mr Russell's approach today. I wonder how he can make the Scottish Parliament strong when, in any battle between making devolution work and the opportunity to promote its own narrow interest, the SNP will always promote division. It is disturbing that the new Scottish Government has excluded Parliament, ignored votes of the Parliament and imposed tough control on its back benchers in the chamber and, I suspect, committees. It is sad that the test of much Scottish Government action is whether it can be done without parliamentary scrutiny. That is not a simple party-political point; it is about the systematic downgrading of the Parliament and a retreat to administrative devolution, which is an irony.

I speak from personal experience when I say that it was not possible to bludgeon anything through the coalition. I will take Tricia Marwick through chapter and verse on the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill and the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill to show her that it simply did not happen that way. Because of negotiation and co-operation between the parties, not one bill that was introduced to the Parliament came out the other end of the process the same. In fact, some of the conflicts between the parties came out into the open, whereas we can only puzzle at what disputes there are inside the SNP. In my last moments, I will discuss charities. We must recognise the importance of not imposing unfair or unnecessary burdens on charities. However, given Mr Russell's puzzlement about why creative Scotland cannot be a charity, there is reason to examine how the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 operates to ensure that its core principles of independence, charitable purpose, transparency and public benefit are sustained. The equalities agenda provides a clear example of the Parliament's powers being misused to  disadvantage the people of Scotland. I urge members to engage with the process of making the Parliament work in the interests of the people of Scotland rather than individual party interest.

When Patrick Harvie is talking about carrier bags, does he mean single-use bags? He seems to be arguing that there is a broader definition of carrier bag, but if that is the case the need to exclude the provision of carrier bags is not so pressing because it is not an issue about the environment.

To use Jackson Carlaw's expression, much of what the committee considered was not of the racy variety. I am not sure whether I would recognise it if it were of the racy variety, but I agree that many of the matters that we considered were simple and straightforward things that had to be addressed. Location, the management of budgets and the opening out of commissioners' roles to public and parliamentary scrutiny are subjects that people can agree on, and I do not think that anyone in the chamber wishes to give anybody a blank cheque, but we must recognise that organisations can be killed in a variety of ways—we have to be honest about that. If we do not think that an organisation should exist, we need to have a debate about that, rather than killing it by reducing its budget over time. People may express entirely reasonable concerns about that. The Scottish Government clearly wishes to pursue some issues relating to the decluttering of the public landscape, and it might not be entirely happy with the committee's conclusions in that regard. It is entirely the Government's responsibility and opportunity if it wishes to introduce a bill to address that. A consideration of all the options is in no way precluded, and Government back benchers can decide on them as they choose.  On the role of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee and its conclusions, I make it clear to my good friend Des McNulty that he was not excluded from anything. Indeed, if I had realised the extent of his interest in the matter, I for one would happily have stood aside and allowed him to take on the very enjoyable experience of working our way through the 75 million folders full of papers. No one attempted to pack the committee in any way. Actually, most people who came to the committee did so with scepticism in their mind—I certainly did. Entirely sceptical towards most things about life, I was equally sceptical about the role of commissioners, and I was open minded about the options that were being identified by the corporate body. Once we looked into the issues, however, it became very evident very quickly that they were not as simple as people had thought. There was a clear presumption among the parties of a certain direction of travel that the committee was going to follow. It did not turn out to be as easy as that when we started to deal with the realities of making the arrangements work for people who wanted a good complaints procedure, and who wanted some work to be done around the commissioners' roles that might not fit with that function. People working in the bodies concerned would understandably argue for their organisation and for its role. There is an innate conservatism on the part of people who are in position and who want to protect what is already there. Far more telling, at least to my mind, was what other parliamentarians were saying, not because they were frightened of the commissioners, but because they saw a distinct and genuine role for the children's commissioner in particular. They were reluctant for that role to be given up. Although members wanted a decluttering of the landscape, with no presumption in favour of the various bodies for ever more, they made a telling case for the children's commissioner. It was not argued that the post should be left frozen in time from when it was first created, but the point was made that there was something significant about it that chimed with what was going on in other parts of the United Kingdom. I do not think that it was fear of external organisations that led the committee to the conclusions that it reached—and those conclusions are not for all time and forever. Rather, it was a matter of recognising a political debate that we almost had to adjudicate upon. On balance, we came to the conclusions that we came to. We recognise the reality for some, particularly in relation to complaints handling. The degree to which somebody is satisfied with the structure of a  complaints procedure is determined by their capacity to get the result that they want from it. Inevitably, we will not make everybody happy through the process that we have identified, but we have tried, on balance, to get things right, with a body that is accessible but sensitive to specific complaints. Referring to a point that Bruce Crawford made, we might have all the structures and commissioners in place, but if the people who make the decisions do not have respect for those to whom they are delivering services, and if they do not have respect for the rights and entitlements of people in our communities, they will not make any procedure fit and they will not make any service work. The big picture is about how we ensure that people who are charged with responsibilities meet people's needs, take account of people's rights and entitlements and deliver services in a way that addresses people's concerns and is respectful, so that people are not pushed down the complaints road. That is the bigger challenge, in which we are all involved. The committee took its role seriously and during our debates many members abandoned assumptions that they had held. Our recommendations represent a serious attempt to acknowledge that there is an issue and to come up with a balanced conclusion. I hope that members acknowledge that if the Parliament agrees to the motion in Trish Godman's name, the committee bill that will be introduced will provide us with a further opportunity to explore the issues.

I am happy to contribute to the debate, just as I was happy to contribute to the work of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee. I did not always go to the committee with a spring in my step, but I recognised that it had an important role to play. I thank my fellow committee members for their forbearance during some of the discussions, which came close to being tortuous. I particularly thank the convener, Trish Godman, who kept us focused on the need to come to some conclusions and reminded us of the significance of our role. Like her, I thank the witnesses, who raised important issues, and particularly the clerks. I do not think that I have ever been on a committee where there was such a degree of support through well-organised materials that illuminated the difficult issues and made them accessible to us. The committee dealt with important issues, but because we were dealing with structures, it was sometimes difficult to grasp the significance of the debate and gain clarity about what the structures and roles actually are. However, I believe that we produced a comprehensive and considered report. Although Bruce Crawford identified some areas that he wants to pursue further, I am confident that we tried to come to the right conclusions. Of course, a further opportunity will be afforded to the Parliament to explore the issues. It is often more difficult than one imagines to act on an aspiration to declutter. It is certainly the Government's experience—and probably that of previous Administrations—that bodies tend to come into existence for a purpose. We cannot assume that they are surplus to requirements without identifying what their purpose is and how else services might be delivered. Also, we should not presume that big organisations will always deliver most effectively. There are diseconomies of scale as well as economies of scale, and we have to test that as we pursue conclusions.

I will come to that contentious issue shortly. First, I want to make the point that people sometimes need to be close to the ground and the issues in order to be able to respond. A generic complaints body will not always be able to address people's specific issues. If we are going to have big bodies, they must still be close and sensitive to those who are pursuing complaints. There is an interesting issue to do with the independence of commissioners, which we wrestled with. The instinctive desire to separate off bodies and make them independent of the political process is partly a product of the lack of confidence in politics and politicians that exists, yet, ironically, we have probably all expressed our concerns about the House of Lords precisely because it is not an elected body. We somehow manage to carry both things in our heads at the same time. We must find the right balance between independence and accountability, about which we must have an on-going debate and dialogue. On the rights bodies, I think that my party would want to emphasise an important issue to do with individuals pursuing complaints about individual breaches of their rights. It is incumbent on us to recognise patterns of disadvantage and inequality. It is not just a matter of addressing individual issues; general messages should be considered in progressing policies. On access, it is fair enough to say that there should be a one-stop shop, but we must understand the disadvantages for some people of such an arrangement. The issue should not be about rewarding the capacity to complain; sometimes we have to engage with communities and discuss with them the complaints that they might have. There is a responsibility on people to reach out into communities; they should not just be recipients of complaints. Robin Harper referred to the particularly important issue of the children's commissioner. I recognise that the corporate body had a particular role in that respect, and I welcomed its provision of a proposed structure against which we could focus the debate. There is a symbolism about the children's commissioner and a strength of feeling among particular groups and individual MSPs about the importance of sustaining that role. However, I also recognise that it was legitimate to discuss its role. It is important that the commissioner clarifies the role, and that the body is seen as challenging the Government, not just in relation to what we aspire to, but in relation to the gap between what a Government claims that it cares about and what it delivers through its budgets and priorities. The Scottish Government is often found wanting in that regard. It cares about a  lot of things, but we should consider its budgets and what it prioritises. We want an on-going dialogue with the children's commissioner about that level of engagement. We also want a recognition that, although the commissioner is a voice for children, children's experiences can be very different. It is important to consider the inequalities and disadvantages that young people face, and their disparate experiences. I again thank those who were engaged in producing the report. I recognise that the debate is on-going and that it does not sit comfortably in any box. There are lots of shades of grey. The Parliament and the committee have recognised that. We have tried to set up a structure that is not for all time, but which is underpinned by an understanding that, in time, organisations must become sufficiently flexible to be able to reflect on their own structures and on how they fit in with other structures across the landscape in order to meet needs.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief constable of Strathclyde Police and what issues were discussed. (S3O-7319)

When the cabinet secretary last met the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, did he discuss the role of the police in supporting the advice, support, safety and information services together—ASSIST—process in ensuring proper risk assessment to inform the domestic abuse courts? Will he clarify whether he expects the police to guarantee participation in partnership working and, more broadly, in working closely with local people—an approach that, of course, underlies any serious attempt to ensure community safety.

I genuinely wonder how Murdo Fraser thinks people can pass judgment on their candidates when the full extent of the problem is not known and the parties have not been able to act against their offenders. Does he not agree that there should be a thorough investigation, so that people can make a real choice knowing who has dipped their hands in the till and which members at Westminster are still honourable?

I am happy to speak in the debate, which has several features—some are unsurprising, some are surprising and some are less surprising than they might have been in the past. I will comment first on the miners' dispute. I am proud that we have a Prime Minister and a Government who are willing to use the Government's power to intervene on people's behalf rather than to unleash the state's power against communities. If anything ever confirmed my views about nationalism, it was the fact that I  never understood how the nationalists could have compassion for miners and mining communities in Ayrshire but not for mining communities in Yorkshire. The nationalists considered the oppressed person to be the Duke of Argyll in Scotland and not the miner in England. That is inexplicable, and those who claim to be progressive must explain that. It is hardly surprising that Opposition parties want a general election—that is what Opposition parties say. However, it is illogical to say that the scandal of parliamentary expenses must be addressed through a general election. How do people expect to deal with the problem by holding a general election before the investigation is complete into those who affront us all in the political process by claiming what they are not entitled to, and before political parties can clear out those who have brought shame on us? That makes no sense. It is equally unsurprising that the First Minister preferred to travel the length of the country for a 20-second contribution to a political stunt in Westminster than to be in this Parliament on one of the few occasions since the SNP became the Government in which the Parliament has had thoughtful and challenging debate—yesterday, it was about how best to legislate to protect victims of rape and sexual violence. Of course, that subject does not attract headlines or lend itself to the music-hall approach to political debate with which the First Minister is most comfortable, so the choice for him was a no-brainer. His Government wants to condition us not to expect debate in the Parliament. The Government wants to use its executive power and resists parliamentary accountability. Shamefully, it is backed by back benchers who are silent when it acts in a way for which it did not seek the support of the people in the Scottish Parliament election. I am genuinely surprised that the Tories collude with the SNP's instinctive approach of making this place a combination of a student debating chamber, a vehicle for lobbying Westminster and a platform for grievance. I am genuinely surprised that the Tories have actively chosen to debate having a general election rather than the absence of a strategy for supporting businesses and construction workers, the fact that the SNP is in denial about what is happening on its watch in education or the funding cuts that groups and organisations are experiencing. What SNP ministers tell us that they care about is absolutely separate from the resources that they deliver and their accountability for that. The SNP centralises credit for the fruits of plans that the previous Scottish Executive produced and delegates blame wherever it can for the consequences of the active political choices that it makes in the Parliament.  I referred to features that are less surprising than they might have been in the past. We had come to expect the SNP to put its own cynical party advantage above all else; the memories of 1979 are strong. We believed that its approach was entirely about party advantage—let the people across the UK suffer, if that means drawing increased political support to the SNP as Scots turn away from the UK Government. However, it is becoming increasingly clear that the SNP thinks not only that a Tory Government might be to its advantage, but that a Tory Government would believe in the same things that it believes in. Alex Salmond believes that Thatcherite economics had a lot to recommend it. He leads a Government that will not put a duty on public bodies in Scotland to narrow the gap between rich and poor in the way that is happening elsewhere. Indeed, until very recently, he believed that the British banking system was overregulated—in fact, he takes his economic advice from George Mathewson. On the front bench of the SNP Government, we have David Cameron and Alex Salmond—Thatcherite brothers under the skin. That is to their parties' political advantage, and, increasingly, their political advantage in combination, too. The fact is that Labour understands the need for change. It has delivered change. It decentralised powers to the Scottish Parliament and took a courageous position in pioneering the openness and transparency for which people commend this place. It is critical that that work be done elsewhere. We have to take seriously the debate on expenses. When I was a teacher, it was unacceptable for a child to say, "It was not just me who did it", or "A big, bad boy did it." It is similarly unacceptable that the leader of the SNP takes that approach to the expenses question by implying that the problem is particular to the Labour Party.

My point is that Labour promised a Scottish Parliament and then delivered it. Labour handed out the power so that the Parliament would be open and transparent. I am proud of the role that we played in that. Ten years on, I am proud that we fought for that. We are unlike that squad in the SNP, who claim that they believe in things but do not deliver. These are serious times. Hard choices have to be made regarding economic intervention. The Labour Government is determined to act on economic questions, and the constitution.

Will the member give way?

Will the member clarify the SNP's position on the responsibility of its members of Parliament in relation to expenses? Do its members take responsibility for the claims that they made, or do they take the view—as the SNP's leader does—that they got caught up in a culture and could not help it?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

My intervention is about personal responsibility.

Does Alasdair Allan agree that Westminster MPs have to take personal responsibility for what they did and that it is unacceptable for anybody to excuse their behaviour on the basis that they were caught up in a culture? That is what the public believes.

Does the minister agree that the public expect all of us to take responsibility for what we claim? Does he, for example, think that it is acceptable for his leader to refuse to apologise for anything and claim that he somehow got caught up in the expenses culture? Does the minister not accept that MPs have a personal responsibility to address the question of expenses?

I am not sure that I agree with Sandra White that the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill is not one of the most important bills to go through the Scottish Parliament. It is among the most important, in my view, because it speaks to something very deep in our society—the experience of women who face violence and the fact that somebody would choose to use their power to violate somebody in a sexual way. It is telling that the First Minister has chosen to be absent and not to participate in this afternoon's critical debate. It is a symbolic as well as a political matter for our First Minister to choose to participate in a political stunt with his Conservative colleagues at Westminster rather than recognise what politics is actually about. People are alienated from the brouhaha of politics, but the bill is an example of what we can do together when we examine important issues. Today, we have an opportunity to support a bill that is radical in its intention and will have significant consequences for women. Our First Minister should be here to recognise the importance of that kind of politics. The debate is not an easy one. The reality at its heart is that there is still a view that, if a woman is raped, it is somehow her fault. Through time, that justification has changed, but it remains instructive to make the point that people look not to the crime or the alleged criminal but to the victim. That can overwhelm us, and the fact that the conviction rate is as low as it is can lead to despair, but today we are taking a significant step forward. We know that there has been progress, but more has to be done to meet further challenges. In the early stages of the Scottish Parliament, action was taken to address the need to support survivors, to make agencies responsive, and to recognise that the legal system revictimises women who go through the process. The Abernethy ruling seems a long time ago. Robert Brown spoke earlier about small brains, but we must reflect that, at that time, big brains told us, "You cannot do this." They said that we could not protect women from the people against whom they complain in relation to sexual offences. I particularly commend my ex-colleague Angus MacKay, who, as Deputy Minister for Justice at that time, had the courage to take on the establishment who said, "These things cannot be done." We are now moving from that place to liberating and progressive legislation. At one time, no one believed that there could be rape inside marriage. There has been progress, and we have to hold on to that. We must commit ourselves to ensuring that we have sustained support services for survivors, and we must challenge attitudes, starting in schools, and  liberate boys and girls from the expectations that are placed on them. If we do not understand how gender roles are applied, we will not change those attitudes. If anything can give us confidence in the shared journey on the legislation, it is to understand the progress that has come because of the powerful role of Rape Crisis Scotland and women's organisations who have given voice to women's experience—

We must allow that experience to shape our legislation on sexual offences, and we must learn from it in other legislation.

Does the member agree that any such campaign should identify the distinctive experiences of boys and girls, and young women and young men? There is some evidence that young women are inappropriately pressured into being involved in sexual activity. Does the member agree that any such campaign must have at its heart an understanding of proper respect between boys and girls?

I again raise the point that I raised with Robert Brown. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that any such campaign will recognise the distinctive experiences of boys and girls and that some attitudes of young men towards young girls must be addressed? If girls are to be kept safe, some boys' attitudes that have perhaps been prevalent in the past must be challenged.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government is doing to support financial inclusion. (S3F-1736)

There is some dubiety about the size of the fairer Scotland fund. I am sure that the First Minister will wish to acknowledge the ground-breaking progress—caused by a happy combination of political will and substantial guaranteed resources—that took place under the Labour-led Executive in supporting and developing the credit union movement across Scotland. Given the critical role of credit unions now in tackling debt and protecting communities from loan sharks, why has the First Minister chosen this time to cut guaranteed funding to them from £2.7 million to £250,000? What action will he take to match his rhetoric on financial inclusion with real money, to offer real support and protection in our local communities, through credit unions?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps its directorate for enterprise, energy and tourism is taking to promote equality in employment. (S3O-7112)

The minister will be aware of the recession's differential impact on various groups. What discussions have there been with the equality unit and other departments in the Scottish Government on job segregation and on how the Government has addressed that issue in proposals to tackle unemployment among women?

Have the cabinet secretary and COSLA discussed the process of placing requests, which is exercising many of my constituents? On their behalf, I ask the cabinet secretary to clarify the legal grounds for refusal of an application, given the significance of such refusals to families and how they manage their child care. Is it legally sustainable for a local authority to refuse a placing request on the grounds of its policy to reduce class sizes to 18, given that that does not appear in the legislation that created placing requests?

Will the member comment on concerns from the families of children with disabilities who wish to exercise their right to make a placing request, perhaps because of family circumstances, but whose children end up in a place where they are discriminated against because of their additional needs? Those parents are concerned that choices are made around placing requests on the basis of the burden. Perhaps the local authority where the child comes from—Glasgow City, for instance—might say that it could make the provision elsewhere. I have constituents who feel that there has been discrimination against their child on the basis of their additional needs. That must run counter to the legislation.

Does the minister share my concern about campus police officers being withdrawn in my constituency?

I am not sure that I can follow Ian McKee's speech. I think that I would be ill advised even to attempt to do so. Dr McKee's last points were significant, although it is unfortunate that he dwelt on a false debate at the beginning of his speech, which I do not think anybody really wants to talk about. The challenge for him is to square his view with what the SNP is doing in our local communities, and to understand the wider social issues. I should declare an interest: I am a parent of children in late primary and early secondary school; I was a behaviour support teacher who, in an education support base, and as part of a broader team, latterly worked with youngsters to hold them in mainstream education; and I am someone who seeks to represent the views of constituents, such as youngsters who are bullied or intimidated in schools or who are struggling because they have not got the appropriate support in school. I was concerned by what appeared to be the minister's tone of complacency. Indiscipline is not just a problem now—it has always been with us—but the test for the Government is whether what it does makes the problem better or worse. I contend that, at the moment, the Government is making it worse. I find it frustrating that when we talk about school discipline, we want to separate it off and put it in a policy box away from the broader issues. We talk about knife crime in schools, but it is disturbing that the Government is rolling back more broadly its policy on knives and the retail of knives. We cannot separate those issues. We ought not to talk about indiscipline in schools as if it were one issue. There are issues to do with the appropriateness of the curriculum for some youngsters, and there is an issue around parents who mollycoddle their children so that the children go to school never having been told, "No." That difficulty, which is not specific to poor communities, must be challenged.  Some children who come to school are living in the most chaotic circumstances. We do not know—and neither does the Government, as it has not sought to find out—how many children are living with parents who have an addiction. Do we imagine that those children, who have to learn to be resilient within their homes, somehow come to school able to stay calm and cope with what is demanded of them? I ask the Conservatives to reflect on the fact that for those youngsters, school is sometimes the only security that they have, and the most remarkable journey that they make every day is to get themselves to school. We should be hesitant about saying that we simply expect those children to learn somewhere else. We should perhaps have to take them out of the classroom, but not necessarily out of the building. Do we imagine that for certain young people, being on the fringes of a young male gang culture in our communities does not impact on what they do when they go to school? I am troubled by the Government's approach to antisocial behaviour. It somehow thinks that getting rid of antisocial behaviour orders for young people is a positive thing, when in fact those orders are about engagement and challenging young people about their behaviour at an early stage. Some of what is happening in schools reflects the broader concerns. We must ensure that our schools are confident enough to deal with poor behaviour, but we must also consider the causes of such misbehaviour and address it accordingly. In the past, when young people from poor communities misbehaved, people shrugged their shoulders, tolerated it and said, "So be it." That is unacceptable: those young people deserve to have us challenge their behaviour, and we must recognise the importance of early intervention, early parental involvement and engagement beyond the school. We need to challenge the children's hearings system, the social work system and others to work with schools in addressing those difficult problems. The Government must confront some of the consequences of its own actions. The council tax freeze, which is a squeeze on funding, means the end of behaviour support, so that children who should be included in mainstream education are denied the support that allows that to happen. There is a focus on bringing down class size numbers in primaries 1, 2 and 3, while our young boys are falling out of the education system in the first and second years of secondary school—and the numbers are going up as a consequence of that focus. There is a freeze on recruitment and an increase in the use of supply teachers in our secondary schools, which makes life uncertain for young people, stops the continuity of their learning and  has an impact on behaviour. The direction project in my constituency, which in the past was supported by youth crime prevention moneys, is now ending its support for five to 12-year-olds because of funding decisions by the Scottish Government, which will have consequences for the ability of those youngsters to sustain a mainstream education and will impact on the quality of learning for young people who desperately need an education. There has been a reduction in the number of classroom assistants and in flexibility—

I will finish on a final point—there has been a reduction in breakfast clubs, which have nothing to do with eating and everything to do with supporting children in the transition from their homes to school. School and education involve tackling indiscipline, but the broader social programme of funding and resources that the Government provides for communities is critical to addressing the problem inside and outside our schools.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the timescale is  for implementation of the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Act 2007. (S3O-6729)

Will the minister describe what discussions he has had with voluntary organisations, Disclosure Scotland and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations about the change in disclosure policy by Disclosure Scotland? Will he acknowledge that groups find themselves in a contractual trap because disclosure checks have to be part of contracts, but groups are no longer entitled to receive them from Disclosure Scotland? Does he acknowledge the urgency of the situation? Will he consider bringing the 2007 act into force as soon as possible? Groups are deeply concerned about the effect on the services that they seek to deliver.

We can debate the reality of voluntary sector funding at another time, but does the cabinet secretary recognise that some voluntary sector organisations are concerned that they are being encouraged inappropriately to become social enterprises and to find funding in that way, which makes them unable to deliver services to the groups that they seek to serve?

We can argue about the benefits of the council tax freeze, but does the member agree that it does not benefit those on the lowest incomes? About 30 per cent of people do not pay any council tax. Those people, who are among the most vulnerable groups, do not get one coin in benefit from the measure.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this important debate. There is a danger of a little occupational segregation among MSPs in economy debates, with only men contributing to debates on big issues such as the economy while we reflect on social issues elsewhere. In my speech, I will try to bring the two aspects together. It is essential to understand the impact of the global economic crisis not just in general terms but in particular terms and for particular groups. The  cabinet secretary reflected on that, but he spoke generally about the economy and did not address particular groups' needs. I will explore with the Scottish Government what its six-point plan and other approaches do to understand needs and impacts and to address them properly. As John Park said, public procurement alone amounts to £8 billion. It is right to ask not only how that money is being disbursed but how it can be used to lever in social and economic benefits for the people of Scotland. We should not separate out that issue, which provides an example of how we can shift from general aspiration to making a difference to individuals, families and communities. Concerns are already felt about the Scottish Government's willingness or capacity to address equality in its spending. Equality groups have flagged up their concerns about the lack of transparency in the budget and the step back from the progress that had been made on interrogating budgets on the basis of equality. Ministers have deprioritised equality in the development of single outcome agreements. This morning, I searched the Scottish Government's website for an updated position, since May 2007, on women and employment, disability and employment, and employability. My search was fruitless, which is a concern because it suggests that the Government is not reflecting on those critical elements in economic recovery. In these unpredictable and unprecedented times, I do not set the Government the task of solving everything, but we must ask one question: are the Government's actions making things better or worse? The first part of Rob Gibson's speech was deeply depressing because the Parliament has put in place opportunities to ensure that the general develops into the particular and to make a difference. I am concerned that, if the imbalance in need and the disproportionate impact are not understood, the opportunities to protect and support people will be lost. In that regard, the Scottish Government will make things worse and not better. In the remaining time, I will flag up some issues. Low pay remains an important issue for women—16 per cent of men and 29 per cent of women are in low-paid jobs. What does our economic strategy say about that? On addressing vulnerability to unemployment and redundancy, what is being said about the fact that women are more likely to work part time? As for occupational segregation, the service industries have been hit more in the recession, and 19.5 per cent of women but only 4 per cent of men are in administrative and secretarial jobs. There is also segregation within sectors. In retail, women make up two thirds of the workforce, but still more men are in full-time retail  posts. Women are concentrated in part-time, low-paid jobs and men in management posts. What is the strategy on the occupational segregation that faces black and ethnic minority communities? What is being done to address the challenge that people who live in poverty face in securing work when fewer jobs are available? What is being done to address the scandalous levels of unemployment among people with disabilities? It is essential that the Government focus on that. The Government announced an apprenticeship summit, but it was silent on equal access to training. I challenge it on that: who will be invited to the summit? I hope that the minister will respond and reflect on what equality groups need to be at the summit to address equal access to training, which must be a key part of the agenda. The policy of concentrating adult modern apprenticeships in particular sectors has had the consequence of directing moneys away from the sectors in which groups such as women are found. We cannot leave it to the market to find modern apprenticeships for women while Government moneys are concentrated on construction, engineering and life sciences. The update on the skills strategy is silent on diversity in need, and it is critical that the Scottish Government should speak on that. What is being done to continue an employability strategy? I regret the ending of Scottish Enterprise's role in that, as I remember intermediate labour market initiatives in my constituency that took women who were unemployed, trained them in child care, provided child care, and offered a bridge into employment. Those initiatives have now gone but must feature once again in the Government's employment strategy. What is being done to match the package of £42.5 million that has been made available in the rest of the United Kingdom to support the voluntary sector through recession? The minister often talks about the amount of money in the voluntary sector, but what is he doing to address the impact of recession? It is regrettable that organisations such as Community Service Volunteers Scotland have to cut back their services when the voluntary sector and volunteering can give people critical skills to face the recession. Tackling disadvantage is not only for when the sun shines; it is an integral part of economic recovery. It does not get headlines, but it passes a more important test: it addresses needs and strengthens economic opportunities. I urge the Scottish Government to recognise that fact in its  apprenticeship summit, skills strategy and spending decisions.

Does the minister recognise that there is some concern that the strategy on primary school class sizes may be at the expense of specialised learning support, which is particularly important for youngsters who underachieve at that stage? Can he reassure me that, no matter what happens on class sizes, he will sustain the level of specialist learning support in our primary schools to ensure that children's support needs are picked up quickly and that individualised support can be given to them?

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body how it ensures that it complies with its equal opportunities responsibilities. (S3O-6462)

I thank the member for that comprehensive answer—I can scrub the first half of my follow-up question as a consequence. However, as well as meeting its responsibilities to staff, how does the corporate body ensure that an equalities approach informs its outreach work and services for visitors? For example, how does the corporate body test the education service to ensure that youngsters from beyond mainstream schools who would like to visit the Parliament are encouraged and supported to do so and that they have the same opportunities that many youngsters in our constituencies, fortunately for us, take up?

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met representatives of the Scottish Commission for Human Rights and what issues were discussed. (S3O-6097)

I will suggest an issue that the cabinet secretary might wish to raise with Alan Miller, whom I will meet on Monday as a consequence of discussions with kinship carers in Glasgow. They feel that the debate on kinship carer support should be placed in the context of the rights of children. As one grandparent said to me, their grandchildren have often—sadly—undergone all too damaging experiences that are similar to those of children who are looked after by foster carers, yet the support for kinship carers is not the same. Is the cabinet secretary or one of his colleagues willing to meet kinship carers in Glasgow to discuss that and their concern that the Scottish Government's definition of kinship carers might have damaging and unfair consequences for the children for whom they care?

We lost the election.

It is a privilege to open this important debate for the Labour Party. I am happy to speak to the motion, "Scottish Government Failures", which is in my name. In discussing the Government's failures, the first question is the political equivalent of shooting fish in a barrel—which one do we start with? The remarkable gap between the Scottish National Party's view of itself and the reality could be laughable, but it represents the serious matter of opportunities lost for people throughout Scotland who depend on the Government at every level to act in their interest. It is clear to us all that SNP ministers take themselves very seriously, but our central contention is that the SNP is not serious about government. What it has done lags behind the action that the Administrations in Wales and Northern Ireland have taken to use the powers that are at their disposal to make a difference, to be creative in stimulating economic activity and to put jobs and training centre stage. It is ever more apparent that, ultimately, the SNP will always put its party interests first. It is evident that the SNP's first, last and only priority is creating the conditions for separation. That is why we plan to support the Liberal Democrat amendment. The referendum issue provides an example of SNP failure. The SNP could have had our support for an unrigged referendum—in which I am certain that the people of Scotland would have rejected the SNP's separatism—but it spurned the offer. Now, times and economic circumstances have changed. It is clear to us that a referendum would now be an unnecessary distraction from the challenges for the Government in sustaining economic activity and protecting people, their families and their communities. If—as ministers told us—it was outrageous to vote against the budget to secure apprenticeships and Labour's budget dividend at a  time of economic recession, how much more risky is it to create uncertainty to persist with a priority of constitutional division? As for the SNP's amendment, rarely have I seen such a self-regarding and complacent amendment, even by the SNP's monumentally self-regarding and complacent standards. As SNP members ditch policies or pretend that other policies that are dead in the water still have life in them, they congratulate themselves because they are doing well in polls that they commissioned. As a schoolteacher, I spent many years encouraging youngsters to be self-confident and full of self-esteem. However, I used to say, "Even when you believe in yourself, you still have to open the book and work." The First Minister might be bristling with self-confidence, but that is ill placed when he will not do the work that being in government demands. We have a six-point plan that did not even make its way on to the back of a fag packet; an analysis of the economic situation by the First Minister that changes daily and is informed by a view of the world that suggests that economic policy can be separated from its social consequences; and a Government that is spinning fit to burst by telling us how well it is doing. The Government centralises credit for the good news and delegates the blame for anything else. It is incapable of facing the reality of crumbling schools, teachers out of work and community projects closing. There are too many broken promises to list them all, but even the edited highlights of not dumping student debt, not reducing class sizes and—of course—not introducing the local income tax are substantial. As we watched the public relations machine move into action to dump the local income tax—the SNP told the press about that before its own back benchers knew—we were puzzled as to why the persistent breaking of promises seemed to matter so little. All that was required was the wheeling out of an alibi. Of course, we made a simple mistake. We thought that the SNP thought that its manifesto commitments mattered. The reality is that the SNP does not regard its failure to deliver on its promises as a problem because, for the SNP, the manifesto's purpose was to get the SNP elected and not to describe what the SNP would do once it was elected. The process of promise making and promise breaking was, and is, an entirely cynical calculation about how to secure power. Alongside the broken promises is the failure to deliver. The SNP actively chose, at a time of turmoil in the financial markets, to cut support to build affordable housing for rent. When we need security in housing and in construction, the SNP has wilfully developed policies that create uncertainty in the housing sector. When SNP  members are told that their policies are not working, their only response is that somebody else needs to give them more money, although the money that they have is not being used as it should be to meet housing need. In health, the statistics show that bedblocking is re-emerging and that huge challenges exist locally. In justice, the police figures will not be achieved and an arbitrary cut in sentences of under six months will be made, while in this city alone, £100,000 is being stripped out of community sentencing support. In transport, the strategic transport projects review was dismissed as a wish list. On the environment, early action on emissions is lacking. In culture, the First Minister tells us that there is a renaissance, but unprecedented numbers of artists tell us that there is a shambles. In addressing poverty and disadvantage, the Government no longer has targets and no longer attempts even to assess the impact of its policies on disadvantaged groups. The SNP Government no longer attempts to secure equal access to services and no longer ensures that budgets are informed by concerns about poverty rather than rhetoric. That leaves the most vulnerable people in our communities without protection in these challenging times. We have the damaging consequences of the SNP being against public-private partnership developments, although its opposition has never stretched as far as baulking at cutting the ministerial ribbon to open such developments. The SNP has found it impossible to produce the Scottish Futures Trust, so it has a particular tartan nationalist take on the Thatcher mantra, "There is no alternative." The Government says, "There is no alternative, so we shall simply not build at all." [ Interruption. ]

I regret that the Government is incapable of listening to people's concerns about its failures. Government demands more than a shrug of the shoulders, especially when the Salmond slump is the consequence. [ Laughter. ]

I say to Mr Swinney that it is easy to laugh at me, but laughing at businesses and communities that are under the cosh is a different matter. The Scottish Government's figures show £1.3 billion of construction projects in 2007. Under the SNP, that figure was slashed to £300 million in 2008. The cost of that reduction in jobs, economic  activity and the benefit of those projects is breathtaking and frustrating. That reality should make us rage at the Government's incompetence and lack of concern. I have said that a referendum bill is unwanted and would be a distraction at this time. However, a greater charge than the wish to waste time and energy on pursuing a referendum bill in such uncertain times can be laid at the SNP's door. I beg the Presiding Officer's pardon while I find my place—I assure members that what is coming is worth the wait. When those with vision fought for and shaped the Scottish Parliament and when the Labour Party made decentralising power a priority—the SNP stood sullenly apart from all that campaigning and debating—we did not imagine that any party that secured power in the Scottish Parliament, which was intended to bring decision making closer to those who understand what is needed in our communities, would seek to reduce the Parliament in economically tough times to the role of spectator to ministerial decisions, as the SNP Government has. We did not imagine that any party that sought power would use this institution crudely to say time and again what it could not do so that it could pursue its separatist agenda. The depressing charge against the SNP is that it will never strain every sinew and never use every power at its disposal to protect our people because its life's work is to establish that the Parliament cannot work as part of the United Kingdom. If there is ever a choice between action to improve people's life chances and action to improve the SNP's political chances—a choice between a fix and a fight—it is no contest for the SNP. It will never do all that it can, because it does not want people to feel that the Parliament serves them as part of the United Kingdom. Although there is political knockabout in witnessing the SNP's self-aggrandisement, its finessing of hard questions, its spin doctors and their PR and the increasingly embarrassing spectacle of a First Minister demeaning his office by focusing on providing the cheap laugh rather than answers, there is no political knockabout in the realisation that the alibi seeking, the excuses and the spin are not about managing political action but are a substitute for it. We have had enough of failure and will talk later in detail about how the SNP is letting down the people of Scotland on each of its responsibilities. We have had enough of inaction and a party-political strategy masquerading as a Government. It is about time that the SNP took responsibility for the powers that it has and used them in the interest of the people in this country. Scotland deserves far better than it has had so far from the SNP Government.  I move, That the Parliament notes that SNP manifesto promises have been broken on a wide range of issues including health, housing, community safety and education; further notes the absence of a credible strategy to address the needs of people facing difficult economic circumstances and to tackle poverty and disadvantage; regrets that the Scottish Government prefers to focus its attention on the powers it does not have in order to pursue its party's agenda of separation, and urges the Scottish Government to examine how it might effectively use the powers at its disposal to meet the needs of people by sustaining economic activity and employment and supporting communities across Scotland.

It falls to me to speak for 10 minutes in a consensual debate.

It is challenging for me to speak consensually for more than two minutes, but I shall do my best. I pay tribute to Jackie Baillie. I hope that other members will allow the Labour Party a little pride in our sister who has brought the bill to this stage. It is a regret that she is not with us today. We have long known her charms and persuasive abilities. She has shown in equal measure two qualities that were critical to taking the bill through: passion and persistence. That is why we have a bill that works and an underpinning policy and political commitment that have created supported across the Parliament. I thank Jackie Baillie's staff, NEBU, SPICe, Stewart Stevenson and his officials. They have all contributed to ensuring that we were happily able to get to this stage. I also commend the campaigning groups that identified the problem, shared their experiences and captured the challenge that faced us as legislators in solving it. As Duncan McNeil said, the impact of constituents coming to individual MSPs' surgeries to describe their experience and demand that we take action was probably as powerful as the campaigning groups' work. That connection is a measure of the important work that the Parliament can do. The bill is a practical measure on an issue that requires a practical approach. It addresses a specific problem. It does not do everything, but it ought not to be judged as if it should. I have long taken the view that it is correct to win hearts and minds but that, while we wait for hearts and minds to be won, we can take enforcement action. We must take that approach to equality because the bill is created and shaped by attitudes of hostility and discrimination the eradication of which will require more than a practical approach. We should remind ourselves of the appalling context: disabled people are berated and insulted by able-bodied drivers; their carers are threatened; and they are denied access to the parking spaces they need simply because there are drivers who are so selfish or indolent that they treat disabled people as if they are swindling them to create a benefit for themselves. That is why we need action. Some drivers are so unembarrassable and display attitudes that are so blatant that we can feel overwhelmed and that it is not possible to address the problem. We cannot allow ourselves to be overwhelmed, because we are dealing with basic rights. It is necessary to confront the attitudes that are driven by such hostility and discrimination. We should think of the bill as a mark of two things. First, it is a mark of the failure to change attitudes; it is evidence of real discrimination—it is not just theoretical and in politicians' heads—that is lived daily. Secondly, it is an acknowledgement  of the need to drive further down into equality and equal opportunity and understand properly how discrimination operates. That is not an indulgence; it must be central to our work because it defines life chances. Understanding how people's life chances are shaped by their disabilities and the discrimination of the communities in which they live is not a party-political issue, but it is a deeply political issue. Margo MacDonald made a point about the level of blue badge holding and compliance abroad. NEBU understands that the blue badge is recognised internationally and that a badge that is issued in another EU country is valid for use in Scotland and vice versa. I hope that that responds to that point.

The debate provides an opportunity to explore those further issues. There is always opportunity to develop understanding of how people with disabilities are affected and what rights and entitlements they should have. That does not take anything away from what we are attempting to do with the bill. We must reflect on the cost of inhibiting people with disabilities from working, participating in society and being involved in their communities. Excluding people in that way involves a huge cost not only to those individuals and their families, but to broader society. I concur with the point, which Charlie Gordon made forcibly, that even if the bill costs £1 per Scot to implement it will be good value and the mark of a decent society. I also concur with John Wilson's point that the bill is about the core business of local authorities in fulfilling their duties to people with disabilities. If people are not able to participate in society because the parking bay system is not working, it is part of local government's core business to address that and it represents a necessary cost, not an additional one. Jim Tolson mentioned the gap in the figures. The fact that a gap exists calls into question the seriousness with which the figures were established. I would not define as a robust assessment figures that show such a difference between two local authorities. If there is an issue, local authorities and the minister must address it seriously together by understanding the real cost.  Local authorities should not create the impression that implementing the bill is a luxury, a bonus or an imposition; it is a necessary part of the individual rights of people who live in their areas and pay council tax, as others do. I urge the minister to commit to continuing dialogue on that. The bill must not fail because we have been unable to agree an absolute cost. The cost must follow the political commitment to disabled individuals. No battle against discrimination or inequality was ever won easily. There will always be doubters and easy opportunities to knock down individual cases, but we would never have secured any entitlements for disabled people—no rights to employment or access to mainstream education—if we had started from the point of view that it was too difficult. Winning the battle against discrimination is about taking practical measures and being optimistic about our capacity to deliver rights for people in our communities. A good example of that is blue badge abuse. I have been amazed at the extent to which normal, rational human beings would justify using disabled parking spaces, even though they were not themselves disabled, because they think that some people might be abusing the system; they discriminate against the people who are legally entitled to blue badges on the basis that somebody else is playing the system. How come the person with a disadvantage suffers because somebody somewhere else is abusing the system? We must challenge that attitude. The matter is simple: a driver should not use a disabled space if they do not have a disability and they should demand that the authorities deal with the people who hold blue badges illegally. We will always find reasons for doing things for our own convenience. The challenge is to create legislation and an enforcement process that allow that attitude to be tackled. I congratulate and thank all the members who have spoken in the debate and everyone who created the political context for the bill by understanding the need for particular measures. The fact that we take an individual experience from a local community, understand the general causes of it and address it politically is an expression of a key role of the Parliament. We do not often get the opportunity to feel proud of our Parliament, but the debate is rooted in an understanding that we work best when we give priority to the challenge of people's life experiences as they describe them rather than as we imagine them to be. I commend everyone who has brought us to this point. I thank Karen Gillon for opening the debate on Jackie Baillie's behalf. It is a privilege for me to  play my small part. The next test is to ensure that this little bit of legislation delivers the things that we aspire to deliver through it.

The agreements are high-level strategic documents, but we would nevertheless expect them to identify priorities. How many single outcome agreements mention carers or a carers strategy?

On behalf of the Labour Party, I extend our deepest sympathies to David and Samantha Cameron and their family. Of all that we have to deal with in life, I can think of little worse than the loss of a child. Today's debate is important and all too short. I urge the minister to consider making a bid for a more substantial debate on the subject to allow us to track properly the situation, how policy needs to be developed and how resources must be directed to meet the needs of those who are being cared for as well as their carers. I am always amazed by people's capacity to care for others, the power of the love that drives daily self-sacrifice and the daily battle that they wage on behalf of their loved ones, rather than themselves. Respite was mentioned. In my constituency, I know that people do not take up respite care places, at great cost to themselves, because they have no confidence in the quality of the respite care that is available. When we talk about shaping services, it is critical that we talk to and work with carers because they do not make their own needs a priority. We have to ensure that priority is given nevertheless. Carers and those for whom they care are our greatest resource in understanding the challenges. In passing, I pay tribute to greater Pollok carers centre for its energy and creativity in supporting carers and in driving the policy agenda. When we discuss issues that relate to carers, it is recognised that carers are diverse. They include young carers, who are often—sadly—in the inappropriate position of caring for adults who have addiction problems and who have different needs from people who have medical conditions. Carers include families who care for disabled  children and elderly carers who care for a spouse or partner.

Elderly people face a huge challenge in coming to terms with their own age and continuing to care. Enable has highlighted the situation of elderly carers who look after sons and daughters with learning disabilities. Those people have cared for their children from childhood to adulthood. In their old age, they are haunted by the terrible fear of what will happen to their children when they die. I support Enable's call to local authorities to count the number of older carers of people with learning disabilities. How can we properly support those people if we do not know the extent of the problem? In speaking to carers, I am always aware of their frustration and anger about the fact that although their issues are recognised, progress is slow. The problem is not just all for the Scottish Government. We sought to tackle the situation in government, but a huge amount has still to be done. The test for the current Government is not whether it has solved everything, but whether the action that it is taking will improve or worsen the situation. I fear that the situation will be made worse by single outcome agreements, for example, which do not require an equality impact assessment. The minister could say today that the Government will not accept such agreements unless they have been equality impact assessed. The £34 million to support families of disabled children was reported to have been rolled up in the local government settlement, but such spending has not been monitored or tracked, so we have no evidence. As the for Scotland's disabled children campaign says, the critical point is that the money is not enough; we must ensure that we invest in improving services and that we transform those services. At the heart of the vision of the aiming high for disabled children programme was the idea that it would be transformational and that work would be undertaken with families to make the change. The liaison group has been given support, but it is disappointing that that is a drop in the ocean in comparison with what £34 million could have done to transform services in conjunction with carers. I have no doubt that the minister is committed to tackling the issues of carers, but it is essential that that commitment is taken into the centre of the Government and that the Government addresses what is happening locally with funding, how the situation is being tackled and how carers and the  cared for will be put at the centre of shaping policy as well as receiving policy.

One of the few pleasures of being in opposition is spectating as the Government party experiences a reshuffle and watching its impact on the selected individuals who have lost their jobs, on those who have gained the exciting opportunity that ministerial office presents and, of course, on those who have doggedly sought preferment but been disappointed. Perhaps next time. I should predicate my comments by saying that it is a great privilege to be in ministerial office. I wish those who are departing office well and send every good wish to those who are going into office, which is a privilege to which we all aspire. As ever, the First Minister's cohorts have been spinning fit to burst but, even by the First Minister's standards, the spin has stretched credibility to breaking point. First, we are told that Mike Russell is to be responsible for the national conversation. That responsibility is to be given to a man who has shown no evidence whatever throughout his parliamentary career that he understands that conversation includes people other than himself speaking and that it might possibly involve listening rather than lecturing. Secondly, we are told that Alex Neil represents fresh talent and that he is a critic being brought into the fold. With all due respect, I go back a long way with Alex Neil—so far that I can remember when he believed that social justice should be at the centre of Government policy, not in the margins where Mr Salmond's trickle-down economics place it—but not even he, who has shown a remarkable ability to argue for anything in the past year and a half, could possibly  characterise himself as a fresh face. I can only hazard a guess at how those SNP members whose faces are a deal fresher than mine or Mr Neil's feel about that. I considered for a moment the possibility that, in this Parliament of minorities, we should all be allowed to choose an SNP back bencher to be given the job—perhaps someone who has displayed a scintilla of independent thought—but even I, optimistic soul that I am, recognise a tough job when I see one. In the unreal world that is the Parliament, where the first rule should always be to expect the unexpected, the transformation of Alex Neil, the alleged critic, from thorn in the flesh to Salmond's little helper has been breathtaking. Week after week, we have witnessed him in full flow, shouting, bawling and crawling in equal measure. The reality of course is that the loyalty of the back benchers has been bought by the promise of the one thing that unites them—a Government that is focused entirely on seeking constitutional fights as a means of separating us from the rest of the United Kingdom. That is the key message of the ministerial and other decisions that Mr Salmond has made this week: separation is now everything. Ministers who are departing office should not blame themselves or allow themselves to be joined to the long list of alibis that the First Minister uses at every opportunity. They could work only with the cards that they were dealt. The Government has failed in its housing policy, which prompted the lobbying today by trade unionists, housing organisations and community volunteers; in its environmental policy, which seeks to privatise our forests, as a result of listening to Rothschild rather than rural workers; in its culture policy, which prompted unprecedented unity of artists in protest; and its schools policy, which—remarkably—has not resulted in the building of one school being commissioned in nearly two years. I welcome the new ministers to their posts and urge them to do in government what they did not do on the back benches—to speak up. I urge them to do what their boss regularly fails to do—to listen to those who live with the consequences of the misguided action in their ministerial portfolios and the wilful lack of action by the Government on the economy. If the new ministers do that, perhaps the First Minister's failed policies might be challenged. Labour members understand that the critical issue is that the Government should work in the interests of the people of Scotland. All the reshuffles in the world will not make the difference that we need, which would come from the First Minister, the Cabinet, ministers and the governing party putting aside their constitutional obsessions and using their existing powers to support families  and communities throughout Scotland. If the ministerial change brings about such a change, that will be welcome.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate, although we are necessarily constrained by time. I hope that whoever is appointed as the new housing minister after 5 o'clock this evening will reflect on having a full debate in the chamber on the important subject of housing. It is important for members to discuss housing and to end the Government's obsession with assertion over action. If ever there was an example of government by alibi, it was Nicola Sturgeon's speech. She talked about what everybody else's responsibilities are and wilfully refused to reflect on her own policy, "Firm Foundations". I hope that she listened to what Ross Finnie said about the six council houses, particularly as her Government has emphasised the continuing and critical role of housing associations in its policy. The power of the threat of a Labour debate on housing is remarkable: there has been half a U-turn on a key policy on HAG spending. Given the absolute certainty about previous HAG assumptions, perhaps the minister could clarify what consultation took place with the housing sector on the new assumptions. I fear that they may have been plucked out of the air in a panic. Two Mondays ago, the then housing minister, Stewart Maxwell—to whom I pay tribute; I have enjoyed debating with him—stated that the grant formula was costing housing associations an extra £10,000 per house, but that that could be tackled by using reserves or borrowing. Four days later, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing announced that the issue was being revisited. Poor Mr Maxwell. He gallantly defended the Scottish National Party's policy while both the policy's demise and his own were being plotted. The Parliament has already agreed that the Scottish Government's housing policy is seriously flawed. Despite that, the Scottish Government persists with it. Cuts in HAG levels will lead to rent  increases or increased borrowing at the worst possible time, and the introduction of a lead developer model can be seen as undermining entirely the critical role of community-based housing associations. Are we to assume that the cabinet secretary, in supporting our motion and agreeing that there should be flexibility on procurement, is finally burying the lead developer role? Will she confirm that, given the GHA's role as a transitional body, its aspiration to be a lead developer will simply not be allowed to be fulfilled? The problem with the firm foundations approach is that if the Scottish Government persists with it, it will seriously undermine the role of community-controlled housing associations. The approach is predicated on an assumption that housing associations have been feather-bedded in some ways. Reserves are talked about, but the reality is that they are used to plan not two years ahead, but five, 10, 15 and 20 years in advance. The very thing that sustained housing associations at a time when council houses were falling into disrepair because they had been starved of investment is now being used inappropriately. There is talk of economies of scale. We know the pressures of diseconomies of scale. A big organisation spends without thinking. We need to reassert the importance of housing associations in community regeneration and in sustaining local communities. The Scottish Government must listen to those who tell it that such an approach will strengthen the role of the national housing associations at the expense of local housing associations. The cabinet secretary must back off. In particular, in summing up, she should address a key point about the implications of the lead developer role that has been raised with me. The lead developer proposals would not allow charities—which the vast majority of the housing associations are—to undertake such a role. Things would need to be changed to allow subsidiaries to do that. Subsidiaries will not be registered social landlords, so they will not be able to receive HAG, which will then go to end users. The reason for the proposal in the first place—to give all the resources to a one-stop shop of regional experts—would be undermined, European procurement rules would apply to the procurement of the lead developer and things would have to be opened up to the private sector. Surely that is not the Government's intention. We should apply the Swinney test to that policy, bearing it in mind that destroying community-controlled housing associations was not in the SNP's manifesto. The Parliament has voted against the policy and times have changed. The worrying conclusion that we have to draw is that the reason why we shall not get the cabinet  secretary to admit that she is wrong—and she is—and the reason why she will not dump the policy along with the local income tax, is that it does not require parliamentary endorsement. The Scottish Government will persist with the policy not because it is right, but because it can. That is the approach of the pre-1999 Scottish Office and its administrative devolution for ministers, rather than that of a Scottish Government that is accountable to Parliament and, through it, to all those who are highly exercised and concerned about the current approach. We all agree that we are in challenging, fast-changing and difficult times, but the test of Government is whether it makes the situation better or worse. This Scottish Government currently fails that test in relation to housing and the sustainability of social rented housing at community level. It is time for the cabinet secretary to recognise that graciously, think again, dump the "Firm Foundations" document and policy—which the Parliament has opposed—and work with housing associations, MSPs and those in the housing sector to develop a housing policy that will make a difference to our communities.

I was making a serious point about the balance of spending. One reason why the money has been brought forward is to sustain the construction industry, but that particular spend will not do that. The building industry is concerned about that.

Can the cabinet secretary tell us what proportion of the money that the Government has brought forward is being spent on supporting development rather than on land banking or on buying off-the-shelf housing that already exists?

I begin by acknowledging the contribution of the Presiding Officer, Trish Godman, to ensuring that the subject has remained a political issue. I appreciate that she is not in a position just now to express her views, but her record is there to be recognised. I congratulate Murdo Fraser on bringing the debate to the chamber. The importance of the motion lies in the fact that it not only describes something terrible but considers ways in which we can address the issues. When I read the motion and became aware of the issues, the capacity of some people for cruelty and the willingness to perpetrate that cruelty against other human beings took my breath away. The danger is that, in being appalled, we are also paralysed and fear that we can do nothing to address that level of cruelty. If we do not act, however, we give up on so many people who are facing problems. We have a responsibility to act. One reason why I welcome the debate is that it enables us to consider how we can support action to address the problem. It is clear that the issue is not particularly about women, but it is disproportionately experienced by women. It is therefore important to make the connection with the abuse of women, male violence against women and the unequal status of women in this country and elsewhere. I believe that those factors play a part in ensuring that it is disproportionately women who suffer from being trafficked and abused by men.  It is critical that we support the organisations and groups that reach out to vulnerable people, who might be fearful of speaking out and do not know where to go. It is essential that we use the networks within communities to give people the confidence to speak out. That is true domestically just as it is true for those who are trafficked into the country. We also need to challenge the perpetrators—not just those who traffic, but those who go and use and abuse trafficked women. The Women's Support Project in Glasgow has done some significant research on the attitudes of men who use prostitutes. One of its stunning findings was that, although a significant number of the men suspected that women were there through no choice of their own, that they had been forced to be there and that they may have been trafficked, that bore no relationship to whether the men would use those women. The notion that prostitution is a fair transaction between men and women is exposed by that. The men knew that the women could have been victims of trafficking, but that made no difference to whether they chose to continue. We heard about Germany. Why was there a demand for prostitutes there? Who would use them? I know that Trish Godman has made representations to Glasgow City Council about the Commonwealth games and the need to challenge attitudes there. It is critical that we put the matter in context and address the question of the perpetrators. As has been suggested, legislation might need to be developed on the Swedish model, but the Scottish Parliament passed relevant legislation before the 2007 election, and that legislation needs to be enforced, because it focuses on the perpetrators and puts the matter in that context. I remind the minister that, although local authorities operate under financial constraints, there are soft budget lines, and those are the lines that should support groups that go out and support women. However, there is nobody to speak up for that in the hard battle of financial choices. I hope that the minister will address that problem. We need education in our communities. We need to talk about what is happening and the connection with violence against women. We need to protect those who have been trafficked, and we need to ensure that the focus on perpetrators is not lost. People are appalled by the notion of trafficking. That is straightforward, but it is more difficult to consider what creates the demand. The minister will have the support of all members if he is willing to address that. We should examine the legislative measures that are in place, consider how well they are working and encourage further enforcement of  them, because they shift the balance from those who allegedly make the choice to go into prostitution to those who create the demand in the first place and continue to use prostitutes despite the evidence, which is visible to them, that some of the most vulnerable people have been placed there for abuse through no choice of their own.

The Labour side was frustrated because there was not a sufficient speed of engagement before last Wednesday. In fact, Labour did negotiate seriously. Does the minister agree with me that it ill behoves the Parliament to impugn the motives of those who sought to improve the budget, in the way that Labour did?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. The budget process is always difficult, and it is self-evidently more difficult for Opposition members because the budget bill can never be a neutral document. The budget reflects the priorities of the Scottish National Party; it is not a Labour budget, so it is our responsibility to try to influence and shape it. That is an understandable part of the process—our role throughout the process has been to seek to influence and shape the budget in the direction of the commitments that Labour would have made and the strategy that we would have had. Nevertheless, the budget bill that we are debating is not the one that we would have introduced. There is frustration that the budget process has been characterised in commentaries as being about playing games. The sense that horse trading and game playing were going on was reinforced by decisions that the cabinet secretary made, such as his singling out of Edinburgh instead of addressing the needs of all our cities.

No. There is recognition that problems have been caused by the presentation of decisions and by the pretence that there was no serious negotiation by Labour before last week's vote, which is simply not true. The process was too much about the arithmetic in the Parliament and not enough about genuinely reaching out to members to find ways of improving the budget. There has also been frustration about the pretence that, in seeking to support proposals that  would improve the budget, we somehow supported the whole budget. It is dishonest to suggest that members who sought to persuade the cabinet secretary of the strength of a particular approach had a reckless disregard for the impact on local communities. That is simply not true—what is happening in our communities has driven and motivated serious negotiation on the part of the Labour Party. We focused on key issues and we sought to support families and communities who are facing the current economic challenge, so we welcome the announcement of what we sought: a secure guarantee to people who are currently in apprenticeship placements. As a consequence, many young people and their families can have certainty when before there was a great deal of uncertainty. For that alone, today will have been a good day at the office. We urged the Government to understand the critical role of Government intervention and action that goes beyond simple assertion. We recognised the importance of supporting people who face unemployment and transition to other jobs. We sought significant increases in the number of apprenticeships because we know our history and we remember what happened when Government took a laissez-faire approach and abandoned young people and families to the scourge of unemployment. We recognised the opportunity that apprenticeships would provide for training and planning for the future. The change that we secured in the Scottish budget is a Labour dividend for families; at last there is a firm commitment on apprenticeships. Critical issues will come into play in the delivery of that commitment. In the past, I have raised significant issues about the importance of equality proofing and anti-poverty proofing the budget and the role of equality impact assessments. I remain concerned that, although the budget allocates moneys, it does not do the hard job of ensuring that we meet the diversity of need in our communities. We can have no confidence that there is any understanding of how people experience disadvantage and discrimination if the budget process does not explicitly set out how such an understanding is arrived at. Single outcome agreements play a critical part in addressing need locally, and the social inclusion budget has been entirely devolved to local government. Stewart Maxwell has said that equality impact assessments should be done but that if they are not done it is for the Equality and Human Rights Commission to investigate. Such a process would take a long time, and there is a simpler solution, which I urge ministers to accept: if they think that equality impact assessment of single outcome agreements should be undertaken  because of how such agreements affect communities, they should say that an agreement will not be accepted without evidence that an equality impact assessment has been done. It is as simple as that. I want to ensure that the shift in the budget addresses need. The cabinet secretary has considered Labour's case for modern apprenticeships, and I urge him to apply an equalities approach, too. It is not enough to assert that Government policy inevitably helps disadvantaged people. It has been claimed that free school meals, free prescriptions and the council tax freeze benefit the poor, but in a written answer to a parliamentary question the Government confirmed that there is no evidence of such benefit. We need evidence, so that we can ensure that what we do makes a difference. As part of the summit on apprenticeships, the cabinet secretary must commit to addressing structural employment issues such as segregation, which reinforces the position of women. If apprenticeships are segregated, it is inevitable that women's experience of low pay will continue. We must consider the sectors in which apprenticeships are offered. Are we improving the care sector, in which there are many women workers? We must address that issue. We have to consider what we say to employers. I was told today that an apprentice hairdresser earns £60 a week for a 45-hour week. That is unacceptable and would not happen in England. I urge the cabinet secretary to ensure that the summit on apprenticeships addresses that. An understanding of those issues is critical to driving social inclusion. How much of the town centre regeneration money will go to our most-deprived communities? How will PACE meet the needs of people with disabilities, who are more disadvantaged in the employment market? We need to understand that equality is not a bonus but at the core of spending decisions and policy documents. Otherwise, the budget decisions that we make today will reinforce inequality rather than challenge it. I welcome the shift that the cabinet secretary has made, but I urge him to ensure that, when he allocates funds for his commitments, he considers how his allocation meets the needs of particular groups in our communities. That is central to our approach, and I look forward to him acknowledging that in his closing speech.

For clarification, I tell the member that everybody understands the seriousness of the situation. Does he suggest that there ought not to be an opportunity to vote down a budget? Does he have a proposal to change the rules, because that is the logic of the position that he proposes?

I am happy to contribute to the debate. I have the honour of contributing a very small footnote to the history of this young Parliament—indeed, to the history of the Scottish Parliament in general—as I was the first person to speak in a debate in the Scottish Parliament in the proud language of my forebears. It is a language that played a critical part in the soundtrack of my childhood in Glasgow and Tiree. In my maiden speech in 1999, I made the point that I spoke haltingly in Gaelic—and I speak it even less well now—because of attitudes to Gaelic in the Scotland that I grew up in. Active decisions were taken to minimise the use of Gaelic and to make no real provision for Gaelic education for the island and Highland diaspora in our cities. There were many like me who lost the language that they listened to and lived with every day, and there were people such as my grandmother, who through politeness and good manners often spoke in not her first but her second language, believing somehow that she needed to be the person who reached out in order to engage with other people. During my childhood in Glasgow, the only provision for children like me was to go to interminable Gaelic classes, at which we learned exactly where Mary was—in front of the house, to the side of the house, or on the other side of the house—but which bore no relation to, or gave me any capacity to speak to my family in, the language in which they spoke to one another all the time. I am glad that there seems to be a consensus on the need to address the question of Gaelic. Things were not always this way, and we should remember that. There was hostility, discrimination and lack of understanding that led to people losing the language that their forebears had treasured. While recognising the progress that has been made, we must recognise those problems, and we  need to learn from the journey rather than presume that victory has been won. I commend those who continue to put pressure on Government at every level in the fight to sustain their language. They have been innovative and creative in how they have tried to take the language forward. They have demanded that the needs of Gaelic-speaking communities be met both in the Highlands and in the cities. They have understood the power of harnessing Gaelic and its culture to address modern culture by giving the language a modern face in music, song and the arts. That has not just provided a renaissance in traditional Gaelic culture but enriched that culture and, indeed, all our cultures. That shows the diversity of cultures that have shaped modern Scotland. On Ted Brocklebank's point, I think that Gaelic has a richness that Scotland can present to the world. It provides an economic interest for the tourism industry, which is helped by the fact that we have that diversity. As the very proud auntie of a nephew who is the Gaelic voice of Charlie in the children's television programme "Charlie and Lola", I know that Gaelic can exist in many places beyond the traditional ceilidh. We must listen to those who understand the connection between the need to sustain Gaelic and the need to will the means for that to happen. There is a critical connection between the survival of Gaelic and support for Gaelic-medium education, and at the core of my speech is the recognition that Gaelic's fragility is not accidental and that making it secure cannot be accidental either. That presents a real challenge to every level of Government about how to act. This is not a time to be feeble. I welcome the draft language plan, but I caution the minister not to listen to the quiet impossibilists who sometimes give advice to ministers. What we need is not assertion or appearance but some guarantees. The phenomenal progress in Gaelic-medium education and the consequential optimism for the language was due to active political decisions by the previous Administration, which are now being built on, and the courage of local authorities such as Glasgow City Council, which now has a Gaelic-medium nursery school, primary school and secondary school. In particular, we should recognise that the introduction of free nursery places accelerated the development of Gaelic by offering a critical place for Gaelic-medium education that has reached out not only to families in which Gaelic had been lost but, in a wonderful way, to families that had no prior connection with the language. The minister will acknowledge the pressures that are on local government and the anxieties among equality groups generally about the vulnerability of  soft budgets during a time of pressures. It is understandable that there is an anxiety about culture budgets, education budgets and other budgets that have supported the development of Gaelic, and I urge the minister to recognise the vulnerability of traditional Gaelic culture and how young people are reshaping it. Support is required at every level. In my final minute, I want to make one or two points about BBC Alba. We celebrate the channel's early success, and we recognise its critical role and its potential in sustaining the language. I commend Alasdair Allan—I am not one who is often gracious in the chamber—for becoming an accomplished Gaelic speaker from a starting point of zero. The minister is a gracious person, but I regret her ungracious remarks about the public appointment of Alasdair Morrison as chair of MG Alba. Whatever her views on his politics, I am sure that she recognises his intelligence, energy and abiding passion for his native tongue. I hope that she will assure us today that the Scottish Government will do everything that it can to support BBC Alba, given its potential to normalise Gaelic in our communities. The minister must recognise that the evident awareness of Scottishness that Gaelic presents is as much about celebrating the differences in our culture as recognising the commonality of some of our traits and characteristics. This is an opportunity to reaffirm the important role of Gaelic in celebrating what everyone brings to the table and what makes us different and distinct—that is critical to our capacity to celebrate all of Scotland's cultures. I commend the minister for the consultation on the draft language plan, and I look forward to her continuing energy in supporting this precious language.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to address the high proportion of young people from deprived backgrounds or with disabilities leaving school who are not going into employment, education or training. (S3O-5413)

I am sure that the minister shares my concern that young people from deprived backgrounds and those with disabilities are disproportionately represented among young people who are not in education, employment or training. That is a challenge to equalities as well as to the development of skills and education. Will the minister outline specifically what Skills Development Scotland will do to address the needs of those young people and improve their future prospects, what annual targets have been set for Skills Development Scotland in relation to those young people and how she plans to monitor such targets?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I confess that I do so with a degree of trepidation, as someone who is not a member of the Finance Committee and is certainly not an economist. One concern is that the budget is often presented in techie language as a hugely complex and complicated issue. One is given the feeling that only the high priests of the financial world can  comment at a level that is appropriate to the debate. We should recognise that the budget is about the real world. We need to talk about the budget in terms of its real-world consequences. We all find it easy to speak at great length on what we care about and what we believe in, but the test for the Government is not just to say what priorities it cares about but to show how it wills those priorities through its budget process. A central job of Government is not simply to assert policy commitments or even to elevate some of those to issues of principle; a Government must talk about what it will do when faced with conflicting issues of principle and with a number of things to choose between. The challenge for the current Government—a challenge to which the previous speaker perhaps failed to rise—is to accept that it cannot simply presume as a self-evident truth that certain things are good because they seem to be good. The budget process, which is the process of testing the budget, is about moving from assertion and belief to evidence that the proposals will make a difference. Given that the test for the Government through the budget process is to identify priorities, to make choices and to justify those choices, the budget needs to be transparent and its assumptions need to be tested. There are real concerns about the capacity of the draft budget to show what priority the Government gives to issues of equalities and social justice. Last year, there were serious concerns about the lack of commentary in the budget documents on equalities, which was identified as a weakness. This year's budget is weaker still. Audit Scotland and the Accounts Commission have commented on concerns about the capacity of local government to deliver on, or even to understand, its equality duties. There is clear evidence that the budget process is not helping by providing certainty and confidence about the Government's priorities. There is clear evidence that the Scottish Government has made political choices on the issues of the council tax and small business bonus scheme, but the rationale for those choices is missing. That is where proper equality proofing—and anti-poverty proofing—would do a job. I understand why people say that equality proofing is very complex and should not necessarily appear in the budget documents. However, it should be at the heart of the process. Regardless of the size of the cake, the issue is how the cake is shared out. Therefore, equality proofing of the budget must be central to the process; it is not a bonus for the days when the sun is shining. Equality proofing is even more—rather than less—important when budgets are under pressure.  On that basis, I come to the issue of single outcome agreements. For me, there remains a central conundrum about single outcome agreements that has not been addressed by ministers. On previous occasions, ministers have said that local authorities have a statutory responsibility to fulfil their equality duties. However, local authorities say that single outcome agreements do not require equality impact assessments. We do not know which of those positions is correct. We need to know that, because otherwise there is a concern that those responsibilities will be deprioritised. One explanation given is the timescales involved in single outcome agreements, but those timescales are entirely in the hands of the Government. No guidance has been issued on whether single outcome agreements require equality impact assessments. In the meantime, resource decisions are being made on the basis of what has been decided in single outcome agreements—not to mention the whole challenge of equal pay, which the Equal Opportunities Committee wants us to consider. Let me give an example. According to Scottish Women's Aid's analysis of single outcome agreements, only seven of the 32 agreements mention violence against women. To be fair to him, in response to an oral question on violence against women, the Minister for Communities and Sport, Stewart Maxwell, said: "I am sure that that is a priority for all councils throughout Scotland."— [ Official Report , 4 December 2008; c 13112.]  However, the issue is not of sufficient priority for a significant number of councils to include it in their single outcome agreements. What will the Government do? What is the next stage? Will the Government say to local government that single outcome agreements require equality impact assessments? Will it say that issues such as violence against women should be mentioned in single outcome agreements? When we come to that point, central Government steps back. In my view, that is not good enough.

The reality is that the budget will fail to take an equality impact perspective if, for example, a Scottish Enterprise skills strategy does not recognise the high number of people who have a disability among those within what used to be called the NEET—not in education, employment or training—group; or if modern apprenticeships face a challenge in relation to occupational segregation, which affects economic opportunity; or if the Government does not spend on infrastructure to address the particular needs of groups who are further from the labour force than others. In such cases, the budget will fail to address equalities and poverty issues.  It is not good enough to say that a cut in the council tax is an anti-poverty measure when the poorest do not pay council tax. We are asking for a rigour in the process that is currently absent, and I urge the minister—

Does the minister agree that there is a difference between giving people  certainty that something will happen, and expecting people to make it happen? There is concern that the issue has been deprioritised, and that the Scottish Government is not acting to ensure that such matters are included in single outcome agreements.

It is a reflection on how far we have come that there is consensus that this matter is serious and appropriate for public debate and political action. We have come a long way from the time when agencies regarded such matters as being purely domestic, private and nothing to do with them. The irony in saying that forced marriage involves a violation of human rights is that there are at the heart of the matter people who have no awareness that they have a human right to say no, and no capacity to resist something that they see as being expected of them. It is a comfort to us that we are now able at least to recognise that it is a subject for public concern and action, and that many people in our communities would support such action. At the heart of much of the work that we do, we must place ways of supporting people by reaching out to individuals and speaking to them about the issues that affect their families in language that they understand, rather than by putting up posters on the walls of places where they might go to seek help. On domestic abuse, it makes me shudder to think that, when I was in the public services, we needed to help a woman who was fleeing violence by getting her a mobile telephone number that would not show up on a telephone bill. That shows just how frightened people must get. We have to think about factors like that when we are shaping services. We do not know the number of people about whom we are talking. As happened with domestic  abuse, when we start to talk about the issue and give people confidence, the figures will go up. That, perhaps, is a matter that we must reflect on. I welcome the consultation, because it is my instinct to support legislation. Indeed, when consultation was being undertaken at UK level, I was surprised at the consultation responses that expressed the view that forced marriage should not be criminalised, and called for civil legislation. I respected those arguments, which were made by people whom I trusted and who feared what would happen if forced marriage were criminalised. However, I stress that we should not close the door fully on legislation, because it might be that we realise in time that civil measures are not sufficient. I ask the minister to reflect on the points that Marlyn Glen made about the implications of our approach to this issue for legislation that is currently going through Parliament or with which we might deal in the future. I want to reinforce the points that were made about the distinction between arranged marriage and forced marriage. We should not overstate the prevalence of forced marriage and we should not afford certain people the opportunity to stigmatise whole communities by focusing on a practice that is anathema to most people in those communities. Although I would obviously commend the Labour Government for the action that it took, I recognise the work of others in this field, and I acknowledge how powerful it is when people such as Mohammed Sarwar and Bashir Ahmad speak up on these issues, because their doing so refutes the argument that whole communities are at fault, rather than a small section of those communities. There is a debate about whether we should rely on education or legislation, but our approach cannot involve only one or the other; it must involve everything. We must use the legislative route to provide protection, but we must also work with communities and young people to give them confidence to resist. Earlier, I made the point that it is not enough just to aspire and that we must will the means to deliver. We have to have resources for specialist groups who can speak within those communities, but we also have to train teachers and youth workers in the main stream who can listen and act to support young people in particular who are vulnerable and who need to be reassured that they are able to resist their families' wishes. I urge the minister to consider the questions that I asked earlier. What does he consider to be the role of the national group to address violence against women? How is the Government discussing local outcomes with COSLA and community planning partnerships? How is it asking  them to assess the resources that would be required to support that work? When will guidance on the equality aspects of single outcome agreements be available? Answers to those questions are critical to allaying people's fears that there is not sufficient recognition of the challenge that this work presents while the process is ongoing. I urge the minister to be creative—as other members have suggested—in how he consults, and to recognise that the conclusions that he reaches will not be the last word, but will be a critically important word in respect of supporting people who find themselves in such circumstances.

As far as I understand it, one of the big differences is that, in other parts of the United Kingdom, a third party can apply for an order. That is particularly important given the silencing and fear of those who are at the centre of the matter.

Presiding Officer, please use your power to take some time away from my summing-up speech if that will help you to juggle times later on and means that you will be able to fit in other speakers. I would not dare to tell you what to do, but I know that a number of members will want to contribute to this important debate. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate on forced marriages, and I welcome the consultation document that has been issued today. The minister has outlined why the consultation will be important. Just last week, the first forced marriage civil protection order was issued in England. If for no reason other than the fact that the protection offered in other parts of the United Kingdom should be offered in Scotland too, it is essential that we get the consultation right and act accordingly. I welcome the minister's decision to hold this debate during the 16 days of action against violence against women, thus placing the issue in the broader context of the position of women across the world and the prevalence of violence against women in its many forms. I always feel rather ambivalent about the Scottish Parliament debate at this time of year, during the 16 days of events. However, it is of course encouraging to acknowledge that we have made progress, and it is right that we take the time to highlight the positive aspects. I believe that doing so reflects acceptance—across the chamber and beyond—of the continuing seriousness of the issue, and acceptance of the impact that violence against women has on the life chances, health and wellbeing of, and opportunities for, women and their families. It is always refreshing to meet people who have been so resilient in their campaigning. Such  people have gathered here today on the issue of there being no recourse to public funds. I hear what the minister said in that regard, and I urge the Scottish Government and the UK Government to work together to see how creatively they can solve the problem. Local Women's Aid organisations ought not to be picking up the tab, and it may be that the Scottish Government can offer emergency resources to take the burden off local organisations while work on the bigger picture is sorted out. The vulnerable women at the centre of these issues must be the focus of our actions. Such debates always highlight just how much remains to be done to tackle violence against women in its many forms. There is always a danger that we might be overwhelmed by the challenge and by the ways in which that violence is expressed, including domestic abuse, rape, the trafficking and enslavement of women, prostitution and forced marriage. Those examples are experienced globally, but progress will be made through local action—step by determined step—to support individual women, families and communities. The consultation on forced marriage should be placed in that context. In discussing forced marriage, we continue to bear down on the broader issue of violence against women. Forced marriage is a distinct problem and it must be challenged, but it is a problem that is shaped by the same attitudes that still mean that—although women can smash all sorts of glass ceilings and can redefine their roles and expectations—even the most talented and pioneering women can be inhibited and controlled.

I absolutely accept that forced marriage is an issue that is not simply for women—although, because of defined roles in communities, it affects more women than men. However, I do not in any way dismiss the suffering of some young men in such circumstances. No matter how talented individual women are, they can be scared in their own homes, and threatened and intimidated outside, too. Experience tells us that—with forced marriage as with other issues—caring is not enough. Feeling for the survivors will not address the problems. We need to understand the causes; resource the people who know how to keep women safe; and tackle the causes through education, provision and legislative action. There is an added dimension to the debate on forced marriage—the fear of causing some kind of cultural offence. However, as one young Asian Scot said to me, any right-thinking person must  believe that it is absolutely unacceptable to force someone into marriage. [ Interruption. ] Even if it happens to only one person, that is one too many. We welcome the consultation, because it is critical to get it right—to act to protect and support women, but without the unintended consequence of forced marriage being driven underground. However, we hope that whatever action is taken will be kept under close examination, to ensure that it is having the desired effect. We must not close the door on any options, and we must ensure that protection is afforded to people facing the problem across the whole United Kingdom. It is essential to have a proper understanding of the pressures on young people who may be forced into marriage—to know how difficult it is to resist forced marriage and how isolated and vulnerable a person can feel. There is an irony in the fact that young people are sometimes forced into marriage precisely because they are challenging the roles that are expected of them. In any provision that we make, we must understand the need to protect the individual and give them both the confidence that they will continue to be protected and the knowledge that, if they have the courage to resist, we will support them in doing that. We must be able to offer safety, advice, the time that is needed and support in the future. Young people in such situations need trusted intermediaries—people who understand the families' cultural and community sensitivities and who are able to rebut and resist some of the arguments that are put to the young people. I ask the minister to reflect on how we can consult the most powerful voices—the voices of those who can talk to their own experience, which are often silenced because they do not have the confidence to come forward. He may wish to think further about how private consultation can be undertaken with some of those who have survived and are living with their experiences. There is also the question of education in communities that still believe that forced marriage is reasonable. It is not an issue of religious belief; it is something that can be challenged inside communities. People can be supported to do that important work. There is an issue with resources. Scottish Women's Aid's analysis of single outcome agreements shows that only seven local authorities make any mention of domestic abuse or violence against women as a local outcome. What reassurance can the minister give that he will act to prevent those issues from being de-prioritised at a local level? I am not sure whether he is consulting COSLA on that analysis, and I do not think that he is consulting community planning partnerships. That might be a useful starting point for some of the discussions around the resource  implications and the education and support side as well as around the broader legal matters. When will the advice on equality impact assessments and equality responsibilities in relation to single outcome agreements be issued? We were promised that advice, but it has not yet appeared. What has been the role of the national group on violence against women in shaping the consultation? The group is a powerful forum for such discussions, but I do not know whether it has discussed the issue, and if so when, or whether it plans to discuss it. That information would be useful to us in forming our view of the consultation. [ Interruption. ] What is the group's role in assessing, monitoring and considering the implications of single outcome agreements? I welcome the debate and recognise the progress that has been made. I welcome the consultation although, as ever, I regret that it is necessary. Finally, I congratulate all those in the Parliament and far beyond who ensure that the issues facing survivors of domestic abuse and violence against women and those who are coping with forced marriages are kept in the public eye so that action can be taken. I urge the minister to sustain the focus on all fronts.

It is a privilege to participate in the debate. Like other members, I congratulate Jackie Baillie on her commitment to delivering the bill, on her tenacity, compassion and humanity and—critically—on her absolute understanding that we need to commit ourselves not only to tackling inequality, but to spending time understanding the challenges and then working on the solutions, detail by grinding detail. We need not only to look for headlines, but to make significant headway. When it comes to the capacity to understand the issue and then address the details, Jackie Baillie has it in spades. I also congratulate the visitors to the gallery, including the disability groups that have come to listen to the debate—a debate that has been shaped by their campaigning on the issue. Just as important, they have contributed to a greater understanding of how disability is experienced, how services for people with disabilities do not fully meet their needs and how those services should be better organised in order to meet those needs. On a personal note, I particularly congratulate the parallel transport liaison group from Glasgow, whose representatives are here today. It is a group with a challenging name but a powerful message. It brings together users, carers and Glasgow City Council, and is supported by voluntary organisation Fair Deal. PTLG provides a forum that liberates people who have learning disabilities to speak for themselves on the issues. When, as a fresh-faced younger MSP—not the haggard old hulk members see before them today—I was asked to chair that group, I found myself in a rigorous and refreshing place—a place where the fact that I cared was not the issue. What I could do to promote PTLG's agenda on transport issues was what mattered. However, I am troubled that in these financially difficult times, an organisation such as PTLG may have its funding cut. We must understand that addressing the needs of disability is about not just service provision. It is also about support for those who tell us what that service provision should be. I urge the minister, in considering the financial concordat, to reflect on that and to enter into dialogue on those softer budget areas that may become vulnerable in hard times. The issue of disabled parking spaces seems such a simple one: people lack mobility and need to park close to the shop, the doctor's surgery, the hospital, their homes and so on. We create spaces for people who have disabilities and no mobility in the expectation that those who are blessed with mobility will not use them. It should be simple and for many people it is. It is a simple rule: no ifs, no buts, no maybes—people who are not disabled  should not park in those spaces. I remember the bemusement and shock I felt when a member of the PTLG described to me not just being unable to get a parking space, but the hostility and harassment that they experienced when they asked to have their space back. It is not as simple as it seems. The need for legislation exposes, at best, a lack of awareness about the challenge that faces people who lack of mobility and why disabled parking spaces are needed and, at worst, a cavalier and distressing indifference—if not hostility—to the people who are entitled to such spaces. It is as if it is perceived that people in wheelchairs have stolen a march on those who have no mobility problems. We need to reflect on what that attitude says about our society. Although the legislation is small in the order of things, and will not do everything, it will make a significant change. We ought not to make good the enemy of excellence in dealing with the legislation. The need for it speaks of something troubling and selfish in our society. It appears that those who choose to be selfish want to rationalise and justify the legislation away by talking not about their actions but about abuse of the blue badge scheme. Of course, if there is abuse of the blue badge scheme, it impacts most on those who are disabled, so it should be dealt with. Such abuse should certainly not be a cover for people who believe that their need to park is more important than the needs of others. I look for agreement from the minister that his Administration understands its responsibility for tackling that broader and disturbing attitude to disability. The practical steps to address inequality are not what we do when everything else is done. It is not just what we care about, but where money is spent. I accept that resources and funding decisions are critical. We need clarification from the minister on the importance of equality impact assessments of the single outcome agreements, which shape and determine local government priorities—

I am, fundamentally, making a point about the bill—we must will the resources to deliver on our aspirations. I ask the minister to clarify whether equality impact assessments are necessary for single outcome agreements, as Mr Swinney has said, or whether they are not, as local authorities have said. With regard to our equality duties, the concordat must not—whatever approach is taken—signal deprioritisation by local government of its equality responsibilities.  Finally, the bill is a testimony to those who have shaped it, but it is also a testimony to this Parliament. Its being passed would confirm that it is possible for people in our communities to pose challenges, identify problems, offer solutions and demand that we act. In this small bill, we are being true to our belief that active engagement in our communities is the real politics to which we aspire. I urge members to support the bill at 5 o'clock.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet  Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth last met representatives of the Equality and Human Rights Commission and what issues were discussed. (S3O-4788)

I find that disappointing, and I urge the cabinet secretary to meet them as a matter of urgency, particularly on single outcome agreements. The cabinet secretary may be aware that Morag Alexander, the Scotland commissioner, has said that the equality impact assessment is a requirement of the public sector equality duties, which are legally binding, and that it should be central to policy design, not policy review. In light of that, what advice did the cabinet secretary seek or receive from the commission on whether equality impact assessments are necessary for single outcome agreements? He is on record as saying that that is a matter for local government and local authority representatives have told the Local Government and Communities Committee that equality impact assessments are not necessary for single outcome agreements.

To ask the First Minister what engagements he has planned for the rest of the day. (S3F-1115)

We share on all sides of the chamber a commitment to seek to protect all those in Scotland who are facing the consequences of the global economic crisis. While the First Minister was down in London this week meeting the bosses of Lloyds TSB, Labour was meeting the unions that represent Scottish bank workers. Before he went to London, he said that his first priority was to protect jobs. What guarantees on jobs did he extract from the Lloyds TSB board?

I take it from his answer that the First Minister has as yet secured no guarantees in relation to employment. The First Minister told us that the Lloyds TSB board would be "left in no doubt of their obligations to Scotland in terms of employment and corporate presence."  What guarantees has the First Minister extracted from the Lloyds TSB board about corporate headquarters?

I reassure Mr Salmond that he does not stand on his own in wanting to protect the interests of workers in Scotland. However, the fact is that he sought two guarantees and has secured none. At the most recent First Minister's question time, Labour urged the First Minister to contemplate the possibility of changing his mind to protect Scottish jobs. Was the subject of the local income tax raised by him or the Lloyds TSB board at his meeting on Tuesday?

I am not an economist, so I will keep it simple for the First Minister. First, it would be helpful if he could answer the question about whether the local income tax was discussed at the meeting. We are talking about what he can do, rather than what he singularly failed to do at his meeting. Throughout Scotland, in these difficult times, trade unions and businesses agree that the local income tax is a serious disincentive to jobs, business and Scotland's ability to attract corporate headquarters. I would be astonished if that was not discussed at the meeting. Given the range of concerns about the impact of the local income tax on jobs in Scotland, even if it is too much to contemplate the possibility that the First Minister will change his mind and drop the proposal, will he at least, as a first step, consider the plea from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce? It states: "We believe that it is entirely unacceptable for ministers to refuse to conduct research into the direct costs to SMEs of the administration of such a tax." The First Minister tells us that he will "strain every sinew", but that is assertion and not action. In response to the concerns about the local income tax, will he at least commission research on the impact of such a tax? Will he swallow his pride and do that little bit to establish what his local income tax would actually cost?

I welcome the minister's comment that he is willing to convene a meeting to address the issues. That is a welcome step forward. Can he indicate how much of the up to £100 million that the First Minister announced can be expected to be secured for Glasgow?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities regarding the First Minister's announcement of 19 August 2008 on housing investment. (S3O-4056)

Following pressure, the First Minister announced on 19 August that £100 million would be provided to tackle the housing challenges. That was welcomed, but there are issues with the detail. The announcement was made ahead of £40 million of the money being confirmed. I do not know whether that concerns you, but will you confirm where we are in relation to that £40 million—if it is there—and how much of the £100 million will be available this year? Will you detail the process by which local authorities throughout Scotland can access the portion that is available this year to ensure fair distribution throughout Scotland?

The housing minister said that the issue of the £40 million is still being discussed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. That is an important point. Will Mr Swinney confirm that that discussion is on-going, and will he provide detail of how the £100 million can be accessed by individual local authorities to ensure that it is fairly distributed throughout Scotland to meet housing need?

If I move away from my planned new chilled approach to speeches in the chamber, I shall blame you entirely, Presiding Officer, for cutting my time from six minutes to five.  I will comment on the Government's programme from the perspective of my party's commitment to our central purpose when we were in power, which was economic growth and social justice. We regard the two as being absolutely inseparable but, during the summer, the First Minister confirmed his view that it is possible to separate economic policy from its social consequences—that we can somehow separate pit closures from the devastation in mining communities. The great fear is that because the Government's overarching commitment is to only one priority—sustainable economic growth—it may abdicate its responsibility on social justice or naively presume that social good will inevitably emerge from economic activity, when we know that that cannot be the case. I am concerned that there appears to be no reference to tackling gender, race or disability inequality and no mention of community regeneration and the deep-rooted inequalities in some communities. We all know that no advance in equality ever happened by accident, and that it is absolutely critical to scrutinise spend with proper understanding and to use evidence about whom it benefits. I seek reassurance that the SNP will learn the lessons of its first year in power and equality proof its budget and reflect on its decision to accept single outcome agreements without any evidence of equality impact assessments. I recently met representatives of the Equality and Human Rights Commission to discuss that very issue. They were obviously concerned, but they told me that the explanation is that the timetable is too tight to expect local authorities to fulfil that responsibility. That seems to be a perverse argument, given that the Government established the timetable. I am gravely concerned that the single outcome agreements, which will determine so much in addressing inequality, will not undergo that impact assessment. The proposed abolition of council tax makes my case. It is evident that an equality impact assessment of the proposal would confirm that it would not affect the most disadvantaged people because they do not pay council tax, and that those people would suffer disproportionately as a result of the cuts in services that would necessarily follow as a consequence of the largest tax cut, which was so proudly vaunted earlier.

Let me finish this point. SNP members can argue for council tax abolition if they wish, but it is unacceptable to assert that it would address inequality, when it would not.

If the member had listened carefully, he would know that I said that "the most disadvantaged people" do not pay council tax. It is claimed that abolition of the council tax would meet the needs of the most disadvantaged people. SNP members can support abolition if they will, but they should not use the poor to defend the policy. There are serious issues in housing for whoever is in power. I was determined not to be provoked by the response of the Scottish Government to the announcements by the UK Government. I was depressed, however, by the line that was taken, which was, "They have copied us." Even if that were true, which it is not, it is hardly an adequate response to the serious issues that we all face. The £100 million that has been committed by the Government has been welcomed. I welcomed it because I asked the Government to release it, but all through the summer it refused to do so, then it did so through pressure. There are hard questions around that £100 million. The housing minister confirmed that £40 million of it has not yet been agreed. The Government has to understand the consequences of the anxiety that that creates. I do not have time to go into all the housing issues, but I urge the Government to listen—if not to me, then to the housing sector, which says that the Government's core approach is damaging. If the Government has the stature to reverse its decision in "Firm Foundations: The Future of Housing in Scotland", it will have our support. I return in my last minute to social justice. The minister might wish to reflect on the article in Third Force News that highlights the anxieties of the voluntary sector about what is happening to the fairer Scotland fund, which has, of course, been cut. The sector says that it is being squeezed out of the social inclusion process. We all know how important that process is to housing in particular. I urge the Scottish Government not just to assert its commitment to equality and social justice, but to show its seriousness, if not in response to me then to the serious people in the sector. Its budget decisions and programme for government should show that, unlike the First Minister, it understands the absolute centrality of economic and social factors in determining Government action.

The member may have more information than I do on the subject. The report on the pilot was due to be published in June. Does he have any idea when we will see the findings?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary explain why house builders told me before the summer about their fear that house builders south of the border had an economic advantage because of the positive measures that the Labour Government there—[ Interruption. ] They told me that. The SNP was forced to react by taking the decision that it took. It is nonsense to suggest that the SNP's measures are being copied.

When the First Minister announced that £100 million would be available to address housing issues, was he aware that there was no guarantee that that money had been secured? That was confirmed last night by the Minister for Communities and Sport, who conceded that £40 million was still being discussed with COSLA. Given the importance of social rented housing, will Mr Salmond listen to what the housing sector is saying and jettison the approach that is at the core of "Firm Foundations: The Future of Housing in Scotland", which involves housing associations being forced into the private market at a time of risk and increased rents? If the First Minister wants to address the issue of housing, will he work with housing associations and others, instead of attacking them?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland will be reconvened and what support will be put in place for it. (S3O-3927)

It might have been appropriate for the minister to apologise for the impact on people with disabilities of his original decision to abolish MACS. He was so driven by a narrow agenda on public bodies that he disregarded his basic equality responsibilities. Will he reflect on the fact that it was fortunate that parliamentary scrutiny was needed, as MACS would otherwise have been dumped, regardless of the damage that that would have caused? One wonders what other decisions have been made without such scrutiny. Given that experience, what action will the minister take to ensure that equality responsibilities are taken more seriously in other areas? For example, will he commit his Government to ensuring that no single outcome agreement is signed off unless evidence is provided that an equality impact assessment has been completed?

I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of her statement. I recognise that there was a lot in it, particularly about people who face repossession and so on, with which we can all agree. I look forward to further debate in committee on some of the detailed issues of the housing policy, including homelessness, that the statement could not address. I recognise, as the cabinet secretary said, that "Firm Foundations" secured support for some of its proposals, but ultimately it did not secure support for its key proposals. The document is troubling because, despite assertions, it did not respond to the coherent opposition to the central proposition around the role of housing associations in particular and developing that agenda. "Firm Foundations" was unconvincing when it was first published, and the changing context of the current housing circumstances mean that it is now well past its sell-by date. The current housing circumstances present a huge challenge to the United Kingdom Government and the Scottish Administration, to which I hope that the cabinet secretary will rise.  I note in passing that the £2,000 grant for first-time buyers is now officially dead, and that the cabinet secretary has had sufficient sense to back off slightly from the single developer model and will consult further on it. I urge her to hold on to the option of jettisoning that model altogether. Regrettably, the key notion of driving efficiencies into housing associations remains, despite the strongly expressed views of housing associations and others that that will expose them to risk in the financial markets, will result in increasing rents and potentially will involve a raid on their reserves, which we all know should be used for the good maintenance of properties and to ensure that they meet the Scottish housing quality standard. I have three specific questions for the cabinet secretary. First, she said: "We will work to ensure that house building is best placed to grow again when market conditions recover." Does she acknowledge that private sector house builders and housing associations now argue that housing associations have a critical role to play as an anchor for the whole housing sector, in order to sustain the house building sector while conditions remain as they are? I urge her to reflect on how she might use the housing associations creatively—giving them more resource, not less—in order to provide that anchor. Secondly, what targets has she set for social rented housing in different areas of Scotland? Given the fact that home ownership is not now going to be an option, the fact that repossession is a genuine possibility for some, and the level of homelessness, I am interested to know what her targets are. Thirdly, does the cabinet secretary recognise the disappointment that many housing associations in Glasgow feel because her signalled commitment to independent scrutiny of the Mazars report—which would give confidence to the GHA and to those housing organisations—has not been honoured? Does she acknowledge the significance of having public confidence in that matter? Given the role of public moneys in the work of the GHA, will she at least take responsibility by convening the meetings between the GHA and housing associations?

I have said elsewhere that they require supervised contact. Will she consider convening those meetings to ensure that the progress on which she is insisting is realised?

I am concerned that the minister suggested that the Government is  inhibited by the timescale for the evaluation of the schemes in England and Wales. Is it not possible for the Government to consult on a series of options? That would give the proposal momentum and drive it forward. The minister seems to be posing difficulties without offering solutions.

I may have the wrong information, so will the minister clarify when the group last met and when it will meet again?

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Claire Baker on securing the debate. In doing so, I reflect on the frustrations of falling on hard times, since the words that were quoted earlier were said when I was in a position to make  decisions rather than only urge the minister to do so. It is important to congratulate groups such as Shelter, the NUS and Citizens Advice Scotland that persist in highlighting a range of issues that they want us to take up—I am grateful for the written and verbal briefings that were provided today. I also congratulate the constituents who continue to bring cases to us. As Jim Tolson said, the problem with deposits affects not only students. The problem is largely invisible, but it can cause great difficulties for vulnerable members of our communities. It is right that the Government should respond to it in the context of communities issues. In a previous life, I was a schoolteacher, and I am always looking for object lessons. The proposal in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 for a mandatory deposit scheme was an object lesson in how the Parliament can work effectively. We hear a lot of talk about consensus. There is a huge amount of rewriting of the history of this Parliament, but we built consensus around a number of significant issues. The proposal was not originally included in the legislation as introduced to Parliament. It was the work of committees and members of all parties, supported by groups outside the Parliament, that put it on the political agenda. Members of all parties reflected on the scheme, and Christine Grahame, Tricia Marwick, Lib Dems and Labour members—I cannot remember the Tory position—all pursued the matter with me as the then Deputy Minister for Communities. They raised it with me not to gain party advantage, but because they believed that it needed to be done. At stage 2, the decision was taken that the proposal as it had emerged was to be supported. Nobody claimed victory or said that there were U-turns, but a little bit of political business was done to ensure that we could take it forward. Acting in that way was important, because it gave a message about the importance of the Parliament's walls being breached by those who really understood how policy should be developed. I hope that Government back benchers will recognise their role in challenging their own front bench members. If I were still the minister, and if I were operating at the pace of the current Minister for Communities and Sport, I would not wait to be chided by the Opposition to act—Labour's own back benchers have a record of doing that. It has been said that we need research and consultation, but there is concern about the pace. I understand that the working group that was set up has met only once since May. I understand the need for research, but there must be action.  The argument has been made that we already have landlord accreditation and registration, but we cannot be in a position where the argument is that if everything cannot be done, nothing can be done. Mr Maxwell has my permission to disregard the commitments that I have made and to act more quickly. Stuart McMillan identified problems with the scheme down south—in that case, other options should be consulted on. We need a driver and a commitment. The private sector has an important role to play, particularly in times of credit crunch, in meeting housing needs and homelessness targets. The landlord sector needs to be open and transparent, and we want the sector itself to recognise the damage that has been done to its reputation. Good landlords have nothing to fear. I urge the minister to recognise that simple steps should be taken, such as bringing forward a timetable and committing to a mandatory scheme. We will ensure that there is consensus in the Parliament in dealing with consultation in parliamentary committees and in our communities. That will give students and families confidence as they make decisions about their accommodation ahead of the academic year. The important small step of building consensus in the Parliament will make a difference in our communities. I urge the minister to make the commitment tonight.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Minister for Parliamentary Business predicated his argument for withdrawing the motion on the basis that the financial memorandum needs to be further clarified. Clearly, if there was a debate, it did not reach a satisfactory conclusion on which members could decide. How is it possible for a serious member of Parliament to vote on a bill without willing the means for its delivery through the financial resolution?

At yesterday's meeting of the Local Government and Communities Committee, one of the minister's officials explained to members that to deal with the cuts in housing association grant, housing associations should look to their reserves. Is Argyll Community Housing Association scaremongering when it explains that because it is a debt-funded registered social landlord, it has no free reserves to subsidise HAG? It has said: "If these proposals are to be implemented, it would appear the association could only get access to HAG by increasing its rents by over £20 a week." Is that what this Government describes as better housing that is accessible to those in need?

I, too, declare an interest as an unwilling beneficiary of the bonus scheme. I investigated whether it was possible to leave the money in the public purse, rather than keep it in my office, which was entirely reasonable, no matter how high the quality of the service presided over by my office. I am concerned by the Government's approach to the small business bonus scheme, which is in sharp contrast to its approach to other areas of expenditure. I am not anti-business—I am in close contact with businesses in my community—but it is the job of Government to reward good business and not simply to give a blanket reward to all business.  John Swinney recently explained that the small business bonus scheme could help those businesses in Edinburgh that are suffering disruption as a consequence of the Edinburgh tram scheme. Of course, that proves my point. It would reward them in the same way that it rewards absolutely every business. The Government asserts that it is prudent and that it seeks best value and efficiency. On the evidence, it does not apply any of those qualities to the scheme. That is in stark contrast to other areas. Only this morning, in the Local Government and Communities Committee, we heard housing associations' concerns about Government strategy. Housing associations say that they will be driven out into the private sector.

It is clear that any Government expenditure has to be targeted, justified and evaluated if that Government is to be prudent in its approach. This morning, in the face of those concerns from housing associations, we were told by an official that we need to make money work harder and go further. Remarkably, that approach is not applied to the small business bonus scheme and we must ask why it is now being honoured in the breach. Gain is asserted without evidence. I cannot imagine any business saying that it does not want rates relief, but perhaps we could do other things to support businesses so that they thrive. The scheme involves no conditions, no driving up of standards and no reward for good practices; all businesses are rewarded the same. That lets down businesses that are connected and committed to communities, seek to employ local people, provide a safe environment for them to work in, offer good services and engage with the community. I can understand that there is a debate about the merits of the SNP's approach as against other approaches. If we were to target support, how would we do it? If conditions were to be applied, which would they be? However, it is surely remarkable that the SNP claims that it will evaluate spending for which it has no baseline, for which there are no constraints on whether and how money is spent, and for which there are no targets or goals, simply a remarkable faith that all businesses everywhere will do the right thing. That faith does not apply to other critical operators in our communities and the Government needs to think about that again. The reason why I find such laissez-faire largesse so remarkable is the context in which the choice was made. The Government has actively  chosen to spend £305 million on the scheme over three years with no conditions, but a lot of crossing of fingers. At the same time, it is thirled to cuts in taxes and charges that, by 2010-11, will take £434 million out of the Scottish budget, which will have a cost for our capacity to deliver services. The bonus scheme is without conditions, which is in stark contrast to our being reminded time and again of the tightness of the budget. Yesterday, the Minister for Communities and Sport, Stewart Maxwell, said that child poverty is morally unacceptable and claimed that he had to fight poverty with one hand tied behind his back. It is easy to reduce every challenging policy issue to an opportunity to make a constitutional point, even if it is depressing. It is another example of government by alibi. We must assert that ministers should not simply tell us what they cannot do and what powers they would like but must be held accountable for what they do and how they use the powers that they have. Government back benchers need to seek more justification for how the powers over business rates are being used and what that says about the Government's priorities. The fairer Scotland fund to tackle deprivation is being cut in real terms; projects to support communities in employment, child care, training and education—the ways in which our poorest people can get into work—are being cut; the Government is pressing down on community planning and local government budgets to improve efficiencies and best value with consequent and often invisible impact on the most vulnerable and claims that we cannot spend money everywhere. What a contrast it is that that experience in local communities, which goes far beyond tough love, is not matched by any rigour in addressing the needs of business; instead, we are expected to rely on blind faith. I recognise that members who have expertise on the operation of business say that the scheme might work. It might, but we should apply the same test across the board. The scheme might be the Government's approach, but it is not a pain-free choice. The Government must answer the charge that the way in which it treats different parts of its budget is inconsistent and unfair. It is not good enough to say without any explanation that we need tax cuts and leave other people to live with the consequences. It is entirely reasonable to ask the Government and its back benchers to justify its choices and be honest about how it can evaluate the scheme in the way in which we expect other organisations that spend public money to justify their spending.

The minister said that, as a listening Government, it received the message from the business community that what was happening was a disincentive. Is he aware that the housing association movement regards the Government's actions as a disincentive to their development? Will he make representations to his ministerial colleagues to think again about the cuts to the housing association grant?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this serious debate. It is important to build consensus, but it is simply wrong to suggest that that has not been done in the past, because there is huge evidence that it has been done. The Minister for Community Safety said in his statement to the Parliament last week that there was a concern because of the terrible health inequalities that afflict Scotland. Of course, the bigger challenge is the inequalities that exist within Scotland. We know that many young people experiment with drugs, but the reality is that communities that experience disadvantage and deprivation lose their children to drugs and the accompanying death toll disproportionately. Those communities understand that. Yes, we have to have a person-centred approach, but we also have to have a community-centred approach. We cannot simply say that that is what happens in such communities; we must listen to people in those communities who suffer as a consequence of drugs being taken and we must take account of the impact on the broader community. Regardless of whether people in those communities take drugs themselves, they see the impact on their schools, health centres and the very fabric of their neighbourhoods. The life chances of their children can be determined by our inability to address the consequence of drugs. It is therefore important for the minister to reaffirm that the Scottish index of multiple deprivation will remain a key driver in distributing resources across a range of services in order properly to meet need. Of course, there are always those who wish to create the impression that the debate around drugs is somehow about opposites—that it is either maintenance or abstinence—but I acknowledge that the minister confirmed that the Government's strategy does not seek to come down on one side or the other in that way. However, I believe that talking about targets drives action by those who are charged with the responsibility for supporting people who have a drug problem. In that regard, will the minister consider setting one target in particular, on the level of methadone use? Does he accept that meeting such a target would indicate the success of the strategy? There are huge challenges around the issue of hidden harm. It is a scandal that the torch is shone on the lives that some of our children live only by those who are raising issues about antisocial behaviour in their communities. Only then do we learn about some of the experiences that too many of our children have, and that is wrong. We have a strategy for young carers, but we do not say often enough that too many of those young  people are caring for adults who have addiction problems and that that is inappropriate. I urge the minister to confirm that he will place the drug strategy in the broader context of the Administration's policies on education, housing, employment, justice and enforcement. I know that there are anxieties locally about projects that support people into work and which work by addressing those problems. I note the strategy document on drugs. However, if the minister resources families that have experienced a problem with drugs to talk about what needs to be done in our communities to address the broader problems that are faced there, there will be a large return for that effort. Therefore, I want to know what support there is for family support projects. Further, I want to know that schools will not only provide education, but will be places in which the teachers and staff identify children who are in need; schools should be the first place in which it is seen that a child is not being nurtured. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has described the skills strategy as demand led—does it still have a place for those with drug and addiction problems, for whom employment is an important bridge? I ask the minister to respond to the comments that were made about the power of Crimestoppers to use proceeds-of-crime money in the communities in which it was harvested to give people a voice. I know constituents who whisper on the telephone in case people hear them and think that they are talking to the police. I urge the minister to support Crimestoppers and other initiatives that give a voice to those who are most intimidated by the consequences of drug problems in our communities.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of clarification, "The Road to Recovery" and the minister say that, above all, recovery is about "movement and dynamism". What does that mean? In addition, if the Government's policy is person centred—it is probably right to be—does the minister envisage circumstances in which individuals could remain on a maintenance programme that involves methadone, for example, without a time limit?

I congratulate Angela Constance on securing a debate on this critical issue. A couple of months ago, I had the privilege of holding the launch of the "'No Recourse' No Safety" report in the Scottish Parliament. A significant number of MSPs here now, and others, attended to hear at first hand about experiences of the problems that are faced by women in such circumstances, and by the groups that are trying to  support them. They also heard how women are caught up in the situations that lead to the dire straits that have been described. I commend Amnesty International, Southall Black Sisters, Scottish Women's Aid and all the women's organisations, which can as ever teach us all a lesson or two in how to bring an issue to public attention and demand that action be taken. I welcomed and appreciated in Angela Constance's speech and motion the recognition of the previous Executive's work on the matter. The whole Parliament has ownership of that work, because it was shaped by the Parliament. The reality of that work is that change has emerged because over many years, women across all sorts of divides in the United Kingdom and far beyond have redefined what politics is about, so that issues of violence against women have become a matter for Governments and for political action. We should not forget the need to challenge male behaviour and male attitudes and to hold men to account. While we raise such issues, I hope that the minister will reassure us that he will consider closely the report of the Women's Support Project on the attitudes of men who use prostitutes and the connections between those attitudes, male violence and trafficking. Those men can carry in their heads the notion that although those women might have been trafficked, using them is legitimate. That report is important and reflects on the context of the problems that we experience. We must recognise the courage of survivors who have spoken out against male violence in all its forms and who have exposed not only their individual experience, but the pattern of the problem, which Government action at every level must address. It is clear that the Government alone cannot at every level deliver justice and equality for women, or address issues of violence against women. It is important to give a voice to those who are most vulnerable and to those who understand the need for action and want to shape the action of government at every level. It is right that the organisations that have emerged to meet the challenge of violence against women have been, and—I am glad to say—continue to be, at the centre of government action. By talking to those who really understand the situation, we will take the correct action. Issues of violence against women provide as powerful an example as any of the challenge to the Government to shape policy not from the top down, but through the experience of individuals and through groups. I am grateful that the Executive has continued that approach. I welcome the minister's decision to establish a short-life working group to address the questions.  Like everybody here, he has resisted the temptation to transplant the discussion into a debate about powers. He has recognised that powers are shared and that responsibility for making progress is also shared. I commend him for what he has done and I welcome and look forward to a report. I assure him that Labour members will do everything they can, as I am sure all members will, to secure support for action to meet and address need and to challenge the problems that are highlighted effectively in "'No Recourse' No Safety" and by the organisations that have been mentioned.

Will the minister give way?

On parliamentary accountability and building support for the SNP's policies, the Parliament has twice voted against a central tenet of the "Firm Foundations" document on housing. We have said that we oppose it, but the minister has described that opposition as  "absurd". Does the member agree that if the SNP needs to build support, the minister should respond to that opposition and adapt her policy accordingly?

As the Scottish Parliament heads towards the summer recess, we have an opportunity to reflect on a year with the SNP in charge, albeit as a minority Government. I was disappointed by the self-congratulatory tone of the motion, but I was even more disappointed—if not surprised—by Alex Salmond's speech when he presented his moving Scotland forward proposals to the Parliament. It was as heavy on self-regard as it was light on tackling issues of substance for the people of Scotland. This time last year, much play was being made of the exciting new opportunities that minority government would present, not just to the party in power but to the Opposition parties. It seemed evident that the new Administration would, of necessity, have to negotiate to set the budget or get its programme and policies through Parliament: co-operation, discussion and compromise would be the order of the day and the Government's approach would be tempered by the views of the Parliament as a whole. The Opposition would be expected to resist the temptation simply to be oppositional and instead would seek consensus where possible. In the first eight years of the Parliament, we had a coalition Government. It is a feature of coalitions that parties must negotiate and seek compromise. An example of that was the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, on which there was a huge consensus throughout Parliament on the balance that we struck. In those days, the SNP was opposed to that balance because it was too pro-development. Now that the SNP is in government and has new friends, however, things have changed. Despite the language of a year ago, the reality has been different. From early on, it became clear that with the support of the Government machine and with the authority of ministerial office, the SNP Administration was less interested in the reality of co-operation than it claimed. As I reflect on the year, it is clear to me that a feature of the Administration has been its disregard for, and lack of interest in, parliamentary accountability. It is a salutary lesson about how power works to witness just how far a party without a working majority in  Parliament can go in pursuing its interests and priorities once the power of office is granted to it. Interrogation of policy is dismissed as moaning; raising questions about funding is condemned as scaremongering; and the year-zero mentality persists. The examples of that disregard are too many to list. We have had reluctance to report to Parliament, dismissive responses to questions from MSPs and ignoring of Parliament's views on key policies. That is coupled with the return, in the figure of the First Minister, Alex Salmond, to the use of abuse, hostility and contempt as parliamentary weapons. Alex Salmond has brought with him from Westminster a political preference for vitriol over reason, boldly answering at length questions for which he has no responsibility, and denying this Parliament the information that it is rightly entitled to seek. The approach of the Administration is an unhappy reminder of the old Scottish Office as run by the Tories—executive power with little or no accountability, and no regard being given to the consequences of actions. This matters, because without proper parliamentary scrutiny, the Government will be left unhindered to its tax-cutting, trickle-down agenda. The people who most need Government action will be abandoned. On this side of the chamber, we understand the equation of economic growth and shared prosperity, and at the heart of Labour members' concerns is the silence of the First Minister on those issues. In his speech, there was nothing about discrimination, inequality or social justice. From other ministers, we get assertion and rhetoric but we do not get action. The sharp distinction between what ministers care about and what they do not care about is obvious in their certainty over tax cuts and in their uncertainty over funding and delivery of services. We have seen the ending of programmes such as closing the opportunity gap, which has done the hard practical work of delivering opportunity in our communities. During the debate on drugs this morning, when he was pressed on resources to help drug users or to help communities that are under the cosh from drug dealers, Fergus Ewing told us that he could not just throw money at the problem. However, when it comes to the small business bonus scheme, that is precisely what the Government has done, with not one condition attached. The budget was focused on extracting money—money that should be directed at public investment in services—in order to fund cuts in taxes and charges. It has been estimated that there will be a shift of a stunning £434 million per annum by 2011. We see the cynicism of a Government that pretends to preside over a social democratic  process, but has an Irish taxation model. It is a deceit and everyone knows it. The budget has been criticised by equality groups for its lack of transparency. Even an equality statement, the purpose of which was to establish the real impact of policy—as opposed to the claimed impact of policy—on disadvantaged groups, was simply factually wrong. Opposition to the Government's housing proposals were dismissed by the Deputy First Minister as "absurd", despite the fact that it was the housing association movement that provided the critique. As for consequentials of £34 million for the families of disabled children, the money has disappeared. Elsewhere in the United Kingdom, children and families are benefiting, but the money has gone from here and no one can explain where it is. The minister will not even talk to local authorities about the issues that underpinned the funding. The Government is quick to claim credit, to assert that it is acting, and to claim that it is listening. However, in reality it is cynical in pursuing its goal of preparing this country to exit the United Kingdom. That explains the silence of the back benchers. The Government is quick to find an alibi and to refuse to take responsibility. It is not governing, but is instead preparing for its constitutional obsessions. It should reconsider what it claims is a "programme". It should do this Parliament and the people of Scotland a favour, and start acting in their interests rather than in its own.

We are used to the First Minister being voluble in answering questions for which he has no responsibility. Will he perhaps answer a question for which he has responsibility? He will be aware that there are real-term cuts to the fuel poverty programmes funded by the Government. Will he reverse that decision and enhance the programmes in order to support those who are affected by the rise in fuel prices?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met Glasgow City Council and what issues were discussed. (S3O-3549)

When the minister met those Glasgow City Council representatives, did she discuss with them the huge overrepresentation of young people with disabilities among people who are not in employment, education or training? That was highlighted in the aiming high for disabled children programme, which brought £34 million to the Scottish Executive's coffers, as the minister will recall. Can she outline what action she is taking specifically to support that group of people through her skills strategy? How can that action be secured in Glasgow, given the cut in the city council's education budget of more than £8 million this year?

I thank the cabinet secretary for sight of her statement, and for the review, which I hope the Local Government and Communities Committee  will consider in more detail, to afford us a proper opportunity to understand its message. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that her statement represents a significant shift in the Scottish Government's approach? I suspect that a civil servant somewhere might even have described it as "brave". It appears to fly in the face of the First Minister's commitment when he was challenged last year over whether the universal central heating programme was going to end. He said that it was not going to end, and that it was going to be enhanced. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the Government's position is now that the central heating programme and its availability to all pensioners are now at an end? Although I welcome the establishment of the fuel poverty forum under the wise chairmanship of Graham Blount, will the minister confirm that the forum's job is to consider how to target, that it is for her Government to decide whether it should target, and that that decision has already been made? The statement tells us about a lot of things that the Government cannot do, but I want to ask about the things that it can do. Given the difficult circumstances with rising fuel prices, why has the Government flatlined the budget for the central heating and warm deal programmes rather than increasing it? The Government hands out £165 million per year to small businesses without attaching one condition, so why has it taken the view that the only way to target those who are in fuel poverty is to remove the entitlement from pensioners in general? Finally, I have to ask about an issue of detail. Will the cabinet secretary clarify two small points about what happens now with the programme? What is the difference between a pensioner who is currently on the list and someone whose application is in the post and will be received tomorrow? What is the difference between a tenant who lives in a private sector flat whose central heating system has finally conked out and someone who does not have a central heating system at all, and what is the difference between how cold those two pensioners will feel?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is putting in place to measure the effectiveness of the small business bonus scheme and how this will be reported. (S3O-3341)

Will the minister confirm that there are no conditions attached to the scheme, other than someone having a small business; that there are no incentives for good practice, for  example training local staff, recycling or anything else; and that there are no expectations of this significant Government funding, other than that people will apply for it? Has an equality impact assessment been conducted on the policy measure? What did it find? Will the minister confirm that, given his Executive's alleged commitment to equalities, it is not sufficient simply to evaluate something on the basis of crossing our fingers and hoping for the best? Will he confirm that we need hard measures, and that we need to know what the scheme is intended to deliver and whether it has delivered what ministers claim for it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is a matter of regret that I have to raise with you that this morning the Minister for Communities and Sport, Stewart Maxwell, misled the chamber in his statement on equality. The minister's statement claimed, in relation to the abolition of the graduate endowment fee, that it will benefit "particularly those on lower incomes, such as disabled people and lone parents". However, the policy memorandum for the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill, which I presume the minister has read, says: "Not all Scottish and non-UK EU students are liable to pay the GE. There are a number of exemptions, including lone parents and those who are in receipt of the Disabled Students' Allowance". I seek your guidance on what action you can take and, through you, ask the First Minister to deal with that evident breach of the ministerial code and to instruct his minister to come to the chamber as soon as possible to explain why he misled Parliament and to clarify his statement.

I thank the minister for making his statement available to us this morning. It reflects the broad range of issues that an equality strategy has to address; they are significant matters and I hope that the Equal Opportunities Committee will consider them further so that we can have a further debate on them in the chamber. Assertion and aspiration in relation to equalities is one thing, but delivery can be different, and that is where the budget becomes crucial to the identification of any patterns of inequality, and we must follow the money to see whether the aspirations can be delivered. The minister will be aware of concerns about the Government's retrograde step in its budget, given the absence of an overarching equalities statement and equality impact assessments in the portfolio spending proposals. Will the minister confirm that the next budget will address those flaws, and can he outline what action is currently being taken to ensure that that happens? Will the minister explain his understanding of the purpose of an equality impact assessment, given that, for example, the controversial decision has been made to merge the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland with the Public Transport Users Committee but the equality impact assessment is being done only now, with a report to be produced at an as yet unspecified time? Will the minister outline what action the Scottish  Government will take to ensure that single outcome agreements are equality impact assessed before they are agreed? The minister said in his statement that he expects that local authorities will ensure that equalities are addressed in the agreements, but how will he ensure that? What equalities elements, if any, are compulsory parts of single outcome agreements? What action will the Government take if its expectations of single outcome agreements are not realised?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with local authorities about the issue of environmental justice. (S3O-3193)

Does the minister acknowledge the anxiety in some quarters that environmental issues are viewed as a rural rather than an urban issue? That is despite the fact that urban areas such as the one that I represent have suffered disproportionately from environmental depredation—large-scale and due to living with the consequences of, for example, disorder. Will the minister confirm whether the environmental justice budget still exists, which was introduced to address that matter? What funding is available to address environmental issues in urban communities, and what share of the environment budget is directed at dealing with communities that have to live with bad-neighbour development?

Will the minister confirm that he will match—plus inflation—the £501 million that the previous Executive provided in housing association grant in its final year?

Will the member take an intervention?

I appreciate what Bob Doris is saying about the challenge that the Mazars report presents: it provides compelling evidence, which should be studied. Will he join me in urging the minister to ensure that people can have confidence that there will be an independent scrutiny process? That process ought not to go to the regulator, but he knows as well as I do that some people are in despair that that might be where it goes. Will he work to find a process by which there can be genuine independent scrutiny of the challenging issues that he has raised?

It might be helpful if the member clarified his understanding of his party's policy. How many houses will be affected by the change to the right to buy? If his party's hostility to right to buy is so strong, why does his minister not advocate its total abolition?

Will the member give way?

I note what the member says about the dash for numbers and I agree with him on that. However, one of our main criticisms of Government housing policy is that, in setting a target of 35,000, it may get the numbers but not meet the needs that have been identified. Does the member agree that the minister should indicate his target for social rented housing, within the overall target of 35,000 to ensure that the Government does not get into the position that the member described of having built the houses but not met the need?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Oh, sit down.

You are on record as saying that you recognise the role of the housing associations. Do you recognise that it is not partisan to reflect their concerns about the implications of "Firm Foundations" for community-based housing associations?

As ever, it is a privilege for me to open the debate on behalf of the Labour Party. It follows on from last week's woeful performance by members on the Government front and back benches. That housing debate was marked by their refusal to answer any of the key questions or to give any indication that they had any awareness of the range and importance of the issues that need to be addressed. [ Laughter. ] If the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change finds that amusing, I suspect that he will not find anybody from the housing sector to join him. The lack of time for that previous debate allowed ministers to equivocate. It was evident to us that the Government was unwilling to address the issues. It would not even provide any time to debate the matter, despite the empty, stretching prairie of time—peppered by stopgap debates and marginal issues—that forms the Government's business programme. We have had three Government debates or statements on housing. On 21 June 2007, the announcement of the housing supply task force came with a huge fanfare, only for us to discover later that the body will not report; that it was not being consulted on the budget; that, remarkably, it would not even shape planning policy, which is designed to address the relationship between planning and the provision of affordable housing; and that it was not being consulted on the revision of Scottish planning policy 3. On 26 September 2007, a debate on the Glasgow Housing Association was initiated and important issues about the inspection report were addressed. The Government indicated that it would progress second-stage transfer. Nicola Sturgeon said that ministers would "review the current suite of grant agreements that are in place".— [ Official Report , 26 September 2007; c 2089.]  Will the minister say, in summing up, when we will get a report on that?

I hope that the cabinet secretary does not live to regret that. The issue is really difficult. I do not support the SNP amendment—although I will be interested to hear the Minister for Communities and Sport speak to it—but I welcome its commitment to scrutinise the Mazars report using an independent process. I urge that that should be done by people with expertise in valuation and adjudication in order for confidence to be restored. I am delighted that rent-a-quote Alex Neil's notion of a black hole is refuted by the report. It is incumbent on ministers to ensure that such issues are scrutinised properly. On 31 October 2007, we had the spectacle of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing being refused the option of sharing with the Parliament her approach on "Firm Foundations" because, unhappily, she had already shared it with the press. That has been the Government's approach in a nutshell. It overclaims and underdelivers; it seeks headlines rather than solutions; and, rather than engaging in consensus building on the big issues, it settles for either silence or playing games. It is impossible for me to cover the huge number of issues that have been raised, but I will touch on some that I think are significant. I thank all those people who have taken the time to treat the debate on this subject sufficiently seriously and to provide us with briefings, particularly on the issues around the specialist provision of housing, which I believe merit a debate on their own. The motion seeks to capture the challenge of any strategy on housing. Indeed, it could have included more on energy efficiency and building standards. For me, however, the key lesson that even laying out those issues confirms is that, although housing policy must be about bricks and mortar, it cannot only be about that. That is why many people are anxious about the Government's approach. In effect, the Government has boiled down its aspirations to building 35,000 houses without thinking through the range of needs that must be met, with no target for social renting and not even a commitment to build as many homes as we did in the past eight years; with no thought on how to sustain that investment by putting in  place and supporting community regeneration; with nothing to say about meeting housing need in a way that goes beyond the house itself—with support for the elderly in the community, for people leaving care, and for those who wish to move on from women's refuges; and with nothing to say about funding decisions, which creates uncertainty at best for those who wish to support, for example, adults with learning disabilities to live independently. Our history tells us that, although national house building programmes might provide houses, they do not necessarily do the rest. How will the Government support the delivery of the homelessness target? How will it protect programmes to prevent homelessness? What expectations does the Minister for Communities and Sport have of the single outcome agreements? Are there any compulsory elements in meeting special and particular housing needs and in supporting progress towards the homelessness target? How will the Government act if there is evidence that supported accommodation, such as that for adults with disabilities, has to end because of the end of ring fencing for supporting people?

I only ask the question. The minister has said in the past that, if there were problems, we could always resume ring fencing. How is that being monitored? What action will he take? We understand the pressure to support first-time buyers, although we are no clearer about what support will be available. What does the minister have to say not just about new build, but about the raising of standards through the Scottish housing quality standard? What does he have to say about the need to support people who might face repossession and about emphasising the target for social rent? What does he have to say about programmes such as ours that were introduced for mortgage to rent? How will the Government support councils with high levels of debt, which will not be able to take advantage of their tiny share of the tiny £25 million for council house building? The figure for the money that is being released through stock transfer to housing associations is staggering. The GHA's investment programme for 2006-07 was £137 million, which is about one third of the total affordable investment programme that the SNP projects for the whole of Scotland for the year ahead. The provision of GHA new build—6,000 new homes over the next five years—makes a stark comparison with Ms Sturgeon's announcement, which would mean at most 50 houses for Glasgow in the next five years.

The money is top-sliced off housing association grant, so it is not additional. It takes a particular kind of cowardice and recklessness for people to encourage others to vote against their own interests when they do not have to live with the consequences. That is compounded by a Government that refuses to accept its responsibility to find solutions. For the absence of doubt, the Stewart Maxwell solution is to raise rents, sell off assets and seek efficiencies, which could be the very expenditure that protects effective housing management. I urge the minister to look to his Cabinet colleague John Swinney for guidance on how he should fulfil his responsibilities. John Swinney, in discussing his decision to be pragmatic in relation to the collection of rates in the context of local loop unbundling—members really do not want to know the detail—said that ministers were operating within a framework in which the Government was constrained in the policy areas that it was able to take forward. He explained that his pragmatism was justified, because the Government's priority is to maximise the resources that are available to local authorities for delivering front-line services. How much pragmatism should we expect from the Government in acting creatively to access the funding that stock transfer would deliver, when the only other option on offer to tenants is a shrug of the ministerial shoulders? The Government's only big idea, "Firm Foundations", is significantly flawed, and the objections to it—as argued by a range of organisations—are not so easily silenced as by deleting part of a parliamentary motion. I urge the minister not to dig himself into a trench on the issue. There are genuine anxieties that the only real outcome of his approach will be to bring to an end the very things that made our housing policy so effective. [ Laughter. ] Does that reaction mean that ministers are mocking the housing associations' record? They might be interested to know that. Such an outcome would put at risk the innovative approaches in estate management, the support for tenants and the specialist provision that has been developed by those who need it. It must be an anxiety for the Government that equality groups did not even respond to its consultation. The problem with "Firm Foundations" is compounded by the consultation document, "Better value from Housing Association Grant". The documents reveal a lack of understanding about effective housing provision going beyond build; they lack evidence on efficiencies; and they are predicated on a process that will squeeze out community-based housing associations to the advantage of the asset-rich big boys. They are also predicated on rent rises, a claim that the  minister has denied in the past, although his own documents indicate that the policy depends on rent increases at the level of the retail prices index plus 1 per cent every year for the next 30 years, and that the private finance factor in development must increase from 18.14 per cent to 21.76 per cent, which is a push to the private market at a time of credit crunch. That is further compounded by the flat-lining of funding on wider action that might support tenants as they go into training or provide money advice, and by the flat-lining of—if not a cut in—community regeneration funding. It is significant that there was overwhelming support for a national specialist housing function to provide expert support on the range of housing needs. The peremptory decision to abolish Communities Scotland to meet other political commitments seems to have been counterintuitive and against the addressing of housing need. On "Firm Foundations", I urge the minister to have the grace to listen to those who understand what needs to be done. On stock transfer, I urge the minister to stop being in denial and instead to be creative in how that money can be released to transform local communities. On meeting homelessness and housing needs, I urge him to take responsibility. The minister should stop outsourcing his responsibilities and tell us what he will do to ensure that the target is met and that the resources are available, not just to ensure supply but to provide the kind of softer-end supports that prevent homelessness in the first place—the kind of things that support people when they come out of care or are in crisis. Above all, I urge the minister to shift from his year-zero approach and to acknowledge the significance of what has already been achieved—not by the previous Executive alone, but by it being willing to work with people in our communities and in the housing sector who understand how one can transform communities and make real change. I seek support to secure continuing investment in change—rather than settling for the easy headline that will make no difference to the lives of people across Scotland who deserve to have their needs met. That should be part of a serious debate on housing and a broader housing strategy. Last week, we heard the reiteration of marginal, tokenistic—symbolic perhaps for some members—and dishonest claims about what the Government is doing in respect of council housing and right to buy. Now is the time for the Government to take responsibility and work with members throughout the chamber and beyond to develop a proper housing policy that will bring about change rather than simply make headlines. I move, That the Parliament recognises the broad range of issues that must be tackled in meeting the diverse housing needs  of people across Scotland; confirms that the Scottish Government must act to address these issues, including continued work to prevent and reduce homelessness, the further development of housing to meet particular and specialist need, dealing with the blockages to the supply of housing, providing affordable housing to buy and within the socially rented sector, ensuring higher quality and better managed housing for rent in the private sector, seeking solutions to the problems facing local authorities where tenants voted against stock transfer and recognising the distinctive challenges in rural areas, regeneration areas and areas of high demand; notes that the consultation responses to the Firm Foundations document exposed significant flaws in the Scottish Government's approach; urges the Scottish Government to address these flaws and bring forward a coherent strategy for all of Scotland's housing needs and, in particular, agrees that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing should ensure that the Mazars report into second stage transfer issues in Glasgow Housing Association is subject to open, transparent and independent scrutiny.

The Deputy First Minister might be aware of my constituent, Donna McLeish, who is currently a prisoner at Cornton Vale and is seven months pregnant. Does the Deputy First Minister share my concern that my constituent was shackled to a Reliance officer while attending Stirling royal infirmary for in-patient and out-patient appointments? Will the Deputy First Minister outline her Administration's position on the handcuffing of pregnant prisoners? What action is  she taking to address the matter with Reliance, the Scottish Prison Service and health boards?

That is the second time that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has accused me of muttering, which is not an accusation that has ever been laid at my door previously. The cabinet secretary may recall Rob Gibson's explanation of the Government's strategy on the voluntary sector—that it was a means of getting rid of the dross and dealing with the poverty industry. Will the cabinet secretary define "dross" and "the poverty industry"? Would he be willing to come to my constituency to meet local organisations that are experiencing funding cuts to tell them why those cuts are being made?

Is Jamie Hepburn, as a member of the SNP, proud to have urged people in Edinburgh to vote against stock transfer and now to have a Government minister who has said when there have been problems that rents should be put up, land should be sold, or jobs should be got rid of? Is the member proud of the response to those who voted no to stock transfer?

Your regional responsibilities include Inverclyde. Do you welcome the decision of people in Inverclyde to support stock transfer? Do you regret the campaign against it in other areas, where people will not receive the benefits?

I welcome this important debate. The intention of my amendment is to get the Government to focus on taking responsibility for its actions and delivering a housing strategy worthy of the name. It is most unfortunate that the Government makes assertions with no evidence whatsoever. We should be focusing and developing policy on a huge range of housing issues, such as affordability, homelessness and the needs of disabled people, but we are stuck with a Government that is more interested in spinning headlines than taking action. Over the past eight years, we built a real  consensus around the key issues and built 36,000 houses for social rent, but we now have a minister who will not even tell us what his target is, and who claims that his £25 million will go some way to addressing need. It is depressing that with this Administration we get assertion rather than action and headlines rather than creative solutions. Despite being instructed to do so, it cannot even say whether the £2,000 first-time buyers grant is in or out—it cannot say yes or no to that. Perhaps the minister will address that in his summing up. What is the Government's strategy? Despite the spin, Nicola Sturgeon acknowledged the role of housing associations in providing affordable houses, which will remain central. I am therefore at a loss to understand the distinction that the Government makes between council housing and housing that is built by housing associations and co-operatives. It is meaningless to say that we built only six council houses, given that we built 36,000 houses of a high standard for social rent. Despite what the Government says about supporting housing associations, the evidence is that there are going to be significant cuts to HAG. There is uncertainty in the sector because the minister will not even tell us what the allocations are. Housing associations are fearful of the consequences. They will have to borrow more at a time of volatility in the private markets, they will have to put up rents, they are unable to plan and they fear that development programmes will be halted. At the same time, the key strategy of the Government's "Firm Foundations" document, which has been widely criticised, is to drive efficiencies into housing associations—with no evidence about where the inefficiencies are—with a single developer model, which I am sure the minister will acknowledge has been criticised by the people who responded to the consultation. The minister has managed to create the impression that the sector that has been most successful in terms of housing strategy for the past 30 years has been living off the fat of the land. The Government is attacking the key element of the housing association movement, which is community ownership. I understand that the Government needs to address the discomfort of its own back benchers, given that £260 million is going unconditionally to businesses and that the Government is going to drive efficiencies into the housing association sector. We hear all the nonsense about the £25 million. In the last year of the previous Executive, £501 million was spent on addressing affordable housing issues. The £25 million is a nonsense. It cannot go to the local authorities that the SNP urged to vote against stock transfer, because of housing debt. The money is going to be top-sliced  off HAG and redistributed to areas that do not have the greatest housing need. The reality is that the Government is committed to not addressing the key issues of affordable housing and to keeping its own back benchers sweet. A moment's scrutiny shows that it is not doing what it is claiming to do on the right to buy. At the same time, it is flat-lining budgets for community regeneration and wider action. The Government is paralysed when it comes to making the hard decisions and addressing the real problems. It is settling for easy headlines that a moment's scrutiny shows to be nonsense. I move amendment S3M-1812.3, to leave out from "the failure" to end and insert: "that, following the parliamentary debate on 20 March 2008, ministers have not yet reported to the Parliament on the future of the £2,000 first-time buyers grant, despite the Parliament agreeing that they should, regrets that ministers have not yet reported to the Parliament on how the Scottish Government plans to respond to the consultation on Firm Foundations which identified serious criticisms of the Scottish Government's approach to housing; notes the critical role of housing associations and housing co-operatives in delivering affordable homes for rent; condemns the Minister for Communities and Sport for not yet announcing the allocation of Housing Association Grant, and reaffirms its view that the Scottish Government has no coherent housing strategy."

Will the minister give us a rough, ball-park figure for how many houses the Government expects to get out of its £25 million? Will he confirm that the announcement of 240 council houses for West Lothian is a direct result of the previous Executive's decision to change the rules on prudential borrowing?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Is the member aware that, in the advice from planning officials to the cabinet secretary, the position was made explicit. The advice sets out: "We had previously expected that the council would resolve to grant consent, thereby triggering notification". Clearly, John Swinney's response was to the fact that the application had been refused. That is shown in the advice that he received.

First, facts have been presented upon which all members of the committee agreed. Secondly, SNP members of the committee made no attempt to explain those agreed facts. Thirdly, does the member accept that the committee made it clear that it was not making a judgment on a development? Indeed, there was probably a range of views in the committee on the development. It is entirely legitimate for a committee of the Parliament to hold ministers to account.

I shall try and restore some calm to the chamber, because there are significant issues to address. I shall do that by starting with a concession to the SNP back benchers: the committee does not believe that there is evidence that Alex Salmond should be huckled off to the pokey. I do not know whether that is a terribly strong position for the Government to be in, but no one is pretending that the law has been broken. The issue is the quality of the judgment of the ministers involved in the process and the consequences that that has had. Members can rubbish the debate as much as they wish, but the fact is that serious people outside the chamber regard these matters as being of national significance and as having serious consequences. We must listen to those people. It was important for the committee to take on this job. We know that we have a First Minister who plays the person rather than the ball. We also know that we have a First Minister who resists answering any questions and is keen to blame everyone else for everything that happens on his watch. However, it is deeply depressing that that now seems to be elevated to a Government strategy. The role of committees in scrutinising the work of the Executive is a crucial part of Parliament's work and ought not to be rubbished as a waste of time. The day may come when SNP back benchers find themselves a spine and discover that a committee is a place to hold the  Executive to account, even if it is their own Government. Can members imagine the hyper-outrage of the SNP if, in previous years, there had been any suggestion that we ought not to ask questions or hold inquiries? However, that was then, and this is now. The reality is that the public are interested in the inquiry. Kenny Gibson welcomed it, and who could forget Alex Salmond bouncing into the committee to claim how delighted he was to be there? He was slightly less delighted when we suggested that perhaps his judgment was being called into question and he is slightly less happy now that he has discovered that he has to respond to a serious report about his behaviour. The Government likes administrative devolution and hates parliamentary scrutiny; it does what it can without accountability to the Parliament. It refuses to make statements, even when instructed to do so by the chamber. Government ministers are serial offenders, but I say to them that accountability goes with the territory. The performance by the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change in responding to a serious report gives me grave cause for concern. The central charges of the report are that the actions of the First Minister were "unwise and inappropriate" and that the actions of Mr Swinney were in danger of imperilling the development. Taken together, their actions send out the message to big business that it can have preferential access, that planning is for the little people and that the normal rules do not apply to it. I will not allow others in the chamber to misrepresent this issue as a divide between those who are pro-development and those who are against it or between those who are pro-business and those who are not. It is about how our planning system works and how it can support, develop and acknowledge the role of local communities in shaping those developments, which is clearly not easy. The key issue, which the First Minister himself accepted, is that the action of ministers has to pass the perception test. The feature of the challenges that the First Minister accepted was about the perception of his role. As has been alluded to already, our former First Minister was challenged on the perception of his role in this development—indeed, he was challenged on the perception of who he chose to go on holiday with. Everyone accepts that the perception test applies, so let us apply the perception test, as proposed by Nicola Sturgeon in the past. Imagine a First Minister—who accepts that he has never done such a thing in his life before, and who was not on ministerial business and was not  in his constituency—arriving somewhere in a ministerial car to meet, at short notice, following a decision of the local authority, representatives of the Trump Organization. He discusses matters with them, phones the chief planner and hands the phone over. A meeting is set up and, subsequently, a one-in-a-million decision is made. I have to say that, by this point in the imaginative exercise, Nicola Sturgeon would have been in the stratosphere. However, that was then; this is now. The First Minister's defence is that he was taking a precautionary approach. If that is the First Minister being cautious, heaven help us when the day comes when he decides to be reckless. Everyone on the Government benches says that that is okay, because we are open for business. However, it is plain that the First Minister was acting without thinking of the consequences and, terrified that Trump was going to walk, pulled out all the stops and helped a group of developers who would not use the powers and routes that were available to them.

In the past, SNP back benchers chided us for not supporting the third-party right of appeal. Indeed, Jim Mather chided me during the passage of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, saying that, by not supporting a third-party right of appeal, we were not supporting communities. We resisted the third-party right of appeal because of its consequences for development. However, now we have a Government that thinks that people do not even need to exercise the first-party right of appeal. How far have we come? Where is the balance now? John Swinney told us that the issue was of national significance, which was not an argument that was deployed later. The one thing that he did not do—this man who knew everything about the planning system—was act before the decision was made, when the process that resulted in that decision was on-going. That would have solved the problem. Instead, however, he chose to do it later. I urge everybody—

Will the member give way?

One question that you did not answer in the whole inquiry process is why you discovered a conflict of interest only in November and not in May when you were elected. The issue that you must address is the fact that the members who opposed the recommendations did not come to any conclusion at all—they simply said that they did not agree with the rest of us. They have given no alternative explanation.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the small business bonus scheme will aid economic growth. (S3O-2937)

The minister has said in the past that the scheme will cost something like £165 million a year, which everyone would agree is a significant amount of money. However, there appears to be no evidence of the benefits that would establish the scheme as a worthwhile way of spending money. The comparison with the approach to the voluntary sector is remarkable—it is shocking, in fact. In that case, it seems that we have agreed to identify where the valuable parts are and where the dross is. Will the minister confirm that no conditions are attached to the money for small businesses? What systems has he put in place to measure the effectiveness of the scheme? How will he ensure that there is public scrutiny of the claimed benefits of the scheme, as members of our party certainly have no faith in trickle-down economics?

That was not the question.

On the point about standing up for the people of Scotland, during this morning's debate on support for the voluntary sector, your favourite minister, Mr Maxwell, supported by Rob Gibson, expressed the view that your strategy was addressing the problem that the voluntary sector was growing like Topsy and a lot of it was dross. Do you agree? How do you intend to pursue the policy?

The voluntary sector is not included—

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am sure that the minister needs no reminder of the fact that it is the considered view of this Parliament that the Scottish National Party Government does not have a coherent housing policy, and I know that he will respect the Parliament's view in that regard. I want to talk about the affordability of rented housing—

My apologies; I will ask a specific question. The "Firm Foundations" document is predicated on higher rent levels. In addition, housing providers are telling us that rent levels might have to rise if the Scottish housing quality standard is to be delivered. What level of rent rise does the  minister consider would be acceptable to allow the delivery of the Scottish housing quality standard and the efficiencies that he has identified, in comparison with levels in housing associations down south?

If this budget settlement is the tightest ever and if there are all these problems associated with it, why has the cabinet secretary prioritised business tax cuts with no conditions attached and a council tax freeze that he must know comes with a risk to local services? I asked him the same question in the budget debate, but he did not answer it.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On a point of my choosing.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to provide support to sport in communities. (S3O-2722)

The minister knows of the important work that is done by football clubs in their communities and he will be aware of the role of fans in ensuring that clubs take such work seriously. Given the parlous state of some of our football clubs, will he commend the important work of Supporters Direct in Scotland in helping to create and sustain supporters trusts? Will he match the funding that the previous Executive gave to Supporters Direct—and if not, why not?

If that is not your responsibility—

In a previous debate, Labour lodged an amendment that called for Audit Scotland to examine the GHA's improvement programme for owners. Why did the SNP, including the member, vote against that amendment?

Will the member give way?

I hear what the member says about the GHA. Does he acknowledge that the model that is now being promoted by the GHA, as the lead developer for Glasgow, should caution us against the notion that a lead developer can create change? Perhaps the member will advise his minister of the problem of diseconomies of scale.

On 21 January, the minister confirmed that the Government intended to roll out the pilot to six areas. Is that the same pilot roll-out as Rhona Brankin announced in March 2007, when she was the Minister for Communities?

It is a privilege to lead this housing debate on behalf of the Labour Party. We in the Labour Party are proud of what was achieved in the first eight years in the Parliament. Much of that work was recognised as groundbreaking, but we acknowledge that there is much more to do. It would be foolish for anyone to say that everything that we did was perfect, but it is equally foolish for the current Administration to say that there was no consensus and no agreement and that what we did was a complete disaster, because that is simply not true. Labour's charge against the Government is that the running thread of our experience of it is that it overclaims and underdelivers, favours spin over substance and, at its very best, produces more broken promises. If the minister has been effective at anything, it has been at creating the impression of action and perhaps securing some positive headlines. However, the truth behind the headlines is a little less substantial. The much heralded housing supply task force will not produce a report or recommendations for action; it was not involved in shaping the budget; it was not part of developing the document "Firm Foundations: The Future of Housing in Scotland"; and at least one member of the minister's group has expressed grave concerns about the budget allocations in relation to the social rented sector. The Government is consulting on Scottish planning policy 3 on affordable housing at the same time that it has set up a body to consider how to unblock the planning system. The "Firm Foundations" document does not even mention Scottish planning policy 14, which looks at setting a benchmark for 25 per cent of units in a new development to be affordable housing. The minister wants the world—or at least his own back benchers—to think that the right to buy has ended, but of course the change that he has  introduced has been so narrowly defined that it will affect very few people. It undermines the balance that was struck in the modernised right to buy, which was supported by the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland, which recognised the need for flexibility in regeneration communities, where ownership can make a difference, and suspension of the right to buy in hot spots where there is pressure.

The Labour Party's position is that we recognise the strength of the right to buy and we want to see the difference that the modernised right to buy has made. That position is supported by the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland. We are told that local authorities will build council houses, but the reality is that very few of them will be able to do that. On the other hand, the Administration is completely silent on how it will support those local authorities that have debt and voted against stock transfer on the advice of the Scottish National Party. On low-cost home ownership, the Administration is following what has already been done, but with no sense that action is needed in areas other than economic hot spots or that there needs to be equitable access to first-time-buyer support. On what else is the minister silent? On homelessness, he asserts that he supports the target, but he removes certainty by outsourcing all responsibility to local authorities. Given that tax cuts are this Administration's one key priority, what pressure will there be on local authorities to provide the bricks and mortar, where possible, while removing or reducing the advice, support and specialist provision that helps prevent homelessness? What will be demanded of single outcome agreements in relation to homelessness? The Administration says nothing about the needs of areas of regeneration. Indeed, Communities Scotland's expertise is to be removed from the community planning partnership table altogether. There will be no access to community regeneration funding and the wider action budget will be flat-lined—those are the very things on which community housing associations have built their credibility. The minister is silent on the Scottish housing quality standard when community organisations are telling us that they will have to deliver it by increasing rents. Then there are the two big ideas of this Administration. Its first target is, "We will build more houses than the last lot did." Secondly, it  claims that it will drive efficiencies into the affordable housing market by opening it to competition. If there is a spine on the Government back benches, it should prepare to feel a shiver down it now. On 28 November 2007, the minister said: "My intention is not to be nice to one particular part of the sector or another; it is to ensure that we deliver more homes for people. That is the fundamental point. ... That is why we have suggested some changes and why I think that competition is important. I think that who eventually owns and manages properties is of less importance than the fact that we have them."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 28 November 2007; c 300.] That flies in the face of every lesson of housing history in Scotland. Given that we know that community ownership has delivered changes in our communities, it is not credible to say that ownership does not matter. At a time of turbulence in the housing market and a credit squeeze, is it wise for the Administration to be vague on the proportion of houses for social rent? Given that the Administration's own figures show that construction inflation has increased by 35 per cent, is it credible to pretend that its target of building 35,000 houses a year by the middle of the next decade is achievable? The challenge for SNP back benchers is to confront their front-bench's agenda. The Administration has a strategy on efficiencies—who could be against that—but it is predicated on higher rents, and on the presumptions that bigger is better, that competition delivers change and that building houses is the same as having a housing strategy. We know from experience that that is not the case. We know that the Administration is undermining community-controlled housing associations. Would it not be an irony if the legacy of the SNP was to lure cross-border raids from big, asset-rich, English housing associations to take over the work that local housing organisations have done? History shows that the disastrous consequence of national building programmes that distribute funding from the centre with no priority for wider action is houses that no one wants to live in and which we have to demolish. The minister has to understand that asserting his love of the housing association and co-operative movement is not the same as delivering for it and that asserting his commitment on homelessness is not the same as delivering on it. I turn finally to the first-time buyers grant of £2,000—the great promise. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Nicola Sturgeon, is non-committal on it and would like us to be her alibi for not delivering it. If she believes in it, she should argue for it. If she does not, she should say why not. The First Minister said:  "The SNP is going to work through all of its manifesto commitments over the four-year term of this Administration."— [ Official Report , 6 September 2007; c 1493.]  The Administration should stop dodging and tell us whether the first-time buyers grant of £2,000 is a broken promise, a promise yet to come or a cynical election promise made with the collective fingers of the SNP firmly crossed behind their backs? We deserve to know. That is why the motion includes a demand for a statement. The fundamental charge against the Administration is that it spins, rather than recognises, our history. It should come clean, understand that a housing strategy is about more than building houses and begin to talk about targets for social renting, the needs of the homeless and the role of community organisations as partners in change. I move, That the Parliament regrets the SNP government's lack of a coherent housing strategy; notes that the Housing Supply Task Force has no timetable or remit to produce recommendations for action; notes in particular the absence of robust evidence on funding and efficiencies in delivering its housing targets; further notes concerns about the impact of a single regional developer model, as outlined in the Firm Foundations consultation, on community-controlled housing associations and housing co-operatives; agrees that the Scottish Government should make a statement to the Parliament as soon as possible, clarifying its plans for the clear SNP manifesto commitment on a £2,000 first-time buyers' grant, and urges the Scottish Government to act to secure long-term improvements in housing rather than the short-term appearance of change.

I welcome the opportunity to raise some issues on this legislative consent motion, which Labour members—who consider LCMs on the basis of the practical measures to which they relate and who judge each LCM on its merits—have decided to support. We think that it is important that we take the opportunity to illuminate some significant issues for the Parliament—members know that my every instinct is philanthropic. Members of the Local Government and Communities Committee felt that it was important for all members to receive an explanation from the Scottish National Party of why it is no longer opposed, in principle, to LCMs. On numerous occasions in the past, SNP members voted against entirely rational and logical LCMs on the basis that it was a point of principle for them to do so. Of course, that was then and this is now. We can only surmise that the memory banks of SNP back benchers have been entirely wiped and that that point of principle has been forgotten. The principle on which we operated was that, whenever possible, we would seek an opportunity for the Scottish Parliament to legislate and that we would use the LCM process only if the prospect of new Scottish legislation was not imminent. The problem for the SNP, of course, is that it appears that the prospect of legislation on anything at all is not imminent. That makes it even more bizarre that the minister claimed to the committee that use of the LCM process was  "a proportionate and efficient use of parliamentary time."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 5 March 2008; c 724.] He might wish to talk to his business manager about that. Of course, the broader question is why no suitable legislative vehicle is available. A big decision has been made to abolish Communities Scotland and yet the bill before us relates to regulation in England. There is no coherence on the issue of savings for Communities Scotland or how housing and regeneration fit into the community planning framework. What will happen now that individual housing association grant decisions will be micromanaged from the centre? How will the regulator fit into all of that? We have had no discussion of those issues. Given that we are going in an entirely opposite direction to that taken in England, it would have been nice for the Scottish Parliament to have been given an opportunity—whether in relation to legislation or otherwise—to have had that discussion. We could have dealt with the issues raised in the LCM in that way. In order to be helpful, I direct the minister to his own words. In July last year, I asked him whether abolishing of Communities Scotland "would require legislation". His reply was: "Ministers are currently considering the most effective organisational structures for the future delivery of Communities Scotland's functions. That process will involve consideration of any legislation that might be necessary to support the transfer of Communities Scotland's functions, although legislation would not of itself be required to abolish Communities Scotland."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 19 July 2007; S3W-1797.]  Given that we do not need legislation to abolish Communities Scotland, it would have been helpful if the Government had looked for legislative opportunities that would have allowed the Parliament to debate what will now happen to Communities Scotland's functions. The LCM is an indicator that the SNP has abandoned the principles that it used to apply. It has not even applied the test that we used to apply. The Government is unable to explain why it has not brought to the chamber a debate on the future of Communities Scotland. Perhaps the minister will tell the chamber what other legislation might be necessary and what Communities Scotland's future is. I welcome his interesting response.

The minister may be aware of a fabulous and fascinating project in my constituency—the Bullwood project—which is doing its best to enhance Scotland's international reputation by producing the largest caber in the world, from a recycled Glasgow Christmas tree, so that it can be paraded in New York during Scotland week. Remarkable things come out of Glasgow Pollok. In the past, the Scottish Government has commented positively on the project, but the minister may be aware that it is now facing difficulties in two areas—in meeting the costs of transporting the caber and in securing the First Minister's signature for it. Is the minister willing to meet me as a matter of urgency, so that we can address those practical matters and ensure that this interesting and unique contribution to enhancing Scotland's reputation plays its part in the New York parade?

To ask the Scottish Executive how housing and regeneration issues will be developed by community planning partnerships. (S3O-2621)

The minister will be aware that, with the abolition of Communities Scotland, its officials are now resigning from local community planning partnerships. I am sure that the minister acknowledges that physical regeneration and community regeneration are central to effective work by community planning partnerships. Is he aware that, like housing associations, housing providers are not able to sit on community planning partnerships? What action is he taking to ensure that the critical work of the partnerships is sustained? Who will replace the Communities Scotland staff in the partnerships?

Many people other than parliamentarians would want to contribute to the review, rather than just be given a report on it when it is complete.

This has been a constructive debate, although I suspect that Tricia Marwick mistakes being critical for being unconstructive. When one is in Government, one needs to recognise that hard things will be said, and one has to be responsible for what happens on one's watch. My constructive-comment count has been very high today, if I may say so.  I urge Government back benchers and the Minister for Communities and Sport to look again at the issue of a tax incentive. We are asking the Government only to consider it, as we believe that it will make a difference and a lot of work on it has already been done. Joe FitzPatrick said that the money would have to come from somewhere, which I accept. That is the responsibility of Government, and we ask it only to consider the proposal. I would be more likely to accept the note of caution about choices from a party that had not spent the morning criticising the choices that were made at UK level. I want the Government to think about the choices that it makes. The incentive might be only £100, and it might not make as much difference as some of us might hope, but the Government has committed, at the last count, to over £200 million in business tax cuts, with not one condition concerning energy efficiency. The Government still advocates the £2,000 first-time buyers grant, which will inflate house prices and will not do anything to counter fuel poverty. Those are giveaways and, in that context, Joe FitzPatrick's comment about the money having to come from somewhere rings a little hollow.

I do not want to lecture Bob Doris on being in Government, but he needs to avoid having a single transferable alibi. The Government must take responsibility for the choices that it makes. I accept that the Government has chosen to freeze the council tax. It should not pretend that that will address fuel poverty—it will not, although it might address some issues. Regarding the central heating programme, I note that the minister said that he is holding an internal review. If the Government is going to examine the central heating programme, it should not be in denial. There were hard issues in 2006, which we addressed. There are currently serious issues concerning the central heating programme, and the Government cannot pretend that those do not exist. I urge the minister to talk to those who are delivering. They tell us that the £7 million that has been announced by Nicola Sturgeon comes nowhere near to addressing the problem, and they tell us about the bizarre situation in which although we have the capacity for installations, companies are going out of business because they are not getting any work as a result of pricing levels. Those issues must be confronted. The Tory amendment says that the central heating programme should be revised to ensure that it  "is reaching those who need it most." That is the ultimate tension in the programme, so I urge the minister to ensure that we have an "open and constructive" debate on the issue, in the words of energywatch Scotland, which says some challenging things to all of us who saw the development of the central heating programme. An internal review by the minister is not adequate—those who live with the programme have something to say. I welcome the fact that the minister has indicated his support for the fuel poverty forum, and I hope that that will be addressed, along with the broader issues that we have outlined. On the work of Communities Scotland—and, I believe, the Scottish Building Standards Agency—being brought in-house, we need bodies that have a commitment to and an understanding of issues such as energy efficiency and fuel poverty. In the absence of those organisations, there must be greater pressure on the Government and its officials to ensure that that critical work—supporting housing associations, giving advice and ensuring that there is movement from policy to practical delivery—is still carried out. Whatever the weaknesses and criticisms of those agencies, they did an important job and I would like the minister to tell us how he intends to address their absence.

Will the member give way?

The specific time that Tricia Marwick chose for her comparison was of course the time of the transition from Eaga delivering the  programme to Scottish Gas delivering the programme. I was involved at the time and wrestled with these issues. I will not pretend that the figures were great, but they are explainable and we acted to deal with the situation. The SNP now has to act to deal with the fact that waiting times are increasing and people are losing confidence in the central heating programme and buying their own systems because they have been told to expect delays of up to a year. I have a constituency case if Tricia Marwick wants an example.

Does the member acknowledge that one of the key charges that the SNP must face is that a council tax freeze does not actually help the poorest people in our communities and, therefore, it is bizarre to claim that a freeze will somehow address fuel poverty? Regardless of the separate argument about whether the freeze is a good thing or a bad thing, it is certainly not directly in the interests of the poor.

As Liam McArthur said, the Labour Party amendment is an add-on to the Lib Dem motion. The aim of our amendment is to reinforce the importance of the role of the voluntary and statutory organisations in giving appropriate advice to those who are in fuel poverty. For eight years, fuel poverty was a critical issue for the Labour-led Executive and the Parliament. There is no doubt that the issue was championed by members from across the parties. Sadly, some of them are no longer with us—I think of Margaret Ewing. Those members kept the issue on the agenda and worked hard to ensure that it did not get lost in the normal day-to-day party-political battles in which some of us are all too happy to engage. The issues with which we are wrestling are difficult. The debate is important in building agreement on action. It is right that it should spur us on in recognising that there are still people who are cold in their homes and who have to choose between heating their homes and feeding themselves. In addition, the consequences of the rise in fuel prices have huge implications for people who are in fuel poverty.  The minister has broader responsibilities, including the important issue of people having quality housing with effective insulation measures. A broader question needs to be asked about housing policy and how local authorities and housing associations are supported in meeting the housing quality standard. Many people wanted to vote to get rid of housing debt for just that reason. In that broader housing debate, it is important that we hear from the minister how the Government plans to address the issue. Labour strongly supports the fuel poverty forum. We recognise the potential for developing a one-stop shop. In the past, things perhaps became overfragmented, which may have led to a lack of understanding. Critically, the fuel poverty forum recognised that Scotland is blessed with strong voluntary sector organisations. People such as Norrie Kerr and others are committed to addressing fuel poverty and are creative in developing policy. They are also robust in challenging Government through their advocacy for those who are in fuel poverty, no matter which party is in government. The forum could have a key role to play in bringing the power companies to the table to discuss further the development of the social tariff and the rationalisation and harmonisation of programmes to ensure greater reach, and to consider why the poor face disproportionate charges for fuel. Although I am sure that Alex Neil will not agree with me, I recognise the important strand that energy issues played in yesterday's budget. We can debate how far the Government has gone in addressing the issues, but in the announcements that were made it recognised that the issue is important to everyone. Of course it is important to link work on energy efficiency measures and fuel poverty programmes. We must also recognise the importance of sustained money advice and energy advice, as such advice can reach out to those who are most vulnerable and who suffer most when action is not taken. Although general energy efficiency issues are critical, we must not lose our focus on the issue of the poor paying disproportionate charges. I am disappointed that neither the Tories nor the SNP want to consider the notion of tax incentives for microgeneration measures. Labour's Sarah Boyack has done a huge amount of work on the area—the Government would not have to look far to get advice—and engaged with loads of people in the sector. I hope that the minister will look further into the work that she has done. However, the reality is that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has set his face against such tax incentives. As a consequence, the hands of other ministers are tied. It is odd that a cabinet secretary who offered  accelerated tax cuts to small business with no conditions attached will not support the use of taxation as a means of encouraging positive action on energy efficiency.

I need to make progress, and have one minute remaining. Labour members have an agreement with our Liberal Democrat colleagues on the issue, although we may not agree with their position on local taxation. The motion is moderate in its demands. It asks the Executive to look at the possibility of a local tax rebate, and it is disappointing that the Government will not countenance that. Instead of closing down the debate, the Executive could have said that it would include that option in its report to Parliament. We know the challenges that are involved in eradicating fuel poverty by 2016. We acknowledge the important work that is being done and the challenging points that energywatch Scotland has raised about the central heating programme. It is important that the debate progresses. The minister spoke of an internal review. I urge him to have the confidence to externalise the review, particularly around the central heating programme. That would enable the Executive to hear what those who are trying to deliver the programme have to say about the challenges involved and the programme's effectiveness. In his response to the debate, I hope that the minister will tell the chamber that he recognises the importance of doing that. I move amendment S3M-1550.1, to insert after "technology": "recognises the importance of continued support for voluntary and statutory organisations providing debt management, money and energy advice to those most affected by fuel poverty;".

rose—

We are debating a serious issue, so I was disappointed by the previous speaker's tone and by the intemperate approach of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, who seems not to want to engage with hard issues and who was reluctant to accept the compromise that was proposed in the Justice Committee. It does not help to suggest that there is a division between people who are for prison and people who are against prison, because that is false. The issues are difficult. The cabinet secretary's failure to understand the importance of building confidence is fundamental. He claims that he wants to move to greater use of appropriate community sentences. If he wants communities to sign up to that approach, it is ill advised for him to refuse to agree to a moderate proposal to keep a watch on the issue that we are debating. It is argued that individual cases make bad law. However, people's experiences can illuminate a situation and reveal flaws in a policy approach that seems logical in theory. In that context, I mention my constituent Mr Armstrong, whose case illustrates why people do not have confidence in the system and why ministers should be willing to compromise on HDC. In brief, Mr Armstrong was convicted of a serious assault and was sentenced to just less than four years in prison. His family, friends and neighbours have campaigned for proper consideration of the circumstances of the assault for which he was convicted. Mr Armstrong alleges that the person whom he was convicted of assaulting was threatening him with a 14in knife and smashing the windows of his vehicle, and that there was a history of reported disorder in the community. The family asserts that Mr Armstrong was a repeat victim who acted in self-defence and who did not have confidence in the police's ability to respond to the circumstances. Perhaps that is a  mark of the failure of earlier intervention to deal with disorder. The deepest irony is that Mr Armstrong's alleged assailant was tagged for other offences but was free to appear in the vicinity of Mr Armstrong's home and cause alarm while Mr Armstrong was in prison. Mr MacAskill is fond of talking about keeping "flotsam and jetsam" out of prison. In the case that I described, who is flotsam and jetsam and who deserves to be in prison? The crude division that Mr MacAskill likes to present does not apply; the reality is that neither party is flotsam and jetsam. We must address people's actions and deal with them seriously, but in so doing we must be careful to understand the context of offending, which might involve a person's being a repeat victim. Such matters must be properly taken into account. I am delighted that Mr MacAskill has agreed to meet me to pursue the issues, and I hope that he will confirm his willingness to accept from the family the massive petition in support of Mr Armstrong. The issue matters because community safety is paramount. We need to know that home detention curfew works. They cannot be used as a crude attempt artificially to keep prisoner numbers low. We do not want huge prisoner numbers, but we need to know that risk assessments are done on the basis not of keeping numbers down but of ensuring that a person is safe to return to the community. People do not have that confidence, because the cabinet secretary will not agree to a sunset clause so that there can be proper consideration of the issue when more prison spaces are available. The cabinet secretary's reluctance to compromise stems from his predetermined view on prisoner numbers. He cannot confront the challenges to do with funding new prisons, but that is what Governments must do. He wants to relieve pressure on prisons, but he must not do so at the expense of putting greater pressure on our communities. I am troubled by his reluctance to compromise and by his willingness to engage in a crude debate rather than accept that he can reduce prisoner numbers only if our communities feel safe and have confidence that the policy is about not reducing numbers but addressing what puts people in prison and keeps them there. I urge the cabinet secretary to rethink his approach.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to address inequalities in Scotland. (S3O-2530)

The minister will be aware that today is world book day. Earlier this morning, I had the privilege of sharing in the celebrations at St George's primary school in my constituency. Can the minister outline what progress there has been in supporting the right to read campaign, which ensures that those with visual impairment have access to the joy of reading? Will he outline what action he is taking to ensure that equality indicators are compulsory in the developing single outcome agreements? How will he ensure that the equality impact of the single outcome agreements is fully monitored?

Members have already indicated that this is an important debate. If Mr Carlaw was hesitant about following Trish Godman's speech, he should consider how I feel about having to speak after him—he encapsulated the passion around this issue, which a lot of us share. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the discussion. Today, I met people from Quarriers—in particular, one of my constituents, Mr Fraser Wood—and again I recognised the challenge that people face in addressing the question of wheelchair use as wheelchair users themselves. Like any equalities issue on the agenda for action, this issue is there not because of our good will and because we care about it, but because of the campaign activity, determination and energy of those who experience inequality and of the carers who support them. Wheelchair users and their carers have driven the agenda on this issue, and I applaud their energy and the energy of the groups and voluntary organisations that have supported them in ensuring that there was a review of wheelchair services and that we are now at the stage where we want to make further progress. I will not make a party-political point—the points that have been made so far all show that the problem's existence is a reproach to all of us who are in a position to do something about it. It is also a broader reproach to a society that has allowed the situation to go on for too long. It is clear that political action should be shaped by those who not only understand the problems, but have the solutions. I hope that the minister can answer the question whether there is now a disability forum sitting inside the Scottish Government that would bring these groups together. There was such a body in the past, and I hope that she will commit today to bringing such a group together to pursue these issues, because it could press the right arguments in the right places.  The test of the rhetoric of equality and our commitment to it is an understanding of the practical issues that need to be addressed in order to deliver on that rhetoric. The wheelchair example is as good as any of the way in which we have to move from a general commitment to equality to addressing the practical issues that provide the barriers. I hope that there is a proper understanding of the need to deliver in partnership with those who understand the issues best. The critical issue is that we need to view the wheelchair not as a machine or as a mechanism, but as a straightforward part of someone's care package and as the way in which they manage to maximise their abilities and their potential. The comparison with hip replacements is a good one. We do not see hip replacements in the same way—as somehow being a bonus, when in fact they can be critical to the quality of people's lives and their capacity to engage with their families and broader society. As has been said, we need to look at the person and not the wheelchair, and we should not try to shape the person into what we think their wheelchair should be. Why should they not have the wheelchair that they need for the kind of disability and needs that they have? The review was driven by those who understood the issues, and I wonder why the action plan has been delayed—for another year, it seems. Will the minister at least commit to examining these issues, which could be progressed before the broader action plan recommendations are brought forward? That would give people confidence that action was being taken. I note from some of the submissions that we have received that people want a national service. Wheelchair service provision seems to be irrational and not attached to need within local areas—I ask the minister to consider that issue. There is a broader issue about social inclusion and human rights, which is encapsulated in the way that we talk about disabled parking spaces. Somehow people think that someone with a disabled parking space has stolen a march and is getting a privilege. Some of the debate around wheelchair services is like that—it is as if someone is asking for something extra. The fact that the matter has been put in the context of human rights is critical. We should not tolerate the barriers. I hope that the minister will respond positively to the supportive points that members have made in the debate.

In discussions with Strathclyde Police, has the minister raised the issues of repeat victimisation and the critical importance of having the public's confidence that the police will respond to disorder and community intimidation? He may be aware of the case in my constituency involving Stephen Armstrong, who has been a repeat victim of crime and has now found himself in jail. Is the minister willing to meet me to discuss the critical issues that have emerged from that case relating to the appropriateness of sentences and, in particular, the importance of our communities having  confidence that the system will respond at an early stage so that people do not end up taking the law into their own hands?

I declare an interest. My husband is Councillor Archie Graham, who is executive member for culture and sport in Glasgow City Council. The Government trumpets that it has achieved an historic concordat with local government; at my fireside, we have not quite got that far, and there is still evidence of conflict. However, in the Parliament and in Glasgow, the importance and significance of the Commonwealth games are recognised. Bob Doris raised a crucial point about territorialism and disorder. Solving such problems is not just a Commonwealth games issue; it is core business for Government. The Commonwealth games are important for Scotland, and particularly for Glasgow, given the stark health inequalities in the city—not to mention inequalities between Glasgow and other parts of Scotland. Too many Scots who declare a love of sport are spectators who do not engage in it. One of the big legacies of the Commonwealth games will have to be that people realise that sport can be an active part of their lives, rather than just another expression of their tribalism. We support the bill. It is largely technical, and there was an obligation to produce it. We thank all those who gave evidence to the Local  Government and Communities Committee, and we thank the Minister for Communities and Sport for introducing a bill that we are able to support. There was a great sense of achievement when we realised that the bid had been secured. It is impossible to overstate the professionalism and passion with which Glasgow's case was pursued towards success. I acknowledge the role of this Government and of past ministers in ensuring that the bid was successful. We have to remember how much of a challenge winning the bid was; it was not a short-term process. The success originated from the foresight of people in Glasgow—in particular, people in Labour administrations over a period of time. There was a long-term commitment to understanding the creative ways by which it is possible to transform the lives of Glasgow's citizens—a commitment to understanding the power of sport and the arts in people's lives. Rightly, the minister spoke of political consensus, but it required courage to argue for such consensus before it could be built. It required courage to invest in more than £100 million-worth of facilities over the past 10 years. Labour in Glasgow has historically sought to win the argument on the importance of sport and culture to the life of the city. That has been controversial in the past, and it could continue to be controversial. Some of us who were born a long time ago and have long memories will remember the controversy over building the Burrell collection building in the middle of Pollok park. People asked whether money should be spent on that when there was so much need in the city. We now have consensus, but it was political will and choice at an earlier stage that allowed the political consensus to build.

Absolutely—and my point is that, in building consensus, we have to acknowledge that the first step is a hard one. We should commend the first step, whoever took it. All of us in the chamber should acknowledge the role that we have played, but we ought not to colonise for the Parliament the credit for success in securing the games. There will be a Scotland-wide benefit, but it is reasonable to insist that there is a focus on Glasgow's citizens, because of Glasgow's drive and Glasgow's need. I will make some brief points about access to and the legacy of the games. I urge the minister to reflect on equality issues. We have received a thought-provoking briefing from the Guide Dogs  for the Blind Association that gives a significant commentary on issues that it wants us to consider. That should prompt us to ensure that we have close dialogue with the people who best understand the games' implications for the equality agenda. I want to make a point—and not just to keep in with the Deputy Presiding Officer—about the concerns of women's organisations that women could be trafficked into Glasgow during the Commonwealth games. It would be useful to address the issues surrounding that. We have to broaden the debate and understand the games' implications for broader social and economic policy. I know that that is already happening in Glasgow. I am not talking only about business opportunities; we also have to consider the opportunities for social enterprises. I am not talking only about employment opportunities; we also have to consider the employability strategy and the challenge of benefiting the people who are the furthest away from getting work. We also have to understand the importance of talking to and working with the local community, to ensure that its needs are addressed. As a mother who spends far too long at the side of a swimming pool—my daughter swims six times a week—I want to stress the importance of supporting people who have the talent but not the support. I urge the minister to consider—along with Glasgow City Council—creative ways of ensuring that there is support for people who are talented but do not have access to the support structure that will harness their talent. We should acknowledge in particular the role of local clubs. Anyone who is involved with young people in sport will know that volunteers—people who do not receive one coin—are the lifeblood of sports, especially sports that do not have great recognition. For example, I commend the people who ran the recent netball international in Glasgow, which was supported almost entirely by voluntary effort and was hugely significant for the young women who want to participate in that sport. We need to harness such energy, not crush it. We need to support volunteers in our communities and embrace volunteering activity. We well know the critical role that the minister and the Government play, but we also have to recognise that part of our job is to support the volunteers and others who have got us thus far—those who have the ideas and energy to take us right to the winning line.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to  address housing need in Glasgow. (S3O-2317)

I am sure that, like me, the minister recognises the key role and proud record of community-controlled housing organisations in meeting housing needs in Glasgow. Critically, that is about regeneration, which is almost absent from "Firm Foundations". The minister will be aware of the belated response by Glasgow Housing Association to the Communities Scotland inspection report. I ask the minister to comment on two issues that emerged from that report. First, the GHA has indicated that it "remains committed to transacting those SST proposals which are currently being progressed". Separately, it appears to make a case for being the lead developer itself, as identified in "Firm Foundations". Those are clearly directly opposed positions. Does the minister still support the cross-party view in the Parliament that the GHA is a transitional body and that community ownership is part of its core business, which does not appear to come out of its response to the inspection report? Secondly, when will the minister report in detail to the Parliament—as he committed to do in the debate on the matter—on progress in tackling the critical issues in the inspection report as regards meeting housing need in Glasgow?

I intend to be brief, not least perhaps because the Minister for Communities and Sport may be as discomfited by my support as I am in giving that support to him. However, as this is an important issue, I want to underline the Labour Party's support for the Scottish statutory instrument that the Government has made. Of course, the instrument will simply continue the important work that was done in the previous parliamentary session on housing and sustaining communities. That work goes beyond any Government and was given recognition by the housing improvement task force. The Tories' opposition to the proposal is not new and the arguments that they have deployed to support their position are not new either. One difficulty with the way in which the market currently works is that it disadvantages first-time buyers by involving them in multiple surveys. Artificially low upset prices can also draw first-time buyers into considering the purchase of properties that they could not possibly afford. The Tories' arguments about the pilot were well rehearsed at the time, but the evidence of the pilot simply shows that a voluntary approach cannot work. Perhaps the most critical issue that needs to change in our communities is the way in which people approach the purchasing of a house. As more people take on ownership of their properties, it must be a concern for all of us that they may do so with less thought than they might give to buying a coat. The new process will ensure that people are given information about the property that they are buying and the challenges that it will involve. The process will also give people a better understanding of the worth of what they are buying. We must be committed—as the housing improvement task force was—to ensuring that people understand the importance of the responsibilities of home ownership and maintaining a property. If we want to sustain communities and ensure that people do not buy properties that they cannot then maintain, we need to tackle the serious problems that exist.  If there are market issues, surely the supporters of the market on the Conservative benches will tell us that the market will adjust, especially as people will have more information when they make purchases. The minister has committed himself to monitoring the policy as it is rolled out, which is an important reassurance for people. We will support the Government on this matter at decision time.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Glasgow City Council about education services. (S3O-2229)

The minister will recall the importance of the United Kingdom Government's report "Aiming high for disabled children: better support for families", which generated £34 million in consequentials for this Administration and made a series of important recommendations about the central role of parents in the development of appropriate services for the families of disabled children. What discussions has she had with Glasgow City Council on the shaping of services alongside parents and how does she expect the matter to be taken forward? What level of support should be provided for out-of-school care for children with special needs, which is a critical service for working parents of disabled children?

The First Minister is aware of just how important the private landlord registration scheme is in protecting constituents such as mine from antisocial behaviour and from rogue landlords who operate, at best, on the margins of organised crime. In the interests of brevity, can we take as read the First Minister's usual defence that the current situation is not his fault? Will he focus on how his Administration will progress private landlord registration? I want to ask two specific questions. Will private landlord registration be a guaranteed part of single outcome agreements with local authorities? What is the First Minister's specific target for the level of  registration to be reached by this time next year to reassure my constituents that the issue is a continuing priority for the Executive?

I welcome the debate and the early sight of the discussion paper, but I hope that we will revisit the debate, because—try as I might—I struggled with some of the concepts and the language in which they were captured. We are interested in the notion of an independent inquiry that the Lib Dem amendment proposes, but we wish to reflect further on that, particularly because the Local Government and Communities Committee is to move on to an inquiry into child poverty. Parliamentary committees might have a critical role at this stage, but we might want to move to the position that the Lib Dems ably presented—that will depend on the outcome of the consultation. I regret that the Government has chosen to use language that does not sharpen the debate but which increases confusion. I felt as if I had wandered into a parallel universe of golden rules and purposes with a capital P. Opposition members have been accused of not making the transition to opposition well. It is difficult for former Government back benchers and front benchers to lose the power to make a difference to people's lives. That is made all the more difficult when the SNP—[ Interruption. ]

The situation is all the more difficult when we see that the SNP might use the power that it has secured to reverse the significant progress that has been made on tackling poverty. Labour members take the fundamental position that we have a contract on economic growth and shared prosperity—we need both. We acknowledge the challenges in making funding decisions. We know that a balance must be struck between spending in general and spending that is targeted on poor people to address poverty. However, when that balance has been set, it is dishonest to conflate the results and imply that general spending addresses the needs of the poor. Spending money generally on prescription charges may be good, but the Government should not pretend that that measure addresses poverty, because those who are in poverty will not benefit specifically from it. We believe that we should build the economy and share the prosperity and that we need  Government action to intervene to support people who are further away from economic benefit—those who are most excluded. Addressing poverty and exclusion must be at the core of our business. Nothing happens by chance—action is required. I was interested that Sandra White said that the SNP led the first debate on poverty in the Parliament. The SNP drops the term "social justice" and then says that Labour did not debate poverty because we called it social justice. Where is the logic in that argument? The SNP's problem is that addressing poverty and delivering social justice are not at the Government's core. I have said before that assertion is not fact. If it were, the Government would not have as one of its key priorities an untested and unconditional business rates cut with nothing in return, no matter how much the Tories view such a cut as common sense. It would not have prioritised securing an early agreement on a council tax freeze, even if such a freeze were very important, without moving at a pace that gave confidence to groups that rely on local government funding. SNP members may believe in a concordat with local government, but they should have ensured proper engagement and the development of social outcomes and agreements in order not to end up with a series of national indicators but not one word about disability, for example. We will not get people, including people with disabilities, into work if we do not fund an employability strategy. Equally, if the Government was committed to tackling poverty—if doing so was at the core of its work—it would recognise that different groups experience poverty differently. Women, for example, experience poverty differently. Consequently, the Government would not have a budget that does not assess the gender or equality impact of spend. What does the Government claim that it will do? There are the three golden rules: cohesion, solidarity and sustainability. As we wrestle with being in opposition, I challenge SNP back benchers in particular. They must make a transition and take on the responsibilities of government. In today's Daily Telegraph , Alan Cochrane tellingly described SNP back benchers as "creepily loyal". I have waited in the hope that he would be proved wrong, but there is no greater evidence that he is right than what has been said in this debate—or what was said in the budget debate. The SNP's back benches have many people on them now who were not here during the previous eight years and it looks like the new SNP is in the grip of those who believe robustly in the politics of trickle-down economics. They seem to have silenced the more radical elements in their own ranks—indeed, I am beginning to think that somebody has taken over Alex Neil's body. I cite  in my defence the fact that SNP colleagues dallied in alliance with the Greens and the Scottish Socialist Party over many years and condemned us for not spending enough money or taking enough action to address poverty. In my extensive research, I have not found one recent clarion call by the SNP on such questions. I have never heard the chant, "What do we want? The cohesion golden rule. When do we want it? Now." No matter how cynical of the SNP's underlying commitment to addressing poverty, disability and disadvantage I have imagined myself to be, I never in my wildest dreams imagined that the same colleagues who apparently support cuts in spending on antipoverty measures would end the sharing of the benefits of economic prosperity—the distribution of jobs to other parts of the country—or that they would support business rates cuts worth £265 million without one condition. I thought that SNP back benchers might effectively lobby behind closed doors to secure changes in the budget. However, John Swinney has not only supported unconditional business rates cuts but accelerated those cuts to secure his budget—and SNP back benchers are silent. I say gently to SNP back benchers that, although we are learning to wrestle with being in opposition, they need to find their voice. Organisations trying to address poverty deserve to know that, even if it is not applied publicly, pressure will be applied privately to ensure that the needs of the poor are addressed and that things are not simply asserted, but delivered. If that does not happen, the serious charge can be made that the language of social justice, inclusion, equality and tackling poverty was used to secure votes, but that addressing such matters is not the principle that drives the use of the power that was entrusted to the SNP at the elections. SNP back benchers must find a voice to ensure that those who want what has been seen as a commonsense deal with the Tories are not allowed to have their way. We know that trickle-down economics do not work and that in order to tackle poverty, people must make a difference, rather than headlines. A partnership with the Government at every level must be pledged. We hear a lot about what is not being done by others. We want to hear what the Government will do—with local and UK organisations that have expressed concerns—to ensure that a shift occurs, that the SNP's commitment to tackling poverty and deprivation is reasserted, and that the progress that has already been made is built on.

John Wilson's Government says that it has received a tight budget settlement and that its budget choices indicate its priorities. Is it reasonable for his Government to support the extraction of £265 million from the budget to give to business unconditionally for the next three years?

Will you name one thing—within the powers of the Parliament—that we did not do in the past eight years that you would have done and are now asking the Government to do?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member recognise the critical role of organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland in relation to increasing benefits take-up? Does she share my concern that it is possible that such organisations' funding is vulnerable? Will she join me in seeking a commitment from the SNP Government to continue that funding?

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way?

Will Nicola Sturgeon give way?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to address housing needs across Scotland. (S3F-452)

This week, the First Minister's favourite minister, Stewart Maxwell, announced the further roll-out of the homestake initiative. Bizarrely, he did so—as the First Minister has indicated—ahead of the end of the Government's consultation, which sought responses on the difficult issues of how we can balance the needs of those who seek to own their homes against other housing needs and how—indeed, whether—we should target support. Will the First Minister confirm that that was his housing minister's uniquely gracious way of letting us know that he has now dumped the SNP's ill-conceived pledge to give a £2,000 first-time buyers grant?

In his opening speech, John Swinney claimed that his budget was about achieving sustainable economic growth, but it cannot be just about that; no budget can be. It must show proper regard for the other side of the equation—the right of all our citizens to share society's increasing prosperity. Despite Mr Swinney's assertions to the contrary, the budget simply does not pass that test. It is a matter of significant regret that a proper equality impact assessment was not carried out and that a gender impact assessment was not undertaken. I seek the cabinet secretary's reassurance that that approach will be reinstated. The SNP Administration and its back benchers repeat over and over the highly debatable assertion that the budget settlement is exceptionally tight and that all the difficulties can be explained on that basis. Even if that were the case, the SNP—which, during the eight years for which it sat on the shoulders of the Labour-led Executive, constantly condemning us for not being radical enough, never once made wise comments about budgets being limited—needs to explain why it is now obsessed with focusing above all else on tax cuts, of which it has proposed not just one but two. In a tight budget settlement, that speaks volumes for the SNP's priorities. I can understand why the Tories rally behind such an approach, especially given that, at a UK level, their leader has had to constrain any talk of tax cuts, lest people fear for public services. It is remarkable how emboldened they are by their SNP allies. The SNP must understand that asserting something does not make it true. The budget contains only a few lines that support social justice, and the moneys that it allocates to primary care in deprived areas, which I welcome, are far smaller than the sum that it identifies for freezing the council tax. The Government has cut regeneration funding to local government. We know that council tax cuts do not benefit the poorest households and have a disproportionate benefit to local authorities that are under less pressure and a disproportionate disbenefit to local authorities in which the population is declining. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing told the Local Government and Communities Committee today that, because she was dealing with a fixed budget, the level of support to housing associations must be reduced. Although there is little evidence of inefficiency among housing associations, the cabinet secretary said that the current situation is unsustainable. That is arguable, but the cabinet secretary and others say that we need a bigger bang for our buck. However, no conditions will be attached to business rates  cuts. There will be no conditions on supporting training, on local jobs or even on recycling targets. When John Swinney was asked about that, he simply said that he expected the cuts to make a difference. On one hand, we want a bigger bang for our buck; on the other, we cross our fingers and hope for the best. I never thought that John Swinney would be an advocate for trickle-down economics. John Swinney talks about the concordat with local government. He has argued that it is important as an end in itself and he has drawn on the English example to reinforce his position. It might have been better if the concordat's position on ring fencing had not been agreed in the context of a financial settlement that required a council tax freeze. If John Swinney had wanted to draw on the English example as he developed the concordat, he could have put in the time and thinking that have gone into the approach locally in England. There have been anxieties about the concordat's implications locally. If the concordat had been developed in a measured way, the groups who are anxious could have been involved and engaged—it is impossible for that to happen before March. Those groups could have talked about how they can monitor and support the development of relevant outcome agreements. However, that did not happen, which has contributed to concern. The SNP's defence is that I and others have been scaremongering and have used organisations such as Scottish Women's Aid as a political football. If I was not as big and ugly as I am, I might have been offended by such comments, given the previous Executive's record on violence against women. For the SNP to imply that organisations such as Scottish Women's Aid are raising serious concerns simply because they have been duped by someone like me shows an appalling lack of understanding of the role of such organisations, which have forced issues on to the political agenda to ensure that they are addressed by government at every level, whoever is in power. Scottish Women's Aid's long record on challenging us all on violence against women deserves a better response. I am particularly concerned about the £34 million in consequentials that has been secured to the Scottish budget as a direct result of effective campaigning by families of children with disabilities. The Government has the right—technically—to use that money as it chooses, but its judgment must be questioned in that regard. When I asked Fergus Ewing about the issue, he gave a measured response and said that Fiona Hyslop was considering the matter carefully. However, when the First Minister was asked, he took a less measured approach and simply said that the issue was dealt with in the local government concordat, although there is no  mention of it in the concordat. Our concern is that the Executive's default position whenever it comes under pressure will be simply to say that an issue is dealt with in the local government budget. We are also concerned that the Government has ignored the fundamental point about engaging with parents to ensure that work is taken forward properly—

I hope that the points that I have made are taken in the spirit in which they were made.

I trust that I will get an invitation to that meeting, because it would be useful to pursue the issues about homeowners and to consider whether Audit Scotland can examine the improvement plans, about which concerns exist. Can the minister confirm my understanding that an action plan should have been published and put in the public domain within eight weeks of the production of the inspection report? Is he confident that the action plan as it stands will address the serious questions that were raised in the report? Will he confirm that he holds, or is willing to hold, regular meetings with the local housing organisations and housing associations that have expressed concerns about the progress towards community ownership in Glasgow?

Members might recall that before the Christmas recess the minister was revealed in the chamber to be the Humpty Dumpty of the ... Parliament". —[ Official Report , 13 December 2007; c 4374.] I am sad to say that he is now Humpty Dumpty in denial. The minister should understand that to assert something does not make it true. The fact is that there was no consultation or review. However, despite the minister's best endeavours to ignore them, the views of sporting organisations and members of this Parliament have been forced on him.

Perhaps on some other day the minister will reflect on how such an arrogant approach has led to this pantomime. My question is about two groups that were not consulted in the non-consultation: Children 1 st and other children's organisations and the planning officials in his own Government. What meetings or discussions have taken place since 13 December with children's organisations on sportscotland's role in relation to child protection issues? What meetings have taken place with planning officials on sportscotland's role in protecting open space in our communities? If those meetings or discussions have not taken place, will the minister tell us when he will meet those organisations and people to ensure that those critical roles for sportscotland are sustained in the coming period?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its priorities are in tackling antisocial behaviour. (S3O-1650)

Who could possibly disagree with that? Indeed, in my constituency, the local housing association, along with others, funded a significant play facility for young people for precisely the reason that the minister identified. However, does the minister agree that, along with prevention, he must reassure my constituents and others that enforcement action against antisocial behaviour will remain a priority, given, for example, that the play area that I mentioned has been trashed and young people now have no access to it? Will the minister outline how he plans to engage with local communities and say whom he has met and whom he plans to meet in his review of antisocial behaviour policy? Will the reports of the meetings be available for public consideration?

As a matter of logic, would it not be sensible to consult people before making a decision rather than afterwards?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. The future of sportscotland is important in itself, but it is also critical in showing how the Executive conducts its business. We in the Labour Party take the view that we need stability in sport at this stage. We recognise the important role of sportscotland in a range of  areas, including the one that Children 1 st highlighted in its briefing on child protection. Others will talk in more detail about the role of sportscotland, but I want to focus on the process of parliamentary and external engagement. Like any good historian, I intend to refer to primary sources—the words of the minister himself. On 1 November, in response to a question from Margo MacDonald, the First Minister acknowledged that there was an interesting judgment to be made about where certain functions should lie. There was a case for agencies to take responsibility in some circumstances and for the Government to take over responsibilities in other circumstances. That is why he said that the Government was consulting on the proposal. I asked whether the First Minister would ensure that the consultation was real. He blithely replied: "The Minister for Communities ... has already made that commitment ... Of course, a full consultation is being carried out, and the minister needs no encouragement from me to make such a commitment."— [ Official Report , 1 November 2007; c 2984.]  I did not wish to be harsh in my expectations of what the consultation might be, so I checked with a credible source—the Scottish Government's website, which said: "Typically consultations involve a written paper inviting answers to specific questions or more general views about the material presented. Written papers are distributed to organisations and individuals with an interest in the area of consultation, and they are also posted under the current consultations section of this website, enabling a wider audience to access the paper and submit their responses." Fine. Off I went to see what was posted. I did a search, and the result was: "Sorry no results found that match your query 'future of sportscotland'." I then thought that I should try the minister, so I sought information through a series of parliamentary questions. Could the responses to his correspondence be published? No, that would be inappropriate. Could his letters to organisations that he consulted be published? No, that would be inappropriate. Could he perhaps publish an analysis of the responses before a decision was made? No. One wonders what the minister had to hide. That bizarre reticence was explained in an answer to Patricia Ferguson on 26 November, which said: "The review ... is not a public consultation" and that the Government would seek permission to publish responses "once the outcome of the review has been announced."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 26 November 2007; S3W-6487.]  Perhaps someone should advise the First Minister that his confidence that his minister needed no encouragement to have a full consultation was a touch misplaced. Stewart Maxwell might have been right when he said initially that the review was internal—but then again, perhaps not. In evidence to the Local Government and Communities Committee, planning officials outlined the workings of Scottish planning policy 11, which gives sportscotland a critical role. They confirmed that the planning directorate had not been consulted and that, even if sportscotland went, "we would expect the function of getting clear advice from some expert authority on particular proposals to remain."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 21 November 2007; c 248.] Even if sportscotland went, we would need another body to meet important planning needs in our communities. No sense of decluttering would be felt and duplication would not be removed. Perhaps that is why the minister did not have the confidence to consult his planning officials. For those who are finding it hard to keep up, I will recap. We have a commitment to a full consultation, but the consultation is not public and is clearly not full. We have an internal review that does not obviously involve internal consultation. We do not know what was asked in correspondence or what the replies were. We know that several important sport and community organisations and equality groups such as Children 1 st were not consulted, and that the public cannot participate in the consultation. We do not know what would happen to sportscotland's key functions, because the minister says: "Until the outcome of the review is known I am unable to comment on who would be responsible for specific areas of sportscotland's work."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 14 November 2007; S3W-6017.]  Call me old-fashioned, but I would have thought that dealing with that was the consultation's role. I regret that I do not have time to say everything that I wanted to, but I will make one more point. The minister is the Humpty Dumpty of the Scottish Parliament—words mean what he wants them to mean. I hope that he will listen to the Parliament's will today, and I look forward to his having the grace to announce a proper timetable to discuss sportscotland's future and the courage to ask genuine questions about the genuine options that are available.

Will the minister comment on the fact that Glasgow City Council, which will host the Commonwealth games, has explicitly supported the role of sportscotland in the preparation for those games?

At some point, will the minister address the crucial element of our amendment? Will she explain why the revised version of SPP 11, which removed the elements that have been identified in the debate, was not circulated widely, except to a stakeholder group? Will she support the amendment that allows for that broader consultation?

Does the member acknowledge that, particularly in a city such as Edinburgh, green spaces that are improved will come under pressure, so the proposal for a statutory consultation on non-sport-related green space—which was a critical element of SPP 11—should be sustained? Will she at least allow that there should be further consultation on such matters?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to what I perhaps uncharitably described—when I first heard what was to be debated—as a tree-hugging debate. Those of a more cynical bent might think that it is a time filler, but given my lack of cynicism and my happy disposition, I am happy to acknowledge that there are important and challenging issues in the debate, both for the Administration and for members. I say to Rob Gibson that the point about SPP 11 is not a diversion but a central issue. I am sure that he would have acknowledged that in the past, even though now, in power, he is unable to do so. My first point is that woodlands and green spaces are particularly important for those in urban areas such as my constituency. I ask the minister to confirm that the Executive intends to pursue environmental justice and address the anxiety that I have about the decision to merge Scottish Natural Heritage and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. He will recall that, when the First Minister was asked about the matter, he said that everything would be okay because they would be absorbed into a rural services body. If any communities deserve the protection of SEPA, it is surely those in urban areas that already live with the consequences of industrial development, pollution and dereliction over time. I would like an answer to that point. Secondly, I am also sure that the minister will confirm and recognise the importance of green spaces and woodlands in addressing the health needs of people in areas of deprivation. In my own constituency for example, excellent work has been done on a localised basis to reach out to men who do not address their own health needs. As well as education, that has included an activity group, including jogging and walking outdoors. Considering such a project, the importance of urban woodland space becomes obvious. The minister may be aware of serious concerns at a local level about the funding of such projects because of uncertainty in the community regeneration fund and the role of community planning partnerships. Indeed, I understand that health boards were not consulted on those plans ahead of the budget, and I look for some reassurance on that localised budgeting, which  makes such a difference to the community projects that bring together health issues and the environment. My third point, on SPP 11, is the most important. I want particularly to appeal to those Scottish National Party back benchers who have a long record of supporting moves to protect green space in urban areas. I urge them to support our moderate amendment. It asks them not to take a view, but to agree that there should be further consultation on certain questions. Let me give members a brief history lesson. As has been indicated, SPP 11 was put out in draft form for consultation. Critical elements included timescale for audit and minimum standards within new developments. Anyone who represents an area where there has been a new development will understand that if open space is not included at the beginning, people will reject it being put beside them at a later stage. If it is really important, it should be done during the development. I am not clear why the SNP would indicate that that issue is somehow a matter for local government, considering how other planning matters are dealt with. Another critical element in the consultation was non-sporting green spaces. Those were tough choices, so it was deeply disappointing that, once consulted on, those critical elements were dropped. That decision did not correlate with what the consultation found. The elements were dropped after a redraft was circulated to a number of stakeholders, and it is disappointing that there was not a further opportunity to consider that difficult shift. I will quote two groups. The spokesman for Fields in Trust said: "There is a sense of deep, deep disappointment. There was an expectation that we would be one of the best countries in Europe in terms of open space planning but these hopes have been dashed". The spokesperson for Play Scotland spoke of its "huge disappointment" with the SNP: "There is huge pressure on local authorities to release land for developers and they have the upper hand at the moment. That is not a good situation for Scotland." The Labour amendment would provide for further consultation. This week of all weeks we need to give confidence that the planning system seeks to find a balance between development and the protection of the environment. The draft of SPP 11 that went out for consultation gave that; the filleted version does not. Our amendment would ensure simply that, by consulting further on the critical elements, people can feel confident that this Administration, like the previous one, understands the balance and is transparent in delivering it. SPP 11 is about a good environment  across Scotland, and I urge back benchers to support the Labour amendment on that basis.

Our amendment is moderate with regard to the issue about consultation. Will the minister explain why it was decided to circulate the revised version of Scottish planning policy 11, which took out critical elements for which there was support, and why that revised version of SPP 11 was issued only to the stakeholder group and not for broader consultation? He will find that there are strongly held views in that regard.

I would like to clarify a point of information. You said that mental health will not fall off the edge because you will ensure that that will not happen. For the benefit of those of us who are not clear about this, could you explain how you will ensure that?

My apologies. Could the minister explain the process by which she will back up her claim that she will ensure that that funding will be provided?

Will the minister confirm that he recently extended the contract with Scottish Gas, despite the fact that waiting times are at an all-time high? Did he seek or receive advice that would have allowed him to place conditions on Scottish Gas in the contract? How will his internal review of the central heating programme address the concerns of contractors who want to support the programme—concerns that Michael Matheson, a back bencher from his own party, has raised?

I add my congratulations to Christine Grahame on securing the debate. I recognise the work that she has done and I commend her on how powerfully she spoke as an advocate on behalf of those who want recognition for the people who died. In a previous life, I was a deputy minister. The thing that I was probably most proud of in that post was that I was veterans minister. It was a huge privilege to be given the critical responsibility, which lies with this Parliament, for the care of veterans. As minister, I had an important role in participating in and supporting remembrance celebrations, especially around the 60 th anniversary of the end of the second world war. At the time, people asked why it was important to look back. In looking back with respect and gratitude to those who lost their lives fighting to defend our country, we are also able to look forward. We have an opportunity to shape the future through understanding the past and the sacrifices that were made. It is critical that we remember those people, but it is also important to give out a strong message to our young people about their history so that they understand what happened and what ordinary people were prepared to do. It is important to mark and to acknowledge those sacrifices and to remind each new generation of them. Knowing the price that was paid by those who went to war—they were very often young people—and by those who continued to suffer as a consequence teaches important lessons about the horror of war. Part of the real tragedy of this story is that families not only had to live with the impact of that huge loss of life, but had to suffer without the comfort of some recognition of the price that was  paid. We owe a debt of gratitude to those people who lived in silence. As someone of island community stock, I remember the respect that people had for the power of the sea and for any tragedy at sea. The thought of what people saw that night—as Murdo Fraser said—is very powerful. I also remember the small graveyard on the island of Tiree where the graves marking out those who lost their lives in the war—perhaps unknown people—came to be respected and revered. That, too, said that we remember and are grateful. I, too, pay my respects to the members of the Lancastria Association of Scotland, who, like many such campaigners, have sustained their campaign over a long period, with compassion and persistence from which many of us could learn. Another example is the campaign to grant posthumous pardons to those who were executed in the first world war. Although it took a very long time, eventually the campaign was successful. It would be fitting if, as Christine Grahame's motion states, the debate contributed to our supporting "the calls from the remaining survivors"— how poignant that phrase is— "and relatives of victims for official recognition of this tragedy." We owe them nothing less. Their sacrifice was massive, and they have suffered in silence for a long time. As Christine Grahame says, the Parliament should acknowledge that sacrifice and support calls for it to be recognised.

Will the First Minister confirm that his affordable housing policy has no target whatsoever for the building of social rented housing? If there is a target, perhaps he will be willing to share it with us. Does he acknowledge that there are concerns about meeting the housing needs of vulnerable people whose needs go far beyond simply bricks and mortar? Will he instruct his minister to meet the housing organisations that are expressing grave concern about the matter with the same urgency with which his Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning met the university sector?

The parliamentary question stated that John Swinney would respond in mid-November. Can the minister confirm that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will consider using the £34 million not to meet the generality of the needs of people with disabilities but to implement the recommendations in the report on changing services and meeting the need for short breaks?

As the member is committed to disability and has a role as a disability reporter, will he join me in encouraging the minister to ensure that the £34 million that was given to the Scottish Executive to support the needs of disabled children and their families will be used to do so?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I also welcome much of what the minister said in his comprehensive capturing of the range of areas in which discrimination and inequality feature in our society. I am particularly proud to lead for the Labour Party in this debate, because,  of course, the Labour Party was founded on an understanding of inequality, injustice and exclusion and a recognition that to tackle those things we need people who are discriminated against to shape the political process. To tackle inequality and respect diversity, we need to open up the political process to those who most need its protection. My colleagues will address a range of the critical issues that are part of the equality and diversity agenda. In speaking to the amendment in my name, I indicate that we are happy to support the motion. However, we believe that, although the sentiments in the motion are easy to express, the challenge is to ensure that the means are willed to deliver on those aspirations. That is what we seek from the statement to the Parliament that we call for in our amendment. We need properly to assess—and to use the equality impact assessment tool to deliver that assessment—and we need to ensure that rhetoric is matched by resources. We know that striving for equality and celebrating diversity should be the core of Government business. A society that seeks to release all the talents and abilities in our communities is a safer, more secure and better society for all. That is what we are seeking from the Government in a statement. To state the obvious, for example, a straight budget increase for individual services may, ironically, disproportionately benefit those who are already strong in our communities. We might therefore want to ask how the budget presented by the Executive, driven as it is by tax cuts, can benefit the most vulnerable and excluded in our communities.

I want to make some progress. I will focus on disability and, more specifically, on children with disability, both as a means of illustrating the challenge of delivering equality through the budget and to raise with the Executive grave concerns about its budgeting priorities. I have come to the issue most sharply because of the experience of a number of my constituents who have children with disability and special needs, but the issues that they raise are the common experience of many families. I recognise the courage, persistence and moderation of those parents in pursuing the issues, but the reality for them is that to have a child with a disability is, it seems, always to be engaged in a battle, struggle and fight to secure for their child what they need to thrive. It is harder to access services, child care, after-school care and holiday clubs and to secure  for their children their independence and happiness in adult life. As a small example, we know that three out of four blind or visually impaired people are unemployed. We know, too, that disabled young people make up 8 per cent of all 16 to 34-year-olds, yet in 2005-06 22 per cent of all young Scots who were not in employment, education or training were disabled. We have concerns about the language of the Executive on regulation. I ask the minister to reflect that one person's excessive red tape is another person's job opportunity. When talking about employment, we also have to challenge employers. I hope that the minister can confirm that any benefits to business that come through the budget will be attached to conditions in relation to those whom businesses seek to employ. We know that supporting disabled children puts pressure on parents; pressure is also put on siblings and on their parents' capacity to give them the attention that they need. Members may be aware of the powerful every disabled child matters campaign, which sought to get the UK Government to understand more fully the challenges faced by families and to engage in creating change for them. As a consequence, a group was set up, chaired by Tom Clarke MP, to review and hear evidence and to make recommendations to the Government. The group took evidence from across the UK, including Scotland, and the report that the group submitted highlights critical issues for families. The UK Government responded with the document "Aiming high for disabled children: better support for families" in May 2007. This may not come as a huge surprise, but the report highlighted the critical need to empower disabled children and their families, provide more responsive services and support, and improve the quality of support. With the response came a £340 million package, £280 million of which was a grant to cover the cost of delivery of improvements in the provision of short breaks for children, allowing a change of environment for the child and respite for carers and siblings. As a direct consequential from that funding, the Executive received £34 million. In response to a parliamentary question, the Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram, confirmed that the money had been received but that it was for the Scottish Government to determine how it was spent. Will the Minister for Communities and Sport confirm today that that £34 million will be spent on meeting the needs of disabled children and their families, as outlined in the UK Government's response, with a particular focus on short breaks and respite? Technically, of course, the Minister for Children and Early Years was correct, but I am  sure that the Minister for Communities and Sport will agree that it would be an outrage if families in Scotland did not benefit from the funding, given the groundbreaking work that was done by the families and campaigning groups to create understanding of the issues and pressure for the funding. We seek the minister's reassurance that the £34 million is not a windfall that the Government will use to fund its tax-cutting priorities but is recognised as critical funding to change the lives of vulnerable children. It would be a bitter irony if there were no beneficial consequences to vulnerable children of the hard work of families of disabled children and the support of disability groups. In the summing-up speech, will the minister commit to making a statement to Parliament, as requested in our amendment, on how the budget, shaped by the equality impact assessment tool, will meet the aspirations in the motion? Will he guarantee that that statement will identify how the £34 million will be spent to meet disabled children's needs, as identified in "Aiming high for disabled children"? Will he resist the red-tape argument and ensure that any employability strategy challenges employers as well as employees? Will he consider how business tax cuts can be a means of creating support in the business community for employing people with disabilities? Further, will the minister confirm the commitment to localised funding for excluded groups, to address their experience? They know the problems, but they also know the answers. Will he meet representatives of disability groups in particular to pursue the agenda of how the fruits of their campaigning labour will be delivered to families with disabled children? As for local government spending priorities, will the minister guarantee that equality groups will be involved in the development and monitoring of single outcome agreements, to ensure that some of the most vulnerable in our communities do not bear the cost of the new change in funding? Like all other members, Labour members recognise the broader agenda. We also recognise the progress that has been made by the former Labour-led Executive and—critically—by the current Labour Government, which is willing to take courageous action on the equality agenda. We all like warm words, but the people in our communities who are most sharply aware of inequality and discrimination, which pepper and shape their every day and every waking moment, deserve from all of us the Executive's unequivocal commitment to putting its money where its mouth is.  It is a privilege to participate in the debate. I trust that the minister will respond to some of the sharp points that I have raised. I move amendment S3M-928.2, to insert at end: "further recognises that equality impact assessment tools should be used in determining and assessing policy priorities and spending allocations, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward a statement to the Parliament detailing how the above commitments on equality and diversity will be delivered through the Scottish budget."

On supporting people, what consultation was there of women's organisations before the decision to lift ring fencing was taken? What participation will those groups have in monitoring single outcome agreements?

Will the minister give way?

Does the member agree that we must be a bit cautious with that argument about the cycle of violence? There are some men alive today who suffer every day because they believe that, when they were young, they failed to protect their mothers. Their courageous voices have also been heard in this Parliament.

Will the member comment on the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's statement in the chamber that he could not support a domestic abuse court in Edinburgh because of the cost of  the Edinburgh trams project, which seems to bear the responsibility for many funding decisions?

As ever, it is an immense privilege to contribute to the  debate, which marks the United Nations 16 days of action on violence against women. It is always important to remember the violence and fear that women and their children suffer. We need to recognise the scourge that remains in far too many homes and take the opportunity to reinvigorate our commitment to act at every level of government and in our communities to eradicate the suffering that is the closest companion of too many families. I appreciate the consensual approach that the minister has taken, but the irony is that domestic violence is a difficult issue—one that has not always gained the recognition or agreement that is often displayed in this place. We must be alive to the fact that, although we seek consensus, the reality for women is of having to live in a world where they are not respected and where violence against women is a weapon of choice, not a matter of regret. There was a time when domestic violence was not seen as a matter for politics. We must commend those who forced the issue on to the political agenda. We commend the women survivors and others who spoke out, organised, and reached out to other women and children. We recognise that, far from being lauded for doing that, they were often condemned. When they spoke, they revealed a dark truth about the nature of the power relationship between men and women, and the nature of power in our society. It is important to look at the impact of domestic abuse on children, but we need to place that consideration in the context of the nature of domestic abuse, where women are overwhelmingly the victims and men are overwhelmingly the perpetrators. We also need to place domestic abuse in the context of violence against women in all its forms, including prostitution and trafficking. Violence against women is the sharpest confirmation of the fact that women remain unequal and that to live as a woman is to have more limited life chances and economic and other opportunities than a man. We recognise the work of women in engaging in shaping policy at Scotland level. We salute, too, the women on the front line, whether in the ASSIST project, Women's Aid, Say Women, or the national domestic violence helpline. All those women work closely with some of the most vulnerable women in our communities, and they do so because they recognise the importance of that work. They also work with women who are not seen as the victims of first regard. We have to be conscious of the fact that groups such as Say Women, which have raised funding concerns, fear that the women with whom they work are seen as problematic and not necessarily worthy of sympathy.  The Labour amendment highlights the need "to review the effect of current enforcement measures" that seek to protect women and children. In particular, it highlights the need for the equalities and justice portfolios to share responsibility rather than pass the buck. In conjunction with the ASSIST project, we need to support the roll-out of domestic abuse courts. The project provides the critical risk assessment information that makes court decisions part of the solution rather than a means of reinforcing the problem for women and children. I ask the minister to confirm that the Government recognises the critical value of multi-agency risk assessment work and multi-agency partnerships. In particular, I ask the minister to respond to the concerns of the women's organisations that have expressed fears that the decision to lift ring fencing at the local level, particularly for supporting people, has the potential to wipe out all local women's aid provision and services. I ask him to acknowledge—as those groups do—that ring fencing was put in place for a purpose, which is to protect services that are not necessarily popular at times of budget constraint. Why was there no consultation with Women's Aid and others before the decision to lift ring fencing was taken? Will women's groups and equalities groups be represented on the monitoring bodies that consider the single outcome agreements? If the minister could point out the relevant outcome agreement in the concordat, as I have already asked him to do, that would be immensely helpful. We also seek reassurance in relation to the prostitution legislation. The challenge is not simply to legislate to support women who are suffering in prostitution, but to provide funding to support women out of prostitution. What role will Scottish Enterprise and other agencies play in supporting those women's specific needs as they move into employment and in providing them with opportunities to move out of prostitution? We seek the minister's assurance that the three-pronged approach continues, combining protection, prevention and provision. I trust—the minister has given us some comfort in this regard—that he will support a review of all the enforcement measures and that justice measures will be seen as part of that process; not as a bonus to the courts in their support to the women, but as a critical means by which women as complainers achieve real access to justice in our courts. Will the minister immediately address the funding concerns of a range of women's organisations that support vulnerable women? Will he outline—and confirm—how his budget will  deliver services and measures to address the broader issue of equalities and the rights of women across the range of our responsibilities, to ensure that in addressing those inequalities we begin to move the process on so that we can challenge the issues of violence against women, which are the sharpest and most difficult expression of violence in our communities and for vulnerable groups? As I have said, there is an important debate to be held, but I challenge the minister to recognise that consensus is built through action, and I look forward to hearing about the actions that the Government will take. I move amendment S3M-894.1, to insert after first "violence against women": "acknowledges the need to review the effect of current enforcement measures to tackle violence against women, in order to ensure that women and children receive the protection and security that they require".

Will the minister clarify which outcome agreement in the concordat is the one by which local government's commitment to tackle violence against women will be tested? No matter how closely I look, I cannot find the phrase "violence against women" in any outcome agreement.

The minister will be aware that, on 1 November, the First Minister confirmed that "a full consultation is being carried out"— [ Official Report , 1 November 2007; c 2984.]  on sportscotland's future. Some of us have been sceptical about that, as there has been no consultation document setting out the available options and their consequences, particularly for the successful bid for the Commonwealth games. As far as the consultation is concerned, while outlining in detail at yesterday's meeting of the Local Government and Communities Committee sportscotland's critical role in protecting open space in the newly published Scottish planning policy 11, planning officials confirmed that they had not been consulted on the organisation's future. Will the minister explain how he can square  the reality that no consultation is taking place with the First Minister's commitment? Does he accept that the issue is very serious and will he agree to end this pantomime and have a proper consultation to ensure that sport in this country is properly served as we develop our commitments with regard to the Commonwealth games?

rose—

I think it is fair to say that, for all of us, a debate on the budget can be challenging. The figures can be  difficult to follow and understand. It is critical that fuller scrutiny of the budget takes place as it goes through its committee stages. It is also difficult to find out how the budget matches what was done by the Executive in the past so that we can track what has happened to money. I would hate to suggest that that is because this Executive does not want to make such a comparison available and transparent to everybody. The budget is challenging for those who need it the most. In the past, we have considered gender proofing it; we have also to consider other issues to do with equality, so we need transparency from the Executive. I fear, again, that the Executive will be overclaiming and underdelivering with this budget, as with so much else. The Labour Party supports a social contract for economic growth and shared prosperity. We can dispute the capacity of the current Executive to work in partnership with the Labour Government at Westminster to sustain economic growth. There is clear confusion over how the Executive will ensure that all Scots benefit and that difficult local challenges are properly recognised. I want to focus on housing, the regeneration of communities, and deprivation. We have already heard what housing organisations have said about the budget. As Patrick Harvie said, we will have to drill further into the claims that are being made about the housing budget. If there is a crisis, as is claimed by the SNP, does the budget match up to it? A very simple question was asked earlier, about the £2,000 first-time buyers grant. We heard that it would be subject to consultation, but that does not answer the question whether the grant has been budgeted for. We are told that there is money to roll out free school meals, subject to the result of the pilot project. Will the £2,000 first-time buyers grant be subject to further consideration, as was suggested by the minister who is responsible for housing? We have not heard. The danger is that people will feel doubt—there seems to be evidence to back up that feeling—when the Executive says that it cannot do things because others in Parliament will not support it. The SNP should put the issues before Parliament so that we can at least investigate them; otherwise, our view will be confirmed that the £2,000 first-time buyers grant, like the claims that have been made about student debt, was a ploy to secure votes and not a pledge to deliver action. We need to know about the balance of spending in housing—there is dispute over the headline figure—and we need to know how much will be spent on social rented housing and the number of new houses that will be built by the end of the third  year of the review, because that will be critical in meeting the homelessness target. Will that target be met? We have said that local government will be responsible for dealing with homelessness, but local government was already anxious about the matter when the legislation was going through Parliament. What will the Government do if local government says that the target is simply unachievable? I wanted to raise a number of issues, but I will end by flagging up the issue of the areas that have not been ring fenced that have been rolled up into the settlement. It is significant, for example, that the private sector grant will remain ring fenced; perhaps that is because when it lost its ring-fenced status it virtually disappeared from local government budgets. After all, we understand the pressures that authorities are under. We realise that the voluntary sector can tackle issues such as violence against women better than local government can because it can define and then meet needs. We seek reassurance that funding of those vulnerable groups will be protected, because they are crucial. I understand that there are pressures on local government and we would certainly find it unacceptable were authorities to be given funds that were not ring fenced, only for the blame to be left at their door when services were not delivered. We need reassurance that local vulnerable groups and communities will not suffer from budgetary sleight-of-hand at Scottish Government level. I also want to know that the Government's compact with local government will be real and that if authorities say they cannot deliver something they will be given the funding to do so.

In passing, I wonder how the First Minister squares his comment that a decision on sportscotland will be made by December with the commitment that he made to me in Parliament that there will be a full consultation on sportscotland's future. As I understand it, that consultation has not yet begun. Will the First Minister acknowledge that the potential talent of many youngsters in Scotland, including those who cheered most loudly on Friday in Glasgow, might not be realised, because of the challenges that they face as a result of disadvantage and deprivation in their everyday lives? I agree with the First Minister that there is a need to sustain grass-roots sports activity and I  welcome the importance that he places on physical regeneration of the east end. Will he ensure that in his broader budget he continues and sustains financial support for crucial local community regeneration initiatives, which reach out to young people, some of whom live in the most isolated and unsupported families and who also perhaps face domestic abuse? Will he support such initiatives, so that those young people can reach a stage at which they can begin to think about being involved in a sporting adventure that many other youngsters are already welcoming and embracing?

The minister spoke about how important it was to put in place structures before the last election. Would she like to comment on the fact that the Minister for Communities and Sport informed me that it was impossible to make any commitment on the community regeneration fund ahead of the comprehensive spending review, but then made a U-turn last week and announced transitional arrangements that could have been put in place  two months earlier? Does she recognise that such hesitancy means that community planning partnerships, as the strategic delivery bodies for European funding, might end up being unable to access money because we cannot guarantee them the necessary matched funding? Will she urge her ministerial colleague to ensure that the £40 million of community regeneration funding that currently comes to Glasgow continues to play its critical role in enabling access to further funding to benefit our local communities?

Will the minister take an intervention?

First time lucky. It would be helpful if the minister would outline why she will not support the Labour amendment. She will be aware of the concern—I say this as a Hebridean who was brought up in inner-city Glasgow—that our environmental approach disregards the urban environment. I therefore ask the Scottish Government to consider looking again at the dilution of Scottish planning policy 11 on  open space, which is under way. Will the Government also consider looking again at the merging of SNH and SEPA into a rural service agency, which the First Minister spoke about during First Minister's questions? Clearly, there needs to be a strong message about urban—

Will Bill Wilson give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The minister might reflect later on what he has just said and judge how unwise it was to make that kind of comment on an issue that members across the Parliament—I acknowledge Gil Paterson's contribution—have taken seriously. Many people on my side of the chamber would wish to work closely with the minister to meet the challenges of funding any such pilot scheme and I am sure that it is an issue on which consensus could be found. Will the minister confirm that a critical element of  the success of the Glasgow pilot has been the advice, support, safety and information services together—ASSIST—project, which has not only supported women but, crucially, informed the court about the nature of domestic abuse and the element of risk that women face? Will he confirm that any roll-out of the pilot in Glasgow will continue to fund ASSIST as a central part of that and that he will ensure that that support element, including intervention in the court, will be woven into the centre of any further developments beyond Glasgow?

I refer the First Minister to his earlier comment that there would be full consultation on sportscotland's future. There has been an internal review by the Executive on its future. Will he instruct his Minister for Communities and Sport to ensure that there is a full consultation on this matter and that sportscotland is not sacrificed to an entirely different agenda around quangos? This is about meeting the needs of sport and sports bodies in  Scotland. Will the First Minister make that commitment to tell the Minister for Communities and Sport to ensure that the consultation is a real one?

The minister has a very odd notion of ministerial accountability. What happens on her watch is her responsibility and, on that basis, we expected her to make an apology to the Parliament. On the right to buy, it seems odd and inconsistent that, having acknowledged the need for flexibility and the fact that the right to buy is experienced differently in different communities, the SNP has plucked out one aspect and made a decision on it ahead of the review. I ask the minister to reflect on the sentence in her statement: "We will also consider further our proposed £2,000 First Time Buyers Grant." That rather begs the question what consideration the SNP gave its proposals before they were put to the electorate and whether the minister is unaware of the trenchant comments by a range of academics that the proposal is expensive, ineffective and meaningless without targeting. What further consideration does the minister intend to give? What form will it take? What is the timetable for coming back to us? Who will be consulted on the matter? Surely the minister will recognise the suspicions that have been generated that that sentence in her statement is simply a cover for, on the one hand,  her inability to defend the policy of the first-time buyers grant and, on the other hand, her reluctance to acknowledge that the promise that was made at the election was made simply to win votes and that, having been successful, it is now a broken promise. Will she give us a timetable for the consultation on the matter? Will she explain why she is not willing either to meet the promise or to justify the opposition to it?

I preface my remarks by saying that I know that the minister is not John Swinney and that he will not be making comprehensive spending review decisions. However, I want to ask him about his responsibilities. The minister will be aware of the work of the housing coalition and its affordable housing demands, which we will no doubt discuss next week. I am sure that he is also aware that the housing coalition commended as an important turning point the budget allocation for housing in the previous comprehensive spending review, in 2004. Will he confirm that he is arguing for at least the same allocation share for housing in this comprehensive spending review as there was in 2004? Will he acknowledge that that would display a real commitment to the affordable housing programme by his Administration?

I understand that the SNP intends to merge the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Natural Heritage, which are of course important bodies for the protection of local communities. Indeed, the First Minister himself cheerily reassured us that the merger was okay, because the bodies were moving to become a new rural service. Will the minister confirm whether that is the case? If so, can she explain how such a rural service will serve the needs of my constituents, who, as she is aware, live not in a rural area but in a city that has suffered disproportionately from environmental injustices and which deserves to be protected from further attacks on its people's health and well-being?

rose—

The point that I was trying to make was that the Parliament is not getting the opportunity even to discuss key issues. Some things are for a Government to decide. It is ultimately for the Government to decide what the Scottish Enterprise network should look like. However, the SNP Government has failed to take on board anything that anyone says through the  parliamentary process. That is a failure. It is an administrative approach rather—

rose  —

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am happy to speak in the debate. I will start with a confession. At first, I thought that it was rather uncharitable and a bit too critical for us to attack the SNP, which has been in power only since May. We all recognise the real challenges that the Government faces and the hard decisions that must be made. However, the problem for the SNP is that it cannot use that defence given its triumphalist, self-regarding and overblown claims about what it is doing. It is in that context of overclaiming and underdelivering that it is entirely legitimate to focus on the gulf between Executive claims and Executive action. I say to Patrick Harvie that the SNP has claimed that it is building consensus but it is doing that behind closed doors instead of working through the parliamentary process. I will comment on the Executive's approach in an area in which I have a particular interest—housing and communities. As has been mentioned, the motion talks about the first-time buyers grant. That was an SNP manifesto commitment for which, I do not doubt, people voted. However, the Executive's position is not clear. Has it accepted that it is a costly promise that does not differentiate between people who struggle to get on the property ladder and those who do not? In the Local Government and Communities Committee on 27 June, Nicola  Sturgeon said that she accepts that she is in a minority Government and cannot automatically have her position agreed. However, if she believes in the policy—I presume that she does, as it was in the SNP's manifesto—it would be reasonable to expect that she might try. She also said: "By necessity and by desire, we will have to test all our manifesto commitments in the Parliament."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 27 June 2007; c 22.] Nicola Sturgeon and the SNP cannot use the fact that they are in a minority Government as an alibi; they cannot say, "We would have done this but these bad people won't let us do it." There have been many examples, over the past eight years, of policy coming to Parliament, being shaped and moulded by Parliament and coming out very different at the end of the process. Either Nicola Sturgeon should be honest and say that the SNP now does not believe that the policy is credible, or she should test it through the parliamentary process. If she does neither, our suspicion will be confirmed: like so many other manifesto promises, it was designed to win votes and, having served its purpose, can now be quietly dropped. The second feature of the SNP Government is its pretending to act. Members may recall the housing supply task force, which was talked up and lauded—of course, we were criticised last week for wanting to set up a talking shop. It has now been confirmed by members of that task force, who accepted that their work would be determined by the Executive's housing proposals and the comprehensive spending review, that they were not told to produce a report or asked to comment on the Executive's housing proposals. They have not been asked even for comments on what the Executive should argue for in the comprehensive spending review or for a view on the future of Communities Scotland as a crucial housing regulator. Another example is the central heating programme. We are told that there will be a review of it, but yesterday we learned that there is no remit, timescale or even a funding commitment for the central heating proposals.

Let me make my next point. The third charge for the SNP is that it takes administrative action, safe from parliamentary scrutiny, when it suits it. I will give members one small example: the abolition of Communities Scotland. I was told in June: "We will take time to consider the issues properly, consulting both organisations, trade unions and other key stakeholders, including ensuring that the relevant Parliamentary Committee has an input into the process  before the final decisions are taken."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 23 July 2007; S3W-1701.]  On 19 September, Stewart Maxwell then said that "it is imperative that we reach a decision as soon as possible ... If the committee has any other thoughts to tell me about Communities Scotland, I am happy to listen to them and to feed them back into the continuing process."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 19 September 2007; c 74.] The reality is that the decision to abolish Communities Scotland, like many other Executive decisions, is defended on the grounds that it is a manifesto commitment and will be done precisely because it can be done administratively. That is the charge: the Executive is behaving like the old Scottish Office. It is, when it can, taking administrative action, unaccountable to Parliament. The last charge is that the Administration calls itself a Government but will not govern. On the community regeneration fund—an issue that I have raised in the past—Nicola Sturgeon told the Local Government and Communities Committee on 27 June: "The committee will have appropriate involvement, but I will balance that with a clear commitment to people in the areas involved that clarity and certainty will be provided". She was asked: "Can we say that you are determined that funding for those projects will continue?" She replied: "Yes ... the matter will be a key priority for Stewart Maxwell and me in the summer, so that we can have clarity soon after the recess."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Communities Committee , 17 June 2007; c 28-9.] Can the cabinet secretary perhaps tell us what she is going to do?

With respect, that is precisely my point: the cabinet secretary should stop looking for alibis and start making decisions. I know—because we did it—that the Executive could put in transitional arrangements to ensure that projects continue while the comprehensive spending review continues. Let me also tell Nicola Sturgeon that the comprehensive spending review is not something that is visited upon the Executive but something that it shapes and determines by its priorities. It told us in June that it could take a decision but it  tells us now that it cannot. It should be honest about what it is going to do to communities. The charges remain: it is disgraceful that the Executive will not take decisions; it is cynical in the decisions that it takes; and ultimately—I say this particularly to Patrick Harvie—it has absolutely no confidence in its rhetoric on consensus. It will not speak to Parliament about what it wants to do, which is the biggest broken promise of all.

I recognise what the minister has said about the Dundee pilot, but my understanding is that no proper evaluation of it was ever carried out. We know where the responsibility for that lies, but will the minister consider studying what happened in Dundee by seeking an independent evaluation of the pilot? That might inform any action that is taken as a consequence of the other points that have been raised tonight.

I add my congratulations to Kenny Gibson on securing this important debate and on the positive motion that he lodged. If I was struggling to think of something to say, I could usefully fill the time simply by reading the motion out, as its length and the substantial information in it add to the debate. I make a plug for the Local Government and Communities Committee, which will carry out a short investigation into fuel poverty issues. We will use some innovative approaches this coming Wednesday: we are asking people to text and e-mail in, to raise issues of concern to them. We look forward to seeing the responses. That could be an approach that other committees want to take. This members' business debate is just one part of the important wider debate on fuel poverty. It is an area where creative thinking across the parties and outwith the Parliament, in the voluntary sector and elsewhere, has moved the debate forward and has already resulted in important things being done. I find many of the comments that Kenny Gibson made about the potential for Warm Zones particularly interesting. We should recognise that the initiative forms part of a broader approach. I encourage the Executive to recognise that things can be done at every layer of government to address fuel poverty. It is up to Westminster, local authorities and us, and it is important to join our actions up. I urge the minister to ensure that he continues the important dialogue with the fuel companies, who present some interesting ideas on what they can do—there is more that they can do if they are encouraged. We should place this debate in the broader context of spending on housing. We can, through how we spend and build, ensure that our houses are better insulated than they were in the past. We can also address people's concerns through refurbishment programmes. I will raise a couple of issues that the minister will be able to respond to—he is probably aware of a number of them. As Kenny Gibson said, the statistics on the warm deal programme show a marked reduction in the number of houses that have been treated since 2004. The number of houses that receive only loft insulation implies that the level of cavity-wall insulation is falling steadily, which supports the view that fewer measures are being fitted per household. That raises the issue of the level of grants, which I concede needs to be addressed. It is important that there is a continuing advertising campaign for the warm deal programme. I would welcome any comments the minister may have on the need to ensure that  resources are made available so that the campaign is as effective as possible and reaches those who need it most. One concern regarding the Warm Zone pilot that took place in Dundee is that there was not a proper evaluation of the project when it ended. I hope that the minister will commit to an independent, in-depth evaluation by the Executive into how effective that pilot was. I know that there are some who do not see that approach as the entire solution, and I would welcome some work being done on that. In England, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has granted a budget of more than £6.3 million to support the growth of Warm Zones. We are keen that the Executive interrogate the success of the Dundee pilot to inform its future spending. We are all in the same place as regards addressing the issue, which also has a geographical dimension: the quality of some housing in our urban areas and the problems faced there need to be addressed too. I have given a plug for the Local Government and Communities Committee and its approach, I acknowledge the critical role that all sectors have to play, and I look forward to commitments from the Executive to explore the option of Warm Zones—if not in Mr Gibson's constituency, then certainly in mine.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its priorities are for community regeneration. (S3O-779)

The minister will be aware that the previous Labour-led Executive committed £300 million over the past three years to  community regeneration. That critical funding, which provides successful and sustainable approaches to regeneration, comes to an end next March, but no decision has been made on its future. Is the minister aware that making no decision is not pain free? Is he aware that the lack of certainty is resulting in projects facing an end to the services that they provide, which is resulting in postholders looking for other jobs, and that, as a consequence, we are losing services randomly rather than on the basis of the quality of their work? Does the Administration intend to end the support for community regeneration, in which case the minister should be honest and announce that cut in funding of £100 million per year to our most vulnerable communities? Alternatively, will the minister continue our approach?

The transitional approach, which has been taken in the past, is to announce that the funding will be rolled forward, so that community planning partnerships can prepare for any changes in Government priorities and, as a consequence, give people certainty at a local level. What will you do, minister? Will the minister manage the transition or come clean about the costs?

I accept that we do not want talking shops, but why would bringing together the people who do the financial modelling with ministers, the key people in GHA, Communities Scotland, community activists, tenants and the community-based housing associations not drive progress forward? The alternative, which is proposed by the minister, gives the responsibility to GHA, which has been given an opportunity to  get off the hook by the Communities Scotland report. I have been involved in an environment such as the one we propose. It is a challenging place to be, but it could be very productive.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I wonder whether the Liberal Democrats support the call for Audit Scotland to examine the rights and interests of owners in the programme that GHA developed.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Perhaps Alex Neil, who is now clearly a great supporter of his party, unlike in the past, could define the logic of his position. If there is a black hole, are you calling on the Executive to fill it or have you bought GHA's line that it should continue to exist as it does now? Your minister says that GHA is a transitional body, but you are saying that it is a black hole—I do not agree with that—so will your minister fill that black hole? Otherwise, your position is totally illogical.

Will Bill Aitken take an intervention?

Does Bill Aitken accept the concerns of some people, particularly those within the housing association movement, that the message of the Communities Scotland report is that breaking up of GHA into big chunks will defeat the aspirations of many organisations that have put in fundable and credible business plans? Would you ask GHA to take those seriously and not impose a number?

He certainly has. I am happy to contribute to the debate. There is no doubt that housing always generates strong feelings and, in certain people, an excessive amount of hyperventilation. It is a genuinely serious issue for the Parliament and I want to address the issues that are highlighted in the Labour amendment. The amendment attempts to make a genuine contribution to finding a way forward. I make no apology for emphasising the significance of the range of housing issues, sometimes conflicting, that matter to communities across Scotland. Those issues are critical and we expect the Executive to deal with them in a reasonable timescale. There is a balance to be struck between what we spend on social rented housing and the needs of owner-occupiers. We must consider how we address low-cost home ownership; the balance of need between rural and urban areas; the challenge of homelessness; and the balance between our spending on bricks and mortar and our support for homeless people. What do we do about meeting the needs of those who choose to buy a house inappropriately because the way in which we define need, in terms of social rented housing, means that they cannot apply for those houses? As a consequence of that, too much of our social rented housing has become residual and is not used by mixed communities. There is something for this Parliament to celebrate in relation to housing, because there has been consensus on a broad range of issues, including the work of the housing improvement task force and the homelessness task force. We welcomed the creation of the housing supply task force, but I am disappointed that the Local Government and Communities Committee was informed this morning that the task force will not be consulted on the forthcoming green paper, will not comment on the future of Communities Scotland, and will have no opportunity to influence or shape the comprehensive spending review, which will be critical to the delivery of policies. I ask the Minister for Communities and Sport, in summing up, to commit at least to continue with the previous Executive's proportion of spending on housing—a spending commitment in the 2004 comprehensive spending review that was recognised by the housing coalition that now  lobbies on affordable housing as representing significant progress. We need action on housing. Some people might be concerned about the debate's narrow focus on the inspection report on GHA.

The member should let me make some progress. I acknowledge that wholesale stock transfer has been a controversial topic. There are serious and legitimate concerns, especially in Glasgow, about the inspection report by Communities Scotland. Indeed, some people have remarked to me that they were surprised that GHA was graded as a C and not as a D. There has been action by Communities Scotland to appoint on to the board. The report is challenging and it highlights serious issues, which concern all of us, about the needs and concerns of the tenants and communities of Glasgow. I do not underestimate the challenge that the report presents. At the stage of transfer, there were evident tensions and anxieties about the future. On the one hand, there were those in communities such as the one that I represent who knew that the community-based housing association movement and co-operatives had the power to transform their areas and wanted them to do that. On the other hand, there were those who had not seen that happen and were anxious about it. Indeed, one argument for wholesale stock transfer was that it would ensure that nobody was left behind. Partial stock transfer depended on individual communities' capacity to be strong enough to take it forward.

I absolutely agree with that. There is a challenge for Government back benchers who believe that there is a financial black hole. The solution is not to say, "There is one, and we're not going to do anything about it." They have to address the matter. Second-stage transfer was part of the core business of GHA that was identified in the ballot. When Communities Scotland, GHA and the accountable officer of the Scottish Executive signed off the transfer, they understood that funding had been provided for second-stage transfer. I do not doubt that Nicola Sturgeon will now understand the power of the official advice—not ministerial direction, but official recognised  sign-off—that the finances were correct in that case. That is a significant safeguard.

I do not accept that. The point that I am trying to make is that, at the stage of transfer, it was important to go at the pace of tenants, to build confidence, and to move on. No one was in any doubt that the finances were in place to deliver second-stage transfer. What is critical now is the action that is taken in response to the report. There is a clear message that GHA is failing in its basic responsibilities. Those who say that there is a choice to fund either refurbishment or changes to local structures, as Alex Neil has said, are entirely missing the point. The message that has arisen from Glasgow's housing for a long time, which is reinforced by the report, is that investment on its own is not enough. GHA has huge resources, but it is failing in its core services to tenants and owners. Indeed, the community-based housing association approach shows that local, rational decision making meets local communities' needs and breaks the cycle of investment in failure that has made Glasgow's tenants suffer for too long. That cycle is characterised by centralised decision making that meets the needs of the body rather than the people whom it serves. It was broken by the community-based housing association movement, which has many friends in the Parliament. That is why second-stage transfer is integral to making investment work throughout Glasgow and is not an added extra. Otherwise, the absence of second-stage transfer from GHA's current programme would have meant that its other services were being delivered. We know that that is not the case. I must ask the minister to rise to the challenge. In our amendment to the motion, we have given reasonable options for what the minister might want to do. It is not enough to say that it is up to GHA when she is faced by the chief executive of GHA who I understand has said that she is in principle opposed to second-stage transfer; by a report from the Government regulatory body highlighting serious failures in GHA; and by tenants and housing association members across Glasgow who have told me that their needs should not become a cheap political football but should drive the approach in the Parliament. I understand the temptation of an incoming Administration to blame the outgoing Administration for any problems that it faces. I  know that Government back benchers will be under pressure to disregard the critical issues that are highlighted in our amendment on a way forward in order to secure the entirely partisan political benefit of attacking their political opponents. I understand that—perhaps I would have done it myself. However, all members on the Government benches who raised concerns about GHA and who promised tenants, owners and communities that they would do something when they were in power should be mindful of the consequence of supporting the motion. In effect, the motion lets GHA off the hook, saying that it is not its problem. It would sign away the opportunity for the 39 local housing organisations that have developed credible cases for transfer, which are now with GHA. Those cases would be written away with the new model of shared services, which has been around for a long time. We owe it to those tenants to ensure that the cases are considered. In particular, I urge those who style themselves friends of the housing association movement—many of whom belong in the Government party, as well as in mine—to reflect on what we have identified as a way forward. As I said to Alex Neil, if they think that there is a black hole, they need to address it as a Government. If they recognise, as we do, that there is not a black hole but a failure of commitment, perhaps they can address that. The amendment is deliberately non-controversial, and I urge the minister first to reconvene the ministerial progress group.

The ministerial progress group was not a talking shop. It brought together every bit of expertise and commitment throughout Glasgow to deliver. It brought together a programme of joint action of a staggered series of proposed transfers across Glasgow. Members should read the joint action report, because it gives us a road map. Critically, the group brings together people to make a difference—not just a discussion or warm words from the minister. Secondly, I urge the minister to consider the role of Audit Scotland in exploring the financial issues of concern in the report. That would include offering Audit Scotland the opportunity to investigate GHA's home improvement programme  and its impact on owners. Again, I was disappointed by the minister's lukewarm words on that. Thirdly, I urge the minister to explore other legislative and creative options to use a mechanism of community right to buy to allow those who currently manage properties to see how they could take control. We urge the minister to explore all those options: be creative and think positively about how matters can be taken forward. There is a challenge in our amendment for the Government, and there are suggestions for action that it cannot justify refusing to consider.

The Government motion allows GHA off the hook. I urge members on the Government back benches and others to consider the options in our amendment and to support it at 5 o'clock. I move amendment S3M-539.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "agrees that housing is an important priority and calls on the Scottish Executive to come forward with proposals for implementing its housing policy within this session of the Parliament; further notes the Communities Scotland inspection report on Glasgow Housing Association (GHA) and believes that the Executive should act to ensure that GHA meets its responsibilities to its tenants and to owners in the services it provides; further agrees that the Executive should intervene to drive forward progress of second stage transfer in Glasgow, given the critical role of community engagement and ownership in ensuring that the significant investment available to the GHA secures real and lasting improvements to Glasgow's housing, and believes that progress should be based around the following: (1) re-establishing the ministerial progress group, bringing together the broad spectrum of interests and expertise across Glasgow's communities, along with other key stakeholders, to explore the options available to deliver community ownership, (2) exploring the role of Audit Scotland in tackling the issues identified in the Communities Scotland inspection report and (3) exploring possibilities of community right to buy as a means of delivering community ownership."

Given that the minister's party advised tenants in Renfrewshire, Highland and Edinburgh, among other areas, to vote against their own interests and against stock transfer, and that tenants who are asking for help now are being told, "It's nothing to do with us," it is a bit rich for the minister to talk to us about taking responsibility like that.  Will the minister confirm that he understands the importance of community ownership in Glasgow, which will break the cycle of investment and failure to invest, which Glasgow has experienced historically? Does he acknowledge the importance of that? Will he outline what he intends to do to take forward the drive towards community ownership? Will he reconvene the ministerial group—which I previously chaired—which brought together the experience and expertise of people who work in housing throughout Glasgow to address the challenge of housing in the city? Will he encourage that group to work with him in considering how we can put the interests of the tenants of Glasgow first? Their interests should come before party-political interests—however indulgent the minister wants to be. The critical point in the report is that the GHA needs to address the interests of tenants.

Will the minister please comment on the ministerial group?

The First Minister will be aware of the widely acclaimed work of the domestic abuse court and the assist project, which operates in my constituency and across south Glasgow. I welcome his executive decision in recognising the benefit of rolling out the pilot across Glasgow. Will he confirm the timescale for acting on that decision? Will he give  a commitment that any Glasgow-wide project will include a key role for assist, which supports vulnerable women and children and provides critical information to the court on risk? Will he ensure that his Cabinet Secretary for Justice does not press on with his dangerous blanket opposition to custodial sentences of less than six months, given the widespread recognition of the benefit of such disposals in providing real respite to some of our most vulnerable women and children and providing a real punishment for, and sending a real message to, those who perpetrate violence within their own homes and families?

I note the cabinet secretary's comments, including those on consensus. Although plenty of members now talk the talk on consensus, planning is a very good example of the previous Executive's record of walking the walk on consensus. I welcome the fact that, in building consensus, John Swinney has expressed support for the previous Executive's approach. By comparison, many in his party, including his business manager, wish to take a different approach. The statement encourages us to recognise the power of effective planning in transforming our communities and of the critical role that participation by individuals and communities—not consultation, but participation—plays at an early stage in ensuring the right kind of strategic planning decisions. My questions are on resource issues, which I believe are critical to successful realisation of the aims that lie behind the national planning framework. First, will the cabinet secretary continue to consider capacity in the planning system? How do we make planning an attractive career? Are we looking actively at scholarships and incentives to encourage people to come into planning—a profession that gives individuals a powerful means of taking part in the transformation of communities? Secondly, and importantly, will Mr Swinney acknowledge that real participation involves skilled facilitation at local level? Is he willing to support organisations such as Planning Aid for Scotland that have credible track records in facilitating such work? In the need to look for cuts across government spending, will he resist the temptation to cut funding to such organisations? Doing so may be seen as a soft option, but such skilled  facilitators are critical to the delivery of an effective planning process in Scotland.

Will the minister confirm that he recognises the importance of houses for rent as well as houses for sale in any affordable housing strategy? Will he confirm the apparent indication by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing in committee yesterday that the Government intends to increase significantly the role of the private sector in meeting housing need? Will such an approach include houses for purchase and houses for rent? Does the minister acknowledge the cabinet secretary's indication that the increased role results from the current unsustainable level of public investment in social rented housing? Although he cannot tell us what will be in the comprehensive spending review, will he at least indicate the finances that he will argue for in support of affordable housing strategies, given his own back bencher Tricia Marwick's comment that the failure of housing policy in the past has been due not to the direction of travel but to the level of investment?

I hear what the member says about a public service. Will she comment on the cabinet secretary's views on how we fund housing, which is increasingly by using private capital? Does she welcome that, since health funding seems to exclude that approach?

rose—

On a point of order. Presiding Officer. I would be grateful if you could come back to the chamber at some stage to say what you understand the purpose of the summing-up at the end of a debate to be. Would it not be sensible for a member to say, when summing up, what they intend to do if they lose the vote?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer—[ Interruption. ] Members on the Government benches seem very upset, but this is a significant issue to do with respect for the Parliament. I seek clarification on the question that I raised about parliamentary questions and the use of holding answers. Presiding Officer, do you know when authority was given by Stewart Maxwell's office for release of the substantive answers to my questions? Had he cleared those before I made my point of order after First Minister's question time? If so, I wonder whether you have asked him why he did not explain that to the chamber. Perhaps you could seek clarification of why the substantive answer was then released at half past 1. Also, what was the response to your comments on the use of holding answers, and will you explore whether embargoed copies were issued to anyone? Will you ask the Executive why it would place an embargo on a document that it acknowledged was significant to a debate? I ask you to explore further the substantial issues to do with the lack of information that was available to members.

Will the member take an intervention?

I start by acknowledging the words of Willie Coffey. Margaret Jamieson was a good friend to those of us on this side of the chamber and we appreciate the comments that he made. We recognise the significant personal challenge that it must have been to make that contribution. If any other members made a maiden speech this afternoon, I congratulate them as well. On the issue of planning, I refer the minister to the planning advice note on affordable housing, which states that developments are expected to meet a benchmark for affordable housing of 25 per cent. We hope that he will ensure that that is pursued. I have some respect for Tricia Marwick on housing matters. I say to her that there was a consensus in the previous session on the direction of travel and that housing organisations are not saying that the situation was shameful. No one could credibly suggest that there was not discussion, debate, deliberation and consideration of housing policy at a significant and detailed level over the past eight years. It is misrepresentation to say that the ideas were good but the investment was not there. We know that there were record levels of investment and we all recognise the challenges that are involved in this area. In that regard, however, I ask the minister what investment he is committed to, at this stage, in relation to his proposals. I am a fan of locally based housing associations. I ask the minister to reflect in particular on the role of Communities Scotland in relation to tenant participation and engagement with communities. I trust that his decisions on Communities Scotland  will not be brought about by pressure from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth but be based on sound reasoning on communities and housing. Is the minister committed to increased support for homestake? It is a policy that is popular, targeted and effective. Will he continue to support the policy for 8,000 new homes this year, and will he indicate his targets and the capital programme behind that as well? Will the minister also clarify the proposal for a £2,000 grant to first-time buyers? It is evident that there are serious questions about that policy. It will be the Labour position that he should simply accept the arguments and move on. If, however, he still wishes to test the policy, I ask him not to use the comprehensive spending review as an alibi. That is a process in which he should be engaged. If he does not reject the £2,000 proposal, will he commit to testing the policy through the parliamentary process? We could take evidence and consider whether it is a credible option, although we would be hard pushed to discover, on current trends, whether it is. What is the minister doing to ensure the progress of private landlord registration? That was a critical issue in the previous session in relation to safe houses being placed in safe communities. How is he working with the private landlord sector on providing affordable homes and on the question of the voluntary accreditation scheme? When will the minister provide us with an analysis of the consultation on the purchaser's information pack, and what will his position be on that? Will he tell us what the Government's position is on a single seller survey? Understandably, as home ownership has grown, challenging issues have developed on that, and I would like clarification. I would reflect on the point that Margo MacDonald made about Edinburgh. It encapsulates one of the challenges for anyone who wants to address the question of housing: where do we invest? Do we invest in prosperous areas, where people are pushed out of the market? We must also recognise the challenge of regeneration. Indeed, one challenge for the Government is that it has separated off community regeneration from community planning. Will the minister commit himself to addressing that problem? In his summation, I hope that the minister will commit to working with the Parliament and the committees, as well as housing organisations, tenants and communities, in order to ensure success.

I certainly would not want people to have that impression. The challenge that I was posing is that, although we have to address the question in Edinburgh, we also have to recognise that, if we use the test of economic hot spots where people are driven out of the housing market as the means of directing funding, we will also have to address the question of the Scottish housing quality standard in houses that are maintained and to make a commitment to regenerate communities where there is no demand. That point also relates to the right to buy. I hope that the minister will commit at least to considering flexibility in his approach, because the right to buy has secured mixed communities in some places but done the opposite in others. I hope that the minister will be able to respond to my comments.

I welcome Stewart Maxwell to his position. However, I am genuinely disappointed that this first opportunity to debate housing should be so abridged. That, of course, is a matter for the Executive, which decided to include a statement and another debate as part of business earlier on. I am delighted by the presence of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and trust that she will respond to my point of order and ensure that, in the Cabinet, she is a strong advocate for housing. Although I will speak about Stewart Maxwell's statement when the Presiding Officer responds, I say to Stewart Maxwell that he ought to recognise that Government by wizard wheezes and sleight of hand is demeaning to his office and insulting to this chamber. It will not do. I am not clear why the availability of what now appears to be an economic discussion paper was not indicated before, but I will pursue the matter later. What consensus can achieve in Parliament when people work together, particularly in housing policy, has been a significant mark of the Scottish Parliament over the past eight years: the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 was passed by 114 votes to one; the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003 was passed by 98 votes to none; and the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 was passed by 116 votes to one. The SNP will have to learn to do more than just spell the word "consensus" to achieve it in future. There was clear agreement across the chamber on those policies. It was the significant work to build and achieve that consensus that was the new politics of Scotland—it built on the work of the housing improvement and homelessness task forces, it was shaped by the concerns and interests of MSPs in this Parliament and the communities that they represent, and critically, it understood that if we are going to build communities and good housing, we work with the communities to understand what the problems are and how they have to be solved. That approach is in stark contrast to the current one, which is represented by the SNP flagship policy of pledging £2,000 to first-time buyers. Remarkably, Mr Maxwell both departs from his policy and holds on to it at the same time.

First, the previous Executive was committed to second-stage transfer whereas  the member's party opposed making a £700 million investment in Glasgow's housing. Therefore, we will take no lectures from those who had no confidence in the people of Glasgow. The fact is that the first-time buyers policy has a recklessness cost of perhaps £50 million or £70 million and an opportunity cost.

Our minister says that the SNP does not know whether it will definitely implement that policy—that will depend on the comprehensive spending review.

The comprehensive spending review is not a process that happens to ministers. I want to know what the Minister for Communities and Sport will argue in the comprehensive spending review. Will he argue for his flagship policy, which everyone who works in housing has rubbished and which will not deliver the change that they want? Will he hold on to that policy or will he accept the inevitable fact that it will not work? It is essential to address some of the significant tensions in housing. One issue with which we can all wrestle is how much affordable housing will be social rented housing and how much will be for low-cost ownership. What will we do for people whose stock has been transferred? What support will the Administration give people who voted for stock transfer? What will the SNP do for people who voted no because members of that party scaremongered them into voting against their own interest? Nothing has been said about a capital programme in housing.

I know that Bob Doris has been a member only a short while, but I tell him that trying to rewrite history is a bad idea. Opponents of stock transfer said that it  represented privatisation. The SNP actively encouraged people to vote against their own interests and against investment, but now it has nothing to say to the people of Renfrewshire, the Highlands or Edinburgh.

I want people to think about some of the hard issues. When the minister invests money, will he address need in rural areas or in economic hot spots or will he recognise the challenge in regeneration areas, where the pressure on housing costs does not exist, but a huge challenge exists nevertheless? Will the minister focus on the challenge of homelessness? We are proud of the priority that we gave to tackling homelessness, but the minister's dismal response—

When ministers finally meet the housing organisations that they conceded this afternoon they would meet, they might want to reflect on the fact that those organisations supported everything that the previous Executive did on housing, saw that as the direction of travel and are calling on the current Administration to follow that. There has been consensus. Members cannot rubbish what they first supported. They cannot say, "This is a new broom," without producing proposals to address the situation. On homelessness, we must think about the challenge of mixed communities. We need to understand how we spend on homeless people. We need to consider not just bricks and mortar, but the serious question of what makes people homeless. I do not think that the minister said anything about the right to buy.

We need to talk about pressured area status and so on. The debate is important. We have had a bad start to it but, when there is productive and  constructive work to do, Labour stands ready. We look forward to the challenge of developing housing strategy for the next period.

The minister says that housing is a priority, but how does he intend to build consensus in the chamber when he deliberately and wilfully ensured that we would not have access to a document that the journalists knew about?

I am interested to know how the minister will build those houses. He will be aware that some of his back benchers believe that the housing association movement is privatisation. On the other hand, in a debate in February 2007, Roseanna Cunningham said: "I do not care who builds affordable houses as long as they are built. They must be built both for rent and for sale".— [ Official Report , 22 February 2007; c 32465.]  Can I assume that the minister is not rejecting the use of transfer to housing associations, or indeed the use of the private sector, which I understand the cabinet secretary ruled out in relation to the health service this morning?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I regret very much that I have again to take up chamber time. My point of order is further to the point of order that I raised earlier, and I thank you for your earlier response. I was anxious that I may have understated or overstated my case in respect of the degree of concern that I have about the use of holding replies. However, as I left the chamber, a colleague told me that a journalist had advised him that a housing document would be issued this afternoon. As I have had no notice of or warning about the document, I asked the Scottish Parliament information centre whether a housing document was to be issued. SPICe said that it could not tell me, but that a document had been embargoed until 2.30 this afternoon. I repeat that I was not aware of any such document although I am the shadow housing spokesperson. I went back to my desk and prepared to write my speech. I was so inspired by the issue of housing that I thought that I had better check my e-mails. I discovered that there were, in fact, written answers to the questions to which holding replies had been issued yesterday afternoon. As you will recall, Presiding Officer, earlier I questioned the difficulty in answering a question about how many meetings ministers had had with organisations and when meetings were planned. At 1.30 this afternoon, the following statement was issued by Mr Maxwell: "The Government will announce today a number of proposals for tackling Scotland's housing problems. I have spoken to the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations today, and in the coming weeks will discuss with them and others with an interest in the future of Scotland's housing how to take forward these proposals." The statement is repeated in relation to Shelter: the minister has "spoken to Shelter, informed it of the statement and will work with it in future." It is a matter of grave regret and seriousness for Parliament that the SNP's housing spokesperson regards the chamber as being entirely irrelevant in the shaping of housing policy. I suspect that the new Administration does not reflect properly on past practice in the Parliament. In eight years of housing policy in the Parliament, we have built consensus and secured a real difference. However, statements are now being issued with no warning given—except to journalists and lobbying organisations. There is no opportunity to  scrutinise those statements and there is malevolent use of the holding replies system to ensure the best possible timing. Presiding Officer, I would ask you to reflect on the possibility of calling the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to the chamber to discuss the answer as a matter of urgency, but Ms Sturgeon is so little interested in Scotland's housing issues that she is in London, speaking to English health authorities. That is a matter of regret. I therefore ask you to call Mr Maxwell to account for this disgraceful attitude to the chamber and his ridiculous way of dealing with the proper approach to the matter. I do not want to intervene in this afternoon's abridged debate and I hope that you will take this matter extremely seriously.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on the potential misuse of holding replies to written questions, as I am informed that the figure for such replies currently stands at 40 per cent. Later today we will have a sadly foreshortened debate on a critical area of action for Scotland—housing. The Presiding Officer may be aware of the anxieties of Labour members and in our communities about the lack of interest that the SNP Scottish Executive has shown in housing and the low priority that it has given to the issue. I lodged a series of questions about meetings that ministers have held with organisations that are interested in housing; I also asked what meetings were planned. Being a reasonable person, I did not list a range of housing organisations, groups and—crucially—tenants who might reasonably expect to meet the Minister for Communities and Sport. On 6 June, I lodged specific questions about meetings held and planned with two organisations—the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and Shelter. Yesterday—on 20 June—I received a number of holding replies to those questions from Stewart Maxwell, which stated that the minister would reply as soon as possible. Collating the information that I requested is a simple task. Is it reasonable for the minister to withhold that information ahead of today's debate on housing, given that the answers might have given us at least a sense of how much ministerial priority has been given to housing in the Executive's first weeks? Presiding Officer, if, as I suspect, the answer to the questions is "none", will you outline what action you will take against a minister who either seems wilfully to have misused the holding reply system to resist providing relevant information ahead of a debate in the Parliament, or is claiming to need more than 14 days to add up to zero?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I shall attempt to be more temperate than I was in my opening speech, although the debate has been less temperate than I had expected. I will flag up several issues. I acknowledge the concerns about national lottery funding, but those concerns are shared across parties—the same parties that supported at Westminster the London Olympic Games and Paralympic Games Act 2006 and supported using national lottery funding for the Olympics. The test is not only whether Scottish young people will benefit. Throughout the UK, youngsters are determined to benefit from the Olympics. I acknowledge the funding issue, but it should not be the decisive factor in how members vote at 5 o'clock. I do not think that the Liberal Democrats and others who have raised the issue want to associate themselves with some of the more intemperate views of Alex Neil, for example, who showed hostility to his neighbours when he said that if London wants the Olympic games, it can pay for them. That reflects a different attitude from one of concern about national lottery funding.

No, thank you.

Well, fair enough.

Alex Neil knows that that is a false division. He knows that, on that question, a commitment has been given to the voluntary sector at a UK level, which it has welcomed. The core of this debate was exposed in Kenny Gibson's stunning speech, when he talked about the north-British cringe. He says that Scottish sportspeople are deluded and only think that the current approach is the best approach. He says that they are experiencing a north British cringe and only think that it would be better to go and work with their peers down in England. However, he knows better. The truth is that they are being driven down to England against their will. We should have more respect for the sportspeople of Scotland and acknowledge the fact that they and their groups and bodies have thought about the issue. I am proud of Caitlin McClatchey, and I was proud of Allan Wells when he ran in a British vest. That is not the north British cringe; it is recognising how we reveal our sporting talent.  I was disturbed to hear somebody boo when Iain Smith said that he might support the English cricket team. That kind of knee-jerk hostility is the antithesis of what we teach our young people on sports fields throughout Scotland. It is to be deprecated, not celebrated, and it is disturbing that the party of government in the Parliament would collude with that kind of attitude. The issue relating to Scottish football is interesting and significant. Labour members have said that we will support the SFA in the position that it takes. However, we do not need to have a Scottish Olympic team just because of a perceived threat to the Scottish football team—that argument is illogical and irrelevant, and it is not worthy of the minister. A Scottish Olympic team should be established as a consequence of a decision to go independent; it should not be used as a midwife to create the conditions for an independent Scotland, which is obviously the SNP's view. At 5 o'clock, members must decide whether they wish to associate themselves with that kind of hostility towards our sportspeople or whether they want to put them at the centre of sporting achievement. We must reassert the importance to our Scottish sporting tradition of our sportspeople wanting to be part of a British team because of the personal achievement that that confers and because of what it does for young Scots and others throughout the UK. I urge members to support our amendment, which, critically, recognises an event—the Paralympics—that the motion and other amendments do not mention and which is about providing access to and supporting a British Olympic team of which we can all be proud.

I am tempted to say to Stewart Maxwell, in the memorable words spoken by Gerry McNee after he listened to someone on the phone rambling about a sports issue, "What's your point, caller?" I am confused and bemused by the minister's speech. Perhaps he needs some performance training before he comes back to the chamber. I am grateful for the support for my amendment, which highlights the critical importance of the Paralympics and the issue of access. We acknowledge the record of the previous Executive in being ambitious for Scotland and supporting Glasgow in its bid for the Commonwealth games. It is a matter of regret that the first debate on sport this session has to be on the issue of a Scottish Olympic team. Although the debate is on a Tory motion, it is of the SNP's making, given that Mr Salmond claims to want a Scottish Olympic team, although he is remarkably invisible today—he was not present during the minister's confused speech. We need to be clear about why what we decide today is important. We must challenge the SNP's  wish to continue to pursue the notion of a Scottish OIympic team. It is not supported by sportspeople and commentators throughout the country and it would waste time and money. As our amendment highlights, we should focus on promoting sport at all levels and producing top-rate athletes. We know that there is real joy in sport. My 12-year-old daughter is a swimmer who loves her Glasgow swim team. She and her pals at the pool were hugely affected when they heard about Caitlin McClatchey's success in the Commonwealth games. My daughter was also inspired by Kelly Holmes winning gold for the GB team, and at the weekend she was blown away by the unbelievable quality of the Chinese badminton players who were performing in Glasgow. Sport can be about our being proud of athletes who represent us, but it transcends that and speaks to our awe at the immense capacity of sportspeople to stretch beyond the limits of their ability, physical strength and endurance and achieve great things. We should consider sport in that context, rather than in the context set by the SNP Administration. It is disappointing that the Administration cannot meet the reasonable expectation that sportspeople and their needs should be considered in their own right, rather than being used as a proxy for a debate about independence. We know the figures for the funding of the Olympics and Paralympics. We know that Scottish athletes would achieve fewer medals on their own and that the costs of a separate Scottish team would be significant. At the heart of the debate is the evidence that shows that no Scottish athlete, having met the qualifying standard, has not competed at the Olympics because their place has been taken by an athlete from another home country. Logical debate tells us that we should support the motion. The charge laid at the door of the SNP Administration is that the debate about the Olympics and Paralympics is not about sport at all. Stewart Maxwell rambled on about the Scottish football team. He said something different last week when I challenged him to resist the temptation to use sport as a proxy for a debate on independence. His response confirmed the fears of many that the issue of a Scottish Olympic team is about, as he said, showing that the First Minister "has great ambitions not only for our country but for our sporting bodies and sporting stars." Therefore, the debate is really about the SNP knowing best and being ambitious for our country, whereas "The lack of ambition from the Labour Party is really quite astonishing." — [ Official Report , 14 June 2007; c757.]  To suggest that I lack ambition is one thing, but is our freshly painted young minister for sport really  saying that Doug Gillon, the respected sports commentator, Chris Hoy, Lee McConnell and every Scottish sportsperson who is committed to the GB team and is striving to go beyond their own limits of endurance and capacity are all unambitious for Scotland, but that the SNP can speak for them? That is a monumental insult. The same thread runs right through the SNP's position. The SNP says that we cannot be patriotic and remain part of the United Kingdom. The SNP is making a transitional demand—it knows that there cannot be a Scottish Olympic team unless we have independence, so it is asking a question while being sure of the answer. The SNP position is a disgrace and an irrelevance and is illogical and irrational. At decision time, all members should take seriously their responsibilities to support sport and sportspeople and should refuse to allow the SNP to use them to serve an entirely different agenda. I urge members to support our amendment and the motion in the name of Murdo Fraser. I move amendment S3M-204.1, to leave out from ", and believes" to end and insert: "and Paralympics; believes that the interests of sport in Scotland and our athletes are best served if they compete as part of the British team in the 2008 Olympic Games and Paralympic Games and at subsequent Olympic Games and Paralympic Games, and further urges the Scottish Executive to work with all the relevant sporting agencies and organisations to maximise the opportunities for young Scots to benefit from UK Sport World Class Performance programmes."

Is the policy is the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing? I ask that because I have received a written answer from her indicating that she has not yet met COSLA. The ministers seem to be giving COSLA a key role in their approach, yet it appears that they have made that announcement without discussing it with COSLA.

To ask the Scottish Executive which footballing organisations and representatives ministers have met since May 2007. (S3O-233)

I attend football matches regularly, but I have never seen them as an opportunity for an informal meeting—that is perhaps a significant difference. In the minister's informal discussions—which did not involve comment on the qualities of any of the players—did any of the organisations or representatives raise with him their wish for Scotland to make a Scotland-only bid for the European football championships in 2016? Will the minister commit to resisting the temptation—which, unsurprisingly and spectacularly, the First Minister did not resist  in his unthinking and half-baked observations on a Scottish Olympic team and a Scotland-only bid for the European football championships—to use sport as a proxy debate for independence? Scottish sport and sportspeople and our young people deserve better.

The minister referred to a number of important meetings. Can he reassure us that he is working closely with his colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing on the national accommodation strategy for sex offenders? Has he had meetings with her and with local authorities on that issue? There are anxieties about placing sex offenders in local authority areas without appropriate supervision and resources. Can the minister reassure me that, if he and his ministerial colleagues have not begun joint working on the issue, they will start soon?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek the guidance of the chair. I have expressed concern in the past about the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing's huge portfolio, which of course encompasses all the communities issues—with the exclusion of the voluntary sector and planning—that were, in the past, covered by a minister and deputy minister. That has been reflected in today's question time, in which only one question was anywhere near that critical area. I attempted to come in on two separate questions but was unable to come in on either. I ask that some consideration be given to separating communities questions, so that we can address the critical issues of equalities, anti-poverty measures, deprivation, community planning and community regeneration. Those matters sit with Nicola Sturgeon, but they have not been addressed and they have not been referred to at any stage by the First Minister in statements in the Parliament.

On a further point of order, Presiding Officer. Currently we have questions on health and well-being, and afterwards we have questions on rural affairs. I ask you to consider, in deciding the categories for questions, whether it is possible to separate the health and well-being portfolio into two separate question times to ensure that the critical communities issues are addressed.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Does the Green party believe that, following the review, the ultimate decision should be taken by a vote in Parliament? As my colleague Malcolm Chisholm said, the decision should be made here. We should have not a ministerial statement but a debate and a vote, by which Parliament's will can be determined. Does the member support that?

The First Minister might be aware that some members of his party believe that the previous Scottish Executive policy of community ownership of social housing was privatisation. Does he agree with that, or does he acknowledge the critical role of housing associations and housing co-operatives, such as those in my constituency, in creating safe, sustainable and thriving communities? If he agrees with me, will he ensure that the already identified record massive levels of investment in social rented housing that have been made through Communities Scotland and through working with local authorities, will be sustained without disruption or delay for communities and tenants? Will he assure us that calls for review are not calls for a standstill? Our communities deserve better.

I am sure that we all agree on the importance of increased growth and shared prosperity. We heard today from the Equal Opportunities Commission about the experience of women in the workforce and of classroom assistants in particular. Will the minister ensure that, whatever the enterprise network looks like, it will understand the structural inequality that exists and will work to support people, given that a critical part of its role is supporting people into employment?

What about the Greens?

Will the minister give way?

Where is the evidence?

We have given tackling antisocial behaviour a very high priority because it is one of the main problems facing communities across Scotland. We have made significant progress by bringing in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, setting up community warden services and providing support for victims and witnesses, all of which are vital for delivering better quality of life for those in our hardest-pressed communities. We recognise, however, that more still needs to be done. We are now rolling out police fixed-penalty notices, considering the wider use of community wardens and determining how best to maintain the pressure on local agencies to implement the 2004 act by, for example, using parenting orders and antisocial behaviour orders for under-16s. We will ensure that community safety partnerships act decisively in tackling not just antisocial behaviour but the wider range of community safety issues, including knife crime.

I thank Wendy Alexander for her kind words. On antisocial behaviour, we should acknowledge the members of our communities who imposed their will on Parliament and who insisted that we act on their behalf to address such problems. I hear what the member says about alcohol. We are rolling out test purchasing and are working closely with the police on the enforcement of appropriate behaviour by licensed premises. Alongside that, there is the education programme in our schools and our efforts to challenge parents on how they work with young people to address alcohol abuse and how they ensure that young people do more purposeful things with their lives than getting involved in underage drinking, which has an impact on communities.

We are disappointed by the lack of use of parenting orders, which are a support for, rather than a threat to, parents. Crucially, they are also a support for children in vulnerable households. It would be most disturbing if there were any suggestion that there is a blanket refusal to use the powers in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. We want to challenge our young people and our families, to work with them and to get the best out of them, rather than to tolerate behaviour that is unacceptable to communities and deeply damaging to the children concerned. I hope that agencies will reflect on that and use the powers when to do so is deemed to be appropriate.

I pay tribute to Susan Deacon's crucial contribution to Parliament's creation and to making it the successful institution that it has become. [ Applause. ] I fully acknowledge her point about the importance of prevention and of working with families at an early stage to ensure that issues are dealt with before they become serious problems. That has underpinned our approach to tackling antisocial behaviour. We understand that if matters are not addressed at an early stage, communities and lives end up being destroyed and people end up having no future. We are talking about two parts of the same important picture. To realise the potential of our young people and to give us safe communities, not only must we challenge—rather than tolerate—problem behaviour, we must also work with the families in the most difficult circumstances. We should not write anyone off, nor should we shrug our shoulders and say that nothing can be done. Underpinning our strategy on antisocial behaviour is a commitment to, and an understanding of, the potential of all our young people and of all our communities to be safe and thriving places for people to live.

We have provided over £130 million to local partnerships to tackle antisocial behaviour and to promote community safety. Every local authority now has a dedicated antisocial behaviour team and a community warden service. Increasingly, local agencies are working with local communities and making effective use of the powers available to them to tackle the scourge of antisocial behaviour. We expect continued progress in implementing local antisocial behaviour strategies.

First, I recognise that a significant number of local authorities have embraced the new powers. Understandably, local authorities that wish to represent their communities want the tools and resources to support those communities. When I have visited Duncan McNeil's constituency, I have been struck by the energy of community activists, who are also a crucial resource. We have made it clear that we will support local authorities with resources and by providing advice, support and a challenging approach through our national co-ordinators, in order to ensure that the powers are used and the strategies are  implemented properly. I agree with Duncan McNeil that we should not hesitate to withdraw funding from local authorities that are not making sufficient progress in implementing their antisocial behaviour strategies. Local authorities have a responsibility to their communities and we are committed to supporting those communities. Given the resources and the powers, local authorities must be challenged to ensure that their commitment to making communities safe is taken forward.

The member has the advantage over me, in that I cannot report verbatim Robert Brown's answer to that question. However, I can say that the Executive and I are committed to the use of parenting orders. We have given local authorities the legislative framework and the funding for parenting orders, the need for which was identified by Parliament. Parenting orders are a means not just of dealing with parents who are acting inappropriately—they are not a threat to families—but of supporting families and ensuring that children are protected. We will continue dialogue with local authorities to challenge what seems to be their lack of use of a power. I emphasise that a blanket refusal by any agency to use any of the measures in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 is unacceptable, so we will take action in that regard.

In 2005-06, the cost of providing legal aid on matters of civil law was £50.3 million. That includes advice and assistance as well as civil legal aid. In 2005-06, the Scottish Legal Aid Board made almost 11,000 grants of civil legal aid and solicitors provided more than 117,000 intimations of advice and assistance and assistance by way of representation.

I make it clear that 60 per cent of all civil legal aid applicants are successful and that of those, three quarters make no contribution whatever.  There is a clear issue about value to the public purse and very significant amounts of money have already been committed. On the other side, there is also a commitment to access to justice. The member spoke about advice deserts. We are particularly mindful of the issues that are faced by women fleeing violence and have said that we wish to address them. Although a new funding review was agreed earlier in the year, as a consequence of some of the concerns about problems for people who wish to access justice, we have agreed to a full review of civil legal aid and financial eligibility. Such issues can be addressed properly as part of that review.

I do not want to mislead the member. If my officials have those figures available, I will make sure that he receives them. We are clearly committed to a civil legal aid system that meets needs and allows people access to justice. On this side of the chamber, we are not interested in those who wish to abuse the system.

The Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill is a short but significant piece of legislation that will help a small group of people who find themselves in tragic circumstances. At present, under section 1(2) of the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976, claims by the immediate family of someone who dies as a result of a personal injury are extinguished if the injured person settles their own claim before they die. The purpose of the bill is to address, urgently and exclusively, a horrible dilemma that the law of damages presents to mesothelioma sufferers, who face certain but not immediate death. Most sufferers go without the comforts that compensation might provide before they die so that their families can benefit from larger awards after their death. That is an appalling predicament for sufferers and their families to face at what is already a tremendously difficult and harrowing time. The bill will remove the dilemma by disapplying section 1(2) of the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976 so as to allow the immediate family of a mesothelioma sufferer to claim damages for non-patrimonial loss under section 1(4) of the act after the sufferer dies, irrespective of whether the deceased has already recovered damages or obtained a settlement. I want to express my thanks to the Justice 1 Committee for considering the bill so diligently and to its clerking team for ensuring that events have progressed smoothly. Although this small bill was welcomed by all parties, it was nonetheless robustly scrutinised and improved by the committee. I also record my sincere thanks to Des McNulty MSP, who generously allowed us to draw from his work in preparing our consultation, and to other MSPs who have long taken an interest in this important issue. I also thank Thompsons Solicitors for providing us with statistics, and the asbestos groups, the various trade unions and everyone else who has enabled the Executive to introduce this unique bill. We welcome in particular the tireless energy and commitment of the campaigning groups in allowing us to reach this  point. Without their hard work and dedication, we would not be debating the bill at all. I also thank the officials in the Executive's bill team for the good work that they have done in response to the committee's requests and for being extremely helpful to me, as someone who became involved in the bill's progress at a late stage. During stage 2 consideration of the bill, I was pleased to fulfil the undertaking that was given to the committee at stage 1 that the bill would be amended so that its provisions would apply to any case in which the sufferer recovered damages or obtained a full settlement on or after 20 December 2006. At stage 2, the committee unanimously agreed to the amendments that will allow that to happen. I record my thanks to the committee for exploring the issue of retrospection so thoroughly with witnesses at stage 1 and to the witnesses for their consensus on the matter. In practical terms, that means that from 20 December last year sufferers have been able to hold someone to account before they die without worrying about disadvantaging their families. As a result of being able to settle their claims or seek accelerated proof dates, some sufferers will be able to get, and to benefit from, their own full damages before they die. In addition, sufferers who had put off starting proceedings to avoid disadvantaging their families have now begun proceedings. There has already been an increase in the number of claims raised by people with mesothelioma. In the financial memorandum to the bill, we said that, in future, not one but two actions might be raised because if the victim can settle before death, the relatives will be able to raise their own action. At present, if the victim does not settle, a single claim is made by the executor and relatives. The issue of initiating a single action for the mesothelioma sufferer and their immediate family was explored in detail by the committee in evidence from stakeholders. I then wrote to the committee to confirm that primary legislation would not be required and that it was a matter for the rules of court. The stage 1 report on the bill recommended that the Executive should liaise with the Court of Session, the insurance industry and solicitors to establish whether the raising of a single action in mesothelioma cases would be feasible and whether it would, indeed, be beneficial to all parties. We accepted the recommendation and the issue has been investigated further. Stakeholders agree that the raising of a single action would be beneficial for claimants, as it would save time and expense. Personal injury claims in the Court of Session are dealt with under the Coulsfield procedures,  which were introduced to bring about speedier settlement of claims. A personal injuries user group chaired by Lady Paton was established by the Lord President to monitor the effectiveness of the new procedures and to recommend continuing improvements to the procedure. I am pleased to inform the Parliament that the user group has considered the use of single actions in mesothelioma cases and has recommended that changes be made to the rules of the Court of Session to enable both claims to be dealt with in the same action. The recommendations await formal consideration by the court once the bill is passed, with a view to early implementation. Looking more widely, the United Kingdom Government believes that, whenever possible, mesothelioma sufferers should receive compensation in life so that they themselves can benefit from it while knowing that their families will be secure in the future. That is completely in line with our approach, and I welcome the proposals to provide faster compensation to all people diagnosed with mesothelioma that were announced on 13 March by John Hutton, the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. Once passed, that piece of reserved legislation will mean that every sufferer should receive a state payment within six weeks of making a claim, which will be recovered if a subsequent civil compensation claim is successful. Scottish sufferers will benefit from those proposals as well as from the provisions in the bill. I am required to signify Crown consent. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I wish to advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, in so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. I feel privileged to have been involved in progressing the bill. I pay tribute to my colleague Hugh Henry, the former Deputy Minister for Justice, who was instrumental in securing a legislative slot for this small but crucial bill. As I have said before, I have been struck by the fact that the issue goes far beyond financial considerations such as damages. It is also about sufferers wanting—and deserving—acknowledgement of what has caused their suffering. In addition to being denied the chance to obtain funds that would have eased their suffering at the end of their lives, sufferers have been denied the chance to hear someone take responsibility and admit that what happened was their fault. I trust that all members will again support this short but vital piece of legislation, which will bring  real benefit to mesothelioma sufferers and their families. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank the members of and clerks to the Justice 2 Committee for all the work that they have done to take the bill through stages 1 and 2; the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee; and the bill team and officials and Cathy Jamieson, the Minister for Justice, for their support and tolerance of me, given that I came to the bill at a much later stage than everyone else. The First Minister made a commitment to end automatic unconditional early release and provide more clarity in sentencing. The bill will deliver exactly that. Throughout the parliamentary process, we have listened and responded where appropriate by amending the bill. One of the key sections, which deals with the custody part, has benefited greatly from that scrutiny and I believe that the provisions are now much clearer as a result, given that they build on the core principle of transparency, which was identified at the beginning. We listened to what people said about the different tests for recall to custody and re-release. It was argued that a revolving-door situation would be created. We amended the provisions at stage 2 to ensure that the same test—that of public interest—would be used for both levels of consideration. The bill now makes it clear what basic conditions will be put on the community licence. Victims and communities have the right to expect that wrongdoers will be dealt with appropriately. These measures are about what happens when the court decides that prison is the right sanction. We realise—and the financial memorandum shows—that there will be demands and new resources. It is not just about more money; we need to ensure that we are making the most effective and efficient use of the existing resources and that, from the start of the process through to the end—from the courts to the community—the process is measured and proportionate. Today, it has been something of a challenge to address those real concerns while having to deal with some of the more grotesque elements of Tory misrepresentation of the bill. While we have been making and developing policy, the Tories have been content to make mischief. They say that it has taken eight years to get to the stage of ending automatic unconditional early release, but they would prefer to vote against the bill—which addresses that matter—and leave the situation as  it is. They are content to put the scribblings from the back of an envelope on to the marshalled list, as represented by the poor-quality, inconsistent and illogical amendments from Bill Aitken, rather than doing the hard work to establish a policy that can gather support. I might be wrong, but, as far as I am aware, there was no member's bill from the Tories that identified another approach to early release at any stage in the past eight years. We have taken on the challenge of developing policy that considers the evident tensions and conflicts around the agenda of tackling offending, keeping communities safe and addressing the issues that create offenders in the first place. We acknowledge the point that Kenny MacAskill made about victims. I contend that not just the bill but a range of approaches that the Executive has taken have given real priority to and understood the needs of victims, precisely because we have spoken to them. The system is giving victims unprecedented support—the court system itself has been forced to change its habits. We acknowledge that there is an issue with short sentences, but there is an also an issue with previous convictions. We often hear about the shoplifter who refuses to change, but some people are involved in what might seem like small individual offences; such offences can have a huge impact on communities and should not be dismissed as not worthy of being challenged. I was stunned at the suggestion this morning that I was soft on crime. Kenny MacAskill also suggested that I was laid back and complacent. Those two characteristics have never been ascribed to me before and I assure him that they do not represent my position on the bill—far from it. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said that it is important to take a measured approach to the implementation of the bill, to work closely with the professionals who have to deliver it and to ensure that there is pace around that, so that confidence can be built. Kenny MacAskill, quite rightly, highlighted the importance of making progress on this matter. That is rather ironic, given that he is a member of a party that would spend huge amounts of time and resources on dealing with the constitutional separation of our country, rather than on focusing resources where there is need. We were also told that the bill is about sentencing. There has been a shift towards more community disposals rather than custodial sentences, and people are beginning to have confidence in that, but the bill is about what happens when the judgment has been made that there should be a custodial sentence. As Kenny MacAskill said, there is an issue about having to spend more money while there are not  more offenders, but the current system masks the level of offending. It does not address offending behaviour or deal properly with those who leave prison and continue to offend. Under the bill, if someone is serving the supervision part in the community and there is a breach of licence, action will be taken against them. We will not reduce the numbers in prison simply by saying to people, "You're not getting to go to prison." We will reduce the numbers when we give people the opportunity to confront their offending behaviour and opportunities to participate in work and in the life of their community so that they realise that offending behaviour is inappropriate. It is the role of the justice system to support people in addressing their underlying problems. Work to support people to do that is not separate from the justice system. We would do nobody any favours by artificially reducing the level of offending or by not being prepared to confront people who have those problems. We recognise that there is an issue about financial resources and we have made commitments in relation to that. I have to say to Patrick Harvie that life is tough and that we have to make hard choices. Finding it hard to justify something is not good enough for a legislature. Members have to decide to support the legislation, to oppose it, or to propose alternatives. As far as I am aware, the Green party has not engaged in the process at all. Colin Fox said that the increase in the number of prisoners will come from changes in sentencing practice, but that is not the case. The important point is that we are willing to confront the issue of recall for those who breach their licence conditions. That is where the increase will come from. It may be that being mischievous keeps Colin Fox going. There are people who have concerns about the bill, but there is not blanket opposition to it, as he suggested. People realise that the bill represents a step forward from the existing approach. As I have said before, there are issues about short sentences, which merit further consideration. I will finish by commenting briefly on weapons.

Jackie Baillie made the point that communities want the provisions on weapons and recognise that they are part of a package. The important measures in the bill will address behaviour that too often ends up with young people losing their lives. I thank everyone in the Parliament who played their part as the bill progressed. I trust that those members who want our communities to be safer,  who want us to address offending behaviour, who want clarity and who want to deal with the weapons issue will join me in supporting the bill at decision time.

The member obviously did not listen to my earlier explanation. When sentencing, judges take into account whatever they choose to take into account, including public protection. The custodial part is then established as part of sentence management. Any extension to that is determined on the basis of identified risk and established during the period of the custodial sentence. It is simply not true to say that in establishing the sentence—the punishment for a crime—public protection cannot be taken into account.

If I have learned one lesson as an elected member of the Parliament, it is that I do not require an audit committee to tell me whether problems exist with the law; my community and my constituents will tell me about the problems and demand change. If we track the significant legislation that the Parliament has passed, we can identify problems that constituents raised and on which they brought pressure to bear on the process. That is how democracy works and it is all the better for it. To be frank, Colin Fox outlines through his approach his opposition to the bill, or at least to one part of it. A member who opposes the bill should vote against it. A member who supports the balance of the bill's approach should vote for it. There is no way of saying that we will maybe have provisions and that we will think about it—that  would be a maybes aye approach to legislation. Members must decide whether they support the bill, act accordingly and ensure that the legislation is monitored. We are aware of the concerns of the voluntary sector and of the Scottish Consortium on Crime and Criminal Justice, members of which I have met. I disagree with their conclusions, but I acknowledge their concerns. We must also acknowledge the concerns of people in our communities, who feel that the current system is inadequate and that we must address the lack of supervision when people leave prison and the fact that we have a sentencing regime that people do not understand. Colin Fox recognised that we have acknowledged that prisoner numbers will increase—we put that in the financial memorandum. We have also said that support must be provided for offenders and that resources need to follow that. We are serious about both parts of custody and community sentences. Colin Fox's proposal gained no support at stage 2, and I hope that members will not support it now. The custodial sentence measures in the bill deliver the Executive's commitment to end automatic and unconditional early release, and do so in a way that injects into sentence management a structure that provides for punishment and rehabilitation. The proposals are not just about sending people to prison, but about getting offenders to turn their lives around. As we have said, stopping offending is the best way to protect the public. We intend the criminal justice reforms that are in hand and the measures in the bill to make significant inroads into tackling reoffending. Amendment 44 would require the Scottish ministers to commission an independent report before they made any commencement order for provisions in part 2. I am intrigued by the notion of outsourcing our thinking on such matters. The Scottish Executive—whoever forms the Administration—and the Parliament are in as good a position as others to consider the effectiveness of legislation, particularly if they are open to elected members' representations. The independent report would be expected to consider the custodial sentence measures in isolation and to comment on their impact on offending and reoffending and on the prison population's size. The effectiveness of short-term sentences is recognised as an issue. Considering and addressing that problem are matters for a future Administration.

I do not concede whatever the member really says or what I understand him to say. I do not concede that the report that amendment 44 proposes should be made. I am saying that an issue with short-term sentences has been highlighted and any Parliament worth its salt will address it. Amendment 44 would require the Scottish ministers to publish the report and lay it before Parliament within 12 months of the passing of the bill. That is an arbitrary date. We have experience that having arbitrary dates for such reports has hampered them. What could such a narrowly prescribed report tell us? It could not reveal the benefits of the structure that was established through the Management of Offenders etc (Scotland) Act 2005 or the other recent criminal justice system reforms. It could not reflect the fact that the measures in the bill will build on the strong existing structures. It could merely speculate on the likely impact of the bill's measures. I repeat what I said at stage 2: effective monitoring arrangements are already in place. The SPS board agrees its business plan with ministers. The plan for 2006-08 included, for the first time, an indication of the prison population that might have to be accommodated. The figure is not a target figure, but its use shows the importance that ministers and the SPS attach to considering the level of the prison population and to planning the business to provide for that population. The increases that have recently been reported have been mainly in the remand population, prisoners on short sentences and young offenders, and are completely in line with what the SPS has said publicly for some time. The SPS keeps a close eye on the prison population, and ministers included full consideration of that population in the financial memorandum's consideration of the bill's impact. The population level is half the story, and the Executive has shared with all relevant parliamentary committees full information about the relationship between population levels and capacity. The capacity levels as indicated by the SPS take account of the current plans for development and redevelopment of the prison estate. The financial memorandum makes it clear that the Scottish ministers fully accept that adequate and proper resources must be in place before the system commences. The Justice 2 Committee is aware that a high-level group involving all the stakeholders—the very people who will make the  bill's provisions work—is working on the detailed implementation plan. Of course, once the new provisions are in place, it is only right that we evaluate them. Evaluation will be part of the process. In addition to the monitoring plans that I have mentioned, statistics that are produced by the courts, the SPS and local authority criminal justice social work departments will reflect developments once the new system is up and running. In the meantime, the custodial sentences planning group continues to work on the detailed implementation strategy. It is right that that strategy should be developed by the people who will need to make it work. We aim to implement the measures as soon as is practicable. We are talking about big changes—root-and-branch reform—and it is essential that we take the appropriate time to ensure that the preparation is right and that the proper infrastructure is in place.

We have said that the custodial sentences planning group is charged with implementing the provisions and giving timescales and clarity to the process. We are clearly committed to such an approach, and we want it to be developed as soon as possible. Amendment 44 would not add to the scrutiny and monitoring that will be done; rather, it seeks to second-guess significant parts of the legislation. If members support the bill's approach, they should vote for it; if they do not support that approach, they should not vote for it. I urge members to reject amendment 44.

Amendment 12 inserts into part 2 a new section that provides Scottish ministers with an order-making power, subject to affirmative procedure, to deal both with the transfer of prisoners from Scotland and other jurisdictions, and the transfer of a prisoner serving a sentence in another jurisdiction to Scotland. Amendment 14 adds a new cross-border transfers order-making power to section 48(4) to ensure that any order made is subject to the Scottish Parliament's affirmative procedure. There are arrangements in place at the moment that deal with the cross-border transfer of prisoners in and out of Scotland. Under the terms of schedule 1 to the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, prisoners in England and Wales, Scotland, Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands may request a transfer to another United Kingdom jurisdiction or one of the islands. Under the provisions, prisoners may be transferred to another jurisdiction on either a restricted or an unrestricted basis. Transfer on a restricted basis means that the prisoner remains subject to the law regarding release from prison as it applies in the sending jurisdiction. If a prisoner is transferred on an unrestricted basis, he or she falls under the provisions of the regime in force in the receiving jurisdiction. We anticipate that the vast majority of prisoners will continue, as at present, to be transferred on a restricted basis. Sections 10 and 10A of the Prisoners and Criminal Proceedings (Scotland) Act 1993 make provision for the transfer of live prisoners and transfer of supervision for live prisoners respectively. There are also provisions dealing with the repatriation of prisoners to and from the UK to jurisdictions with which the UK has a repatriation agreement. Those are as contained in the Repatriation of Prisoners Act 1984 and schedule 2 to the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997.

I do not have the exact numbers, but I will ensure that the member is provided with that information. I would imagine that not terribly many transfers take place.  The new order-making power that will be inserted by amendment 12 will enable the Scottish ministers to continue to make suitable provision to facilitate the transfer of prisoners to and from Scotland. Subsection (1) of the new section allows the provisions in part 2 of the bill to be modified in relation to transferred prisoners. That might be necessary, for example, to impose certain licence conditions on an offender who is transferred on a restricted basis and who is subject to supervision conditions that were imposed by the transferring jurisdiction. New subsection (2)(b) will allow the Scottish ministers to amend other enactments if necessary; for example, to ensure that provisions for cross-border transfers remain operational. I move amendment 12.  Amendment 12 agreed to.

Amendments 36 and 37 will amend new section 27Q that will be inserted into the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 by section 43 of the bill. Section 27Q will allow ministers to make exceptions to offences under the knife dealers licensing scheme. The amendments, which will ensure that any orders providing for such exceptions will be subject to affirmative procedure, respond to a concern that was raised by the Subordinate Legislation Committee during its consideration of the bill as amended at stage 2. The Executive agrees with the committee that the affirmative procedure would be more appropriate for any order that makes exceptions to offences under the knife dealers licensing scheme. I am happy to have lodged the appropriate amendments to the bill to make the change desired by the committee and I trust that the amendments will have the support of Parliament. I move amendment 36.

We should recognise the significance of part 3 of the bill. Sadly, it has been almost entirely disregarded due to the debate on the other issues. However, part 3 should also be placed in the context of our broader approach. Part 3 will ban swords, license the sale of non-domestic knives, double the sentence for carrying a knife in public, remove the restriction on the police's power of arrest and raise the minimum age for purchasing knives from 16 to 18. All those provisions should be seen in the context of our general approach to antisocial behaviour that recognises that when gatherings of young people become involved in low-level disorder they can quickly move towards becoming part of a gang culture in which, sadly, carrying a knife is regarded far too much as a prize. I recognise the support that exists for part 3 of the bill. It is important that we send out a strong message on weapons generally.  Amendment 36 agreed to.  Amendment 37 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendments 38 to 43 amend sections 44 and 45 of the bill, which both amend section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. I will  go on to explain the effect of the amendments, but it is useful to start by saying something about section 141 of the 1988 act. Under section 141, it is an offence to manufacture, sell, hire, offer for sale or hire, or lend or give to another person an offensive weapon specified in an order made under that section. Section 141 also provides for defences for the purposes of functions carried out on behalf of the Crown or a visiting force, for making the weapon available to a museum or gallery; or, where the weapon is lent or hired by the museum or gallery, that it is intended for cultural, artistic or educational purposes. Amendments 38 and 39, which will insert into section 141 of the 1988 act new subsection (11ZF), will alter the burden of proof that applies where an accused seeks to make use of the defences provided to offences under that section. The amendments mean that it will be incumbent on the prosecution to prove that a weapon was not sold for use by a museum or gallery, rather than requiring the accused to prove that it was. Amendment 39 will also amend section 141 of the 1988 act by inserting into it new subsections (11ZA) to (11ZE). Subsections (11ZA) and (11ZB) provide further statutory defences to an offence under section 141(1). The amendments to insert new subsections (11ZC) to (11ZE) are technical amendments, which will ensure that the new defences interface effectively with the import regime. The new defences make provision for the use of otherwise banned weapons for theatrical, film and television purposes. That makes similar provision for Scotland to that introduced for England and Wales by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006. Amendment 41 will specify that the defences will apply only to conduct taking place after the defences have come into effect. Amendment 40 provides a broader and more flexible version of the power to amend the application of section 141 of the1988 act than that provided in the bill as introduced. That will enable additional defences to be introduced in the light of experience of operation of the provision. It will also ensure that the application of section 141 in Scotland can interface effectively with the UK import regime. Amendment 42 will widen the effect of section 141ZA(3)(a), which establishes that the Scottish ministers, when making an order banning the sale of swords, may provide for defences for religious, cultural and sporting purposes. The amendment will ensure that defences can be put in place in  respect of offences relating to manufacture and sale and offences relating to importation. Amendment 43 is consequential to amendments 40 and 42. It will ensure that the powers to modify the application of section 141 of the 1988 act provided by the amendments work together properly. I move amendment 38.  Amendment 38 agreed to.  Amendments 39 to 41 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendments 47 and 77 are further testament to our wish to make the  provisions in the bill as clear as possible. We are retaining extended sentences as they are a valuable sentencing option for the court when dealing with offenders who might pose a greater risk to public safety. Amendment 47 deletes section 6A, which will be replaced by a new section to be inserted by amendment 77, which clarifies the application of part 2 of the bill in relation to custody and community prisoners who are also subject to an extended sentence. Thus, for example, in terms of section 6, the custody part must be set by reference to the confinement term of the extended sentence, that is, the term of imprisonment that the court imposes for the offence before setting the additional extension period. In relation to section 12, in the case of a custody and community prisoner who has been confined until the three-quarters point of their sentence on the ground of serious risk to the public, the Parole Board must review the case before that point. At the three-quarters point, the prisoner must be released on community licence. Again, amendment 47 applies that provision to extended-sentence prisoners by reference to the three-quarters point of the confinement term of their sentence. In effect, it makes it clear that the confinement period of an extended sentence is comparable to the full term of a normal custody and community sentence. In other words, the extended period is an additional period, during which the offender will be on community licence and will be subject to recall to custody for breach of the same. I move amendment 47.  Amendment 47 agreed to.

Again, I make no apology for stressing the importance of the process for setting the custody part of the custody and community sentence, because it is a key measure in the new provisions. The process has, quite rightly, attracted much interest and comment during the bill's parliamentary progress. We are grateful for those comments, which helped us to develop a package of change, as accepted at stage 2, that was designed to clarify and improve the process. Those changes clarified what the judge may take into account when considering whether to increase the custody part beyond the 50 per cent minimum. We put beyond doubt the fact that these measures are about sentence management, not sentencing, and that they do not affect the matters, including public protection, that the judge quite properly takes into account when deciding what the appropriate overall sentence should be in every case. The changes mean that judges will be required to give reasons when they decide to extend the custody part of any sentence. We also made provision requiring the court to prepare reports for every case involving a custody and community sentence of 15 days or more. The provisions in section 6 are key to the new regime. They set out what the court must do once a custodial sentence has been imposed. What happens at that point impacts on how long the offender will be in custody before being considered for release on community licence and that is also the point at which the offender, the public and the victim will know the minimum time that the offender should expect to spend in prison. Section 6 prompted substantial debate during stage 1. We are grateful for that and for the Justice 2 Committee's helpful comments in its stage 1 report. In response to those comments, we said that we would present changes at stage 2 that we believed would further clarify the purpose of section 6 and put it beyond doubt that it is about sentence management and not sentencing. We did that and the committee accepted our  amendments. One of those amendments inserted section 6C, which puts a requirement on the courts to provide the Scottish ministers with reports that the SPS and, potentially, the Parole Board for Scotland will require to carry out their business. Although the committee agreed to our amendments, representatives of the judiciary continued to have concerns about the best way in which the information can be provided. Following further discussion, particularly with the Sheriffs Association, we are persuaded that the present requirement in section 6C to produce reports does not quite provide the degree of flexibility that is needed to enable the courts to deal appropriately with the different types of cases. Section 6C may not enable the courts to provide in the reports—which will often be produced at very short notice—the level of information that is proportionate to the offence and the length of sentence that has been imposed. As well as placing an unintended burden on court resources, the practical effect could be to delay the transfer of information to the SPS, thus depriving it of information that would be valuable at the early screening stage. We are grateful to the Sheriffs Association for highlighting the inadvertent effects of the current provisions. Amendment 5 will replace the current requirement in section 6C(2) with provisions that will require the court to provide relevant information to the SPS in a way that allows the court to respond appropriately and proportionately in each case. That enabling provision will allow an operational framework to be put in place that will support the transfer of information. Development work is already in hand through the custodial sentences planning group. The provision of more flexibility will not, of course, prevent the preparation of detailed reports by judges in cases in which such reports are required. However, it will mean that the process can be tailored to respond effectively and quickly to the varying demands that will arise from the different types of sentences. The prompt transfer of the right kind of information is vital, particularly in cases in which offenders are given very short sentences. The more flexible approach will allow for that. I move amendment 5.

With Bill Aitken, we are damned if we do, damned if we don't. He makes a  rather grudging comment about the fact that the Executive took seriously the committee's views and addressed issues that were raised by those who will have to implement the legislation. I would have thought that, rather than make such a grudging comment, Bill Aitken would have welcomed the amendment.  Amendment 5 agreed to.

I will speak briefly to Executive amendment 13, but first I address the amendments in Bill Aitken's name, as I will not have another opportunity to do so. Bill Aitken might have a charming and easy manner, but what he said was remarkably offensive. He implied that the people who are committed to addressing crime and disorder in our communities want to lie to and be dishonest with the public. He should reflect on his comments.  When we said that we would end automatic unconditional early release, we also committed to replacing the discredited system with measures that would create a more flexible approach to sentence management. We wanted measures that would allow for the right mix of punishment, deterrent and rehabilitation, allow the courts to impose a longer period in prison to punish a particularly serious crime or take account of persistent reoffending, and allow offenders to be managed on the basis of the risk they pose and not the length of sentence imposed by the court. That is the Executive's approach and it is dishonest of Bill Aitken to suggest otherwise. He seems to prefer a system in which, after someone has done their time, they go out into the community without conditions. In the current system, a person who is sentenced to four years gets out after two, with no conditions. In the proposed new system, the person will serve two years in prison, during which time the risk they pose will be assessed. If they are assessed as being able to be released, they will spend two years in the community, with licence conditions that will allow them to be recalled. Bill Aitken will remember that at stage 2 we set out a more rigorous approach to recall. Amendment 23 and the other amendments in Bill Aitken's name in group 6 reflect a lack of thought. Everyone understands that automatic early release was introduced as a response to prisoner numbers. There were no easy answers then and there are no easy answers now. Bill Aitken's position at stage 2 was that the custody part of the sentence should be 90 per cent, but now he says that it should be 85 per cent, which suggests that, rather than addressing a serious problem, he is thinking of a number, and then another number, as if the matter were a child's game. The issue requires far more thought than that. We could make the facetious point that Bill Aitken is now softer on crime than he was at stage 2, but the issues are more serious than that. I would argue that what we are suggesting is a far more serious approach to a difficult problem. We want a flexible regime that takes account of modern sentence management principles and that ensures that the work that has been started in custody can continue and be developed during the community part of the sentence to maximise its effects on public safety and rehabilitation. Bill Aitken talks about the offender being rewarded for good behaviour. However, we know about circumstances in which people behaved in prison but caused problems in the community after they were released. We are now talking about risk assessment and management of offenders in the community after they have served the custody  part. I would argue that that will enhance community safety.

When I have finished these points, I will take an intervention. Bill Aitken talked about home detention curfew. Home detention curfew has been established as being effective in a very small number of cases. However, we have clearly said that, because there will be a big change in the process, we will not reintroduce home detention curfew until the system has bedded in. We have also accepted that it would be important for the Parliament to return to the issue if we were to reintroduce home detention curfew and that, therefore, that would require to be done by an affirmative order.

Of course, the provision for extended sentences will remain, but Bill Aitken will recognise that it will be used particularly for serious offenders, such as sexual offenders, who pose a greater risk. What we are saying is that such an approach could be used for far more offenders than would be the case under his proposal. Members may ask why the maximum duration of the custody part has been set at 75 per cent of the sentence. We believe that that is necessary in order to strike the right balance. As I said earlier, it allows the court, in exceptional circumstances, to reflect publicly the fact that a crime is particularly heinous or that an offender is so persistent in his or her offending that the minimum custody period is not enough in their case. It also allows the Parole Board to deal properly with offenders who are assessed as still posing a high risk at the end of the custody part, and it leaves a reasonable amount of time for restrictions to be effective and for rehabilitative work to continue in the community. The key question regarding these amendments is whether they would create a system that allowed in each case the right mix of punishment, risk assessment and management, joined-up working, and the opportunity for the prisoner to break the cycle of reoffending.

Through the bill, we are addressing a problem that has been identified in our communities. The quality of the debate from the Tories is not a measure of the importance of the debate to our local communities. The simplistic and trivial way in which Bill Aitken has plucked a number out of the air indicates how seriously the Tories take the matter. The requirement to serve part of the sentence in the community is not a soft option; it is a smart option. Evidence shows that we have a much better chance of preventing many offenders from returning to crime if we tackle the underlying causes of their criminality. It is significant that the bill is being attacked both by those who want nobody to go to jail and by those, on the Tories' side, who want to sound tough on crime. To be tough on crime is to address the real issues. It is to punish, but it is also to consider ways of turning offenders round. That is what the bill seeks to do. We want the custody and community parts of sentences to be planned and joined up. We want the community part and the licence conditions to be taken seriously, and we want prisoners who have been released from custody to understand that the community part is an important part of the proposal. Therefore, resources must be identified for both the custody part and the community part. Amendment 13 seeks to amend section 48(4) in relation to the order-making power in section 6B to alter the minimum proportion of the custody part of the sentence. Of course, it does not affect the 75 per cent maximum custody period, which is set in statute. The proposed changes reflect the advice that we received at stage 2 from the Subordinate Legislation Committee, which we are always delighted to please. Acting on that advice, we propose to make an order that is made under the powers subject to the Scottish Parliament's affirmative procedure. As far as these issues are concerned, I have no reason to be defensive about the bill. The bill genuinely seeks to address all the issues that must be confronted in communities where serious offending is taking place. We know that we need to tackle such offending early, but we also realise that by sending offenders to prison we can both mark the seriousness of their offences and, if they have chaotic lives, give them help before they go back to the community. The Tories have clearly given this matter very little thought and we must not allow them to present this serious measure in any other way. I urge the Parliament to reject all the amendments in the name of Bill Aitken and to support amendment 13.

Do not encourage me, Presiding Officer.

Given Mr Aitken's great expertise in the parliamentary process, will he explain why these amendments did not surface at stage 2? If he had lodged them then, we could have had a considered discussion of repeat offending and early release.

I hesitate to tell Annabel Goldie not to be ridiculous, but her intervention was entirely ridiculous. We have said that the bill as it stands has consequences for prisoner numbers and that we recognise that that has implications for resources. We say that addressing offending behaviour is partly about custody in prison and partly about what we can do in the community, through work on rehabilitation. Both approaches have an important role to play. Members cannot pluck figures out of the air and claim to have a policy when they have not worked through the consequences and benefits of that policy. We can deduce from the proportion of prisoners involved and the increase in the prison population that the amendments would have an impact on numbers. In reality, there is no need for the amendments. I disagree slightly with the line that Jeremy Purvis took. The court already has at its disposal a mechanism for punishing persistent offenders—it is called sentencing. The overall sentence that the court hands out will take into  account all the matters that the court thinks are relevant, such as the nature of the offence, the offender's history and previous convictions. In addition, section 6(4) provides details of the matters that the court may take into account when considering whether to extend the custody part of the sentence beyond the 50 per cent minimum. They include the offender's previous convictions. The custody and community structure has received widespread support, in recognition of the fact that there needs to be a community element to the sentence during which offenders can build on work that was begun in custody. That is designed to reduce reoffending by easing the transition from custody back into the community and ensuring that a number of conditions are placed on the community licence. Where restrictions are assessed as necessary, they will be imposed, but at the same time support will be offered, where required. Only through a combination of punishment in custody and rehabilitation in the community can we hope to address offending behaviour and to reduce reoffending. This is not a simple matter, but it is one to which people must give commitment and energy, rather than glib solutions that do not address the real problem. We are not claiming that reoffending will cease overnight—that would be naive. We are saying that by providing the right mix of punishment and rehabilitation, we have a better chance of getting offenders to turn around their lives. Success will come through maximising the amount of work that is done during the custody part of the sentence, so that more progress can be made when they go out into the community on licence. For many offenders, the issue will be to direct them away from their old ways by providing supports and some basic help. For others, more stringent interventions will be needed. Our plans allow for both eventualities and all scenarios in between. Surely that is a much more innovative and sophisticated approach than prison, prison and simply prison, and not addressing the core issues that the bill addresses. I urge the Parliament to reject the amendments.

If Bill Aitken spoke for victims, he would have taken a more positive approach to the measures that we introduced to address, at an early stage, antisocial behaviour, which can become offending behaviour. There is no lack of commitment to victims from Labour and Liberal Democrat members. It is an insult for the member to suggest otherwise.

We know that the Parole Board's actions must be ECHR compliant and that Phil Gallie does not regard that as a good thing, but that is where we are. The provisions on setting the custody part of a custody and community sentence are modelled on the life sentence arrangements. That underscores the fact that we have not developed the new regime on a whim. For the reasons that I have given, the amendments are not needed. As Bill Aitken knows, similar amendments were not supported at  stage 2. I suggest that the amendments should not be supported now. Most critically, we ought not to allow the Tories to represent the bill as an attack on public protection. Public protection is properly addressed in setting the sentence. While an offender is in custody, their risk can be further assessed. I urge members to reject the amendments.

Does the member accept what I have said, which is that judges can—and no doubt will—take public protection into account when establishing a sentence? The notion that the bill will erase public protection from sentencing is self-evidently nonsense. The headline sentence will be established. We are addressing sentence management and assessment while an offender is in custody.

Bill Aitken gave us déjà vu with his group 4 amendments, but the amendments in group 5 are not about anything that came before the committee for its consideration, so the proposed measures have not undergone any parliamentary scrutiny at all. Bill Aitken's suggestion that the amendments are about his party's election manifesto is probably closer to the truth. It is disappointing that we are being treated in this way. Amendments 21, 24, 26 and 29 seek to insert a new structure into the bill that would mean full-term custody for offenders who have served two or more custodial sentences in the 10 years prior to their latest conviction. No one is arguing that prison does not work. We say that it is not the whole picture and that it cannot do everything. To say that prison does not work is a counsel of despair. It is like saying that we can do nothing and that we just have to live with it.  There are positive examples of people working with offenders in the prison system to address their literacy issues and other problems, to afford them the opportunity to move on when they go back into the community. Prison is part of the picture, but not the whole picture. One of the problems with Bill Aitken's plan is that it is arbitrary and it will create anomalies depending on when the first sentence was imposed. For example, if a prisoner's second sentence was imposed nine years and 11 months previously, the measures would apply, but if the second sentence was imposed 10 years and one month previously, they would not apply. Why should there be a difference for the sake of a couple of months? Bill Aitken is in the luxurious position of being able to advocate something without having to work out how he would deal with the consequences of such a policy. Given the number of uncertainties, the consequences would be difficult to predict, but we can deduce that, given the proportion of prisoners involved and the increase in the prison population, if all prisoners served their full custody period in detention, there could be a sizeable impact on the prison population within a few years.

This issue may be complex, but we should not overstate the complexity of the bill as a whole. The bill's effect on sentence management will be quite straightforward. Sentences will have a custody part, a community part and an assessment of risk during the period in custody. That is not complex. However, the amendments deal specifically with the issue of single terming. They will get rid of what might be called odd consequences—the term "anomalies" was used earlier—some of which were perhaps hinted at by Bill Aitken. I would not want to say that our judiciary is not capable of dealing with complexity—I enjoy a positive relationship with them and do not want to insult them—but we recognise that we need to work with the judiciary on the range of issues that the bill addresses. We are doing that through the planning implementation group on the bill, so that people understand the importance of explaining what they are doing. The amendments do not even, I think, deal specifically with whether a court should impose a consecutive or a concurrent sentence. Courts are able to do that at the moment. The amendments deal with single terming, which can complicate matters and mean that people can end up in the position that has been highlighted. The general thrust of the bill is quite straightforward, but the amendments address a specific complexity that has been recognised as requiring to be addressed. Although the amendments are not straightforward, they will provide the benefits of increased transparency and clarity.  Amendment 46 agreed to.  Amendment 19 moved—[Colin Fox].

I had a sense of déjà vu when I listened to Bill Aitken, because his amendments are remarkably similar to amendments that he lodged at stage 2, which the Justice 2 Committee rejected for the reasons that I will outline to the chamber. However, he managed to be even more mischievous than he normally is, and he perhaps bordered on being something more serious than mischievous in his allegations about what the Executive seeks to do in the bill. We have a responsibility to ensure that we do not, in what we say, undermine people's confidence in the system. Amendment 20 seeks to remove the requirement for the court to ignore public protection when the custody part of a sentence is set under section 6. Amendment 22 would add the consideration of public protection to the factors that the court must take into account when it sets a custody part of more than 50 per cent of the sentence. Amendments 31 and 32 would make similar provision in relation to life sentences and the setting of the punishment part under section 15. We have said all along—and we clarified it at stage 2—that the right time for public protection to be taken into account is when the court considers the appropriate length of the total sentence. As we have said before, the bill is about sentence management, not about sentencing itself. It is for the judge to consider all the factors that they consider relevant and to decide the total length of the sentence. At that stage, we are not able to fetter the consideration of the judge in what factors they take into account. The bill is about sentence management, or what happens when the headline sentence has been established. The custody part of a custody and community sentence—or, as its name suggests, the punishment part of a life sentence—is for the sole purpose of retribution and deterrence. In other words, its purpose is punishment. It forms a  minimum of 50 per cent of the overall sentence. Any extension by the court will be based on factors such as the circumstances of the offence and the offender's previous convictions or reoffending while on licence—we added that factor at stage 2. It is right for such factors to influence punishment, but it is not right to expect a judge who has fixed the headline sentence, after taking into account whatever factors he or she thinks are relevant, to look into the future and assess the risk that an offender may pose at the end of the custody part.  The continuing assessment of risk and need by the Scottish ministers—in effect, the Scottish Prison Service—and by local authorities will form part of the sentence management process. Measures will be taken as appropriate during the custodial part of a sentence. That will allow decisions about risk to take account of all relevant factors, many of which transpire during the custody part and of which the court cannot be aware when it is passing sentence. Public protection remains a critical factor in setting the overall sentence and is key to determining whether an offender should move to the community part of a sentence. Amendments 31 and 32 would overturn the existing provisions for setting the punishment part of a life sentence. They have worked well since they were introduced in the Convention Rights (Compliance) (Scotland) Act 2001. Substantial jurisprudence now supports the arrangement whereby the court sets the punishment part, whereas risk—public protection—is considered at the appropriate time by an independent and impartial tribunal, which is the Parole Board for Scotland.

I am sure that there will be agreement throughout the chamber that, for too long, lack of clarity in what sentences mean has undermined the credibility of the criminal justice system. We have said that one of the key aims of the bill is to improve public confidence by providing greater clarity about sentences, their length and their meaning. This group of  amendments is the final step needed to ensure that that is achieved. As recommended by the judicially led Sentencing Commission, we are abolishing the practice of single terming sentences. Single terming means that a second sentence that is imposed during a period of imprisonment for an earlier offence can be entirely absorbed in the first sentence. The amendments in the group, while complex and lengthy, are essentially technical in nature. They are intended to enhance the regime's operation, and they will prevent subsequent sentences that are imposed during a period of imprisonment from being entirely absorbed in the first sentence, which would not have been the court's intention. Amendments 78, 79, 81 and 82 introduce new schedules into the bill that detail the processes to be applied when an offender is serving more than one sentence of imprisonment. We have a complex array of provisions in the new schedule that deals with the various permutations. However, it may help the chamber if I offer an example. When a court imposes a consecutive sentence, it will now be served in parts. That, after all, is the court's intention. For example, a prisoner who receives a custody and community sentence to be served consecutively to a sentence that is already being served will serve the custody parts of both sentences before serving the aggregate of both community parts on licence in the community. In addition, for those on whom the courts impose an extended sentence, the extension periods will also be aggregated. Paragraph 6 of the new schedule that is introduced by amendment 82 also creates a new order-making power to apply the provisions of the new schedule to cases in which a previous sentence is imposed by a court elsewhere in the United Kingdom. That will enable the court, as it does now, to impose a sentence consecutively to a sentence that is imposed by a court outwith Scotland. Amendment 80 adds that order-making power, at section 48(4), to the orders that will be subject to the affirmative procedure. Amendments 46, 49 to 51, 60, 61, 63, 64, 66, 67, 70, 72, 73 and 75 are all consequential to the introduction of the new schedule. Amendment 83 makes consequential amendments to sections 167 and 204A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, and amendment 84 repeals section 204B and subsections (7A) to (7C) of section 167 of the 1995 act, because the new schedule covers everything that was previously covered by those provisions. The changes may be complex, but they will deliver a more honest and transparent approach to sentence calculation. I move amendment 46.

This large group of amendments deals with a number of technical and drafting issues that have resulted from a final proofreading of the bill's provisions. The amendments will make the bill more consistent and readable. I am happy to go into the details of specific amendments if members wish, but at this point I will speak about two amendments in particular. Amendment 4 provides further clarity to section 6. It addresses an area that has caused practical difficulty, in the past, in cases in which the custody part of a sentence results in a period that includes a fraction of a day. The amendment will require the court, in specifying the custody part of a custody and community sentence, to round up the custody part to the nearest whole day. Amendment 15 amends section 48 to provide that the order-making power in section 47(1)—to make supplementary, consequential, and so on, provisions in a case in which the order amends primary legislation—is subject to the affirmative procedure. The proposed change reflects the advice of the Subordinate Legislation Committee at an earlier stage, and we are grateful to the committee for its continued interest in the bill. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.   Amendment 2 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendments 16 to 19 and 33 seek to address Mr Fox's concern that custody-only prisoners could spend longer in prison than those custody and community sentence prisoners who receive very short sentences. Mr Fox wants to remove the anomaly by eliminating the category of custody-only sentences; all offenders who are given a custodial sentence, with the exception of those who are given life sentences, would be subject to a custody and community sentence. I do not think that anyone disputes that there is an anomaly—that point was acknowledged at stage 1 and stage 2. However, we had to consider the practicalities of ensuring that the custody and community sentence was as effective as possible. We agree that as many offenders as possible should be subject to the new custody and community regime. That is why we have set the threshold at the lowest practical point—15 days. I emphasise that we have to consider the practicalities. We have said many times that 15 days is the minimum time in which arrangements can be put in place for initial assessments to be made and conditions to be set. We are committed to tackling reoffending, but there is a particular problem with the group of offenders who are committing the types of offences that lead to short custodial sentences. For that group, it will be crucial to break the cycle and provide alternatives to a life of petty crime. There is a limit to what we can do with those people, given the short sentences, and I know that some commentators do not want custody and community measures to apply to very short sentences—although they do not say what should be done with those offenders instead. I do not think that we should be doing nothing. For people who are given very short sentences, the approach that is taken will be more about getting them in contact with the range of services that they will need—such as drug treatment, accommodation services, and advice on housing and benefits—to stabilise their lifestyles and move them away from offending. The service will be more akin to signposting people on and brokering access to services, rather than to formal supervision by social work. We have therefore stretched the application of the custody and community regime as far as practicable. Custodial sentences have to be meaningful, and that is what the 15-day threshold seeks to achieve.  Those who are sentenced to fewer than 15 days make up a very small percentage of the prison population. Most of those cases are for fine default. If a person defaults on a fine, they are flouting a disposal already made. In the financial year 2005-06, the average daily prison population of prisoners who had been sentenced to fewer than 15 days was just two. That average excludes fine defaulters. We are seeking to address fine defaulting in other ways. With fine defaulters, supervised attendance orders provide courts with an alternative to custody. We have announced that, from September this year, supervised attendance orders will be the mandatory penalty for fine default of up to £500. That will mean that the vast majority of fine defaulters will no longer be sent to prison. We estimate that that will remove approximately 3,000 annual receptions to custody for fine default. Points have been well made about the inadvisability of amendments 16 to 19 and 33 in the name of Colin Fox. I urge Parliament to reject them all.

I note the support of the Conservatives and I am rather concerned by the overcooked and overstated position taken by the Greens. I am sure that members of that party have studied in great detail the Official Report on the subject. The legislative consent motion was discussed in great detail at the Justice 2 Committee and the conclusion was that the committee was content to support it. The committee recognised that, should the bill be passed and a serious crime prevention order  attached to someone in England and Wales was breached in Scotland, it would be entirely reasonable for the Scottish courts to address the matter. The motion does not deal with the broader issue of whether we should be able to apply SCPOs in Scottish courts. I suspect that views will be divided on the subject when it is considered. The Executive judged that it should deal now with the small issue of orders that are issued in England and Wales and prevent Scotland from becoming a bolthole. The broader issue will be addressed by the next Administration. Members should note that it is possible for SCPOs to be applied post-conviction, which seems entirely reasonable to me, or indeed by a High Court, rather than by somebody taking an order out of their hip pocket and saying, "I think this might be a good idea." The orders would be tested in court. The breach of such an order will be a criminal offence, but the person to whom it is applied will have been advised of the consequences of breach. If they believe that the order ought not to have been applied, they can apply to the court for it to be put aside. The question whether the SCPO is valid is a matter for the court and the question of its breach, the terms of which the person will understand absolutely, is also a matter for the court. We took the view that it was important that we deal in this small way with the fact that the bill is going ahead in England and Wales. As was made very clear in the Justice 2 Committee, that does not prevent the scrutiny of the matter and I have no doubt that it will be scrutinised in detail by a future Parliament that will look at the issues in Scotland. However, as serious crime becomes more imaginative, creative and difficult to address, we must give our judicial system the levers and powers to allow us to address it, although at the same time maintaining the important rights of the accused. On those grounds, I urge members to follow the Justice 2 Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee and support the legislative consent motion.

The Serious Crime Bill will make it an offence in Scotland to breach a serious crime prevention order issued in England, Wales or Northern Ireland. It will extend the use of production orders to cash seizures, and put it beyond doubt that reasonable force may be used when executing a search warrant under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. It is a sensible package of measures that will ensure that Scotland does not become a bolthole for those trying to circumvent the provisions of their SCPO. The bill also strengthens the provisions of the 2002 act. The Justice 2 Committee supports the Executive's approach, and I trust that the Parliament will too. I move, That the Parliament endorses the principle that the offence of breaching a Serious Crime Prevention Order should be extended to Scotland and that amendments to the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 relating to the use of force in executing search warrants in Scotland under section 387 of that Act and the extension of production orders and search warrants to include cash seizures as set out in the Serious Crime Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 16 February 2007, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

I, too, congratulate Alasdair Morrison on securing this important debate. In particular, I thank him for recognising the Executive's efforts and those of our partners in tackling bigotry and sectarianism in Scotland. I also welcome what other members have said. Their speeches have given us pause for thought. We should acknowledge the importance of the debate. Change has occurred, but we should recognise that change does not happen by accident; it requires political will and determination, and a commitment by our communities to take action. People have had to put up with sectarian attitudes at our sporting grounds and beyond them for far too long. The venomous and spiteful behaviour of some people ends too often in violence. Scotland has had to face that problem as a society, and it is right that we should lead the  way in tackling sectarian attitudes and behaviour wherever they occur. Part of the problem with sectarianism is that people have thought that it is somehow a bit of a joke. They have thought that it ought not to be taken too seriously. I support what Bill Butler said about Nil by Mouth, which is an example of an organisation that developed out of tragedy. In the depths of the tragedy, friends and family were willing to put their energies into ensuring that something good would result from it and that we would be confronted by what the murder signified. Not only was it an individual family's tragedy, it was a terrible statement about our society. Understanding the seriousness of sectarianism is important. Alasdair Morrison was right to connect it to racism. Both things say something about our society. Sectarianism is a blight on Scottish society, and those who still harbour sectarian attitudes must learn that there is no place for sectarianism in Scotland. Members have been right to say that sectarianism is not exhibited only at football matches—we know that it runs deeper than that—but football is a powerful vehicle for emotions and commitments. It gives people a powerful feeling of togetherness and belonging. People can express their sectarianism and racism at football matches, but we can also begin to challenge those attitudes at football matches, as football is so powerful. Our football clubs must be commended for understanding that they can engage with people in a way that perhaps mere politicians cannot. Football has the capacity to unite people, and we recognise what football clubs have done in that regard. We must harness what they have done and move forward by working with fans, clubs, religious leaders, schools and the police. Much has been achieved in the battle against sectarianism. The launch of the calling full time on sectarianism strategy at the reconvened summit on sectarianism in December 2006 provides a strong example of how we can work together and deal with sectarianism head on. Singing and chanting at football matches are a particularly visible manifestation of sectarian behaviour that cannot be ignored. However, I agree with John Swinburne that there has been change. Over the years that I have attended football matches—at the other end of the city from the club that Alasdair Morrison follows—an evident change has taken place in how people sing. The place is not the same as it was 10 or 15 years ago. Alasdair Morrison was right to emphasise the power that fans have in policing themselves to make such behaviour unacceptable.

I understand that alcohol can fuel sectarianism and cause difficulties, but alcohol is also sometimes used as an alibi. As with other forms of violence, people say that the drink caused their behaviour, but no, whatever was in them caused their behaviour and perhaps they were just liberated by alcohol. The deeper issue needs to be challenged. On sectarian singing, we must all take responsibility for our actions and challenge those who peddle hatred and intolerance. We welcome the recent statements from Celtic and Rangers requesting their supporters to refrain from chanting such songs. We commend those fans who have made it their responsibility to police themselves. Clubs need to recognise that sectarian behaviour brings them into disrepute. They need to take action against such behaviour. In particular, clubs should take a much stronger line on banning abusive individuals and should work with the police to ensure that those who cause trouble outside grounds are also banned from attending matches and any social events that are associated with the club. In addition, clubs should work with supporters groups to ensure that those who behave in a sectarian way also have their supporters club membership revoked. Clubs should be ready to take whatever action they can against supporters groups that fail to address the sectarian element in their membership. I welcome the old firm's on-going approach to tackling the problem by working with fans, stewards and the police to help to eradicate sectarian behaviour from football matches. However, as has already been alluded to, sectarianism is not confined to Rangers and Celtic. A number of football clubs in Scotland have recognised that they have a hard-core sectarian element in their fan base. Sectarianism is a problem not just in sport but in many different areas of Scottish life, and our work to tackle sectarianism reflects that. I welcome the establishment of the new body called Football for All, which will deliver a focused anti-sectarianism awareness campaign early in the new football season. The initiative will send out a strong message to the people of Scotland that the ending of vile sectarian singing and chanting at football matches has an important part to play in eradicating sectarianism from Scottish society. We have also introduced powerful new laws. Measures have been introduced under section 74 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003 to deal with religiously aggravated crimes. We also introduced football banning orders in September 2006. They are a particularly powerful tool, as they  allow the police and the courts to take action to ensure that anyone who indulges in abusive, violent or bigoted behaviour can be banned for up to 10 years from attending matches in Scotland, the rest of the United Kingdom and overseas. In addition, banning orders can also exclude such individuals from going to town centres, railway stations and bars on match days. Working in partnership with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, we have already delivered the first phase of the straight red football banning orders awareness campaign. The campaign, which was very successful, made it clear that we are getting tough on the abusive bigots who bring our national sport into disrepute and that there will be no second chances for those who indulge in such mindless behaviour. I am pleased to announce—I am sure that Alasdair Morrison will welcome this—that a further £30,000 is being provided to run a second phase of the campaign to drive the message home. The message is loud and clear: abusive or violent behaviour will not be tolerated in Scottish football. We have amended the laws on marches and parades and we have issued guidance to Scottish local authorities on how the new procedures will be expected to work when they come into force from 1 April. Last May, we joined march organisers—the Orange order, Cairde na hÉireann and the Scottish Trades Union Congress—local authorities and police forces to sign a joint statement pledging to unite to tackle abusive behaviour at marches and parades. We know that churches and faith groups have also taken forward anti-sectarian work independently by developing a charter on the principles of religious freedom, which provides a strong anti-sectarian message. We are working with the broader voluntary sector to bring together those organisations that are involved in tackling sectarianism. We have made huge strides, but the Government does not have all the answers. That is evident on this issue as on many others. We need to work with those who have shown themselves to be willing to make a commitment to real change. We believe that the tide of public opinion is turning against the bigots. People who would in the past have put up with sectarianism or joked about it in their communities are starting to speak out. That broad partnership approach is the right way to tackle sectarianism. We should all be proud of the way in which we in Scotland have taken the issue forward. Our goal is to create a Scotland that, at its heart, is free from sectarianism, racism and discrimination. We have real hope for the future. I have no doubt that our  efforts and those of our partners in driving the anti-sectarian agenda further forward will bring about the Scotland in which we all want to live and prosper. Football clubs are rising to that challenge and, as citizens of Scotland, we must rise to it, too. We must recognise such behaviour for what it is, confront it when we see it and ensure that Scotland is a better place in which to live.  Meeting closed at 17:45.

We deplore the activities of illegal moneylenders. Trading standards officers and the police have been working together in the Scottish illegal moneylending unit since 2004 to detect and enforce relevant offences. The unit has brought two cases to justice, while six more are pending.  An evaluation by the Department of Trade and Industry has identified ways in which enforcement could be further improved. In addition, conventional policing over the two years 2005-06 and 2006-07 has resulted in 28 reports to the procurator fiscal, of which 18 have so far resulted in prosecution.

I agree with Cathie Craigie's description of illegal moneylenders. There is clear evidence that there are people who are waiting to prey on the most vulnerable people and who understand how to do so in a way that makes those vulnerable people feel that they are somehow responsible for the situation and cannot go to the police or anyone else for support. It is important that we recognise how unacceptable that conduct is. We know that those activities happen inside communities and that the solutions are inside communities, which is why we have given significant support to credit unions to do more than their core business of saving and lending and to be imaginative in the way in which they reach out to people. That is why money advice exists. We must do more to find ways to educate people and help them move away from moneylenders, but we must also do a great deal more to understand the intricacies and challenges of prosecution and to give people confidence to come forward and talk about what those moneylenders do. At lunch time, we had a positive round-table discussion at which groups from the prosecution and justice side and from communities talked together. We are committed to doing what we can to support such work, not only through policy but, crucially, to ensure that policy is followed by resources.

If people were concerned about our friend Christine Grahame speaking for too long, I hate to think what the reaction is to my having 13 minutes. I shall sort it by speaking slowly, rather than trying to be too controversial. The fact that communities and justice ministers organised the debate and acknowledged its importance is a symbolic and a practical expression of the important joint work that must be done to deal with illegal moneylenders. We need not only to examine the particulars of illegal moneylending but to understand the important message to which Christine May referred: that the driving force of the Scottish Executive's and the Scottish Parliament's commitments to deal with the issue should be addressing poverty, disadvantage and deprivation. That should be at the core of all the Executive's and the Parliament's work. The terrible injustices and brutalities of illegal moneylending can be explained by how poverty is experienced in our communities. That is precisely why we must put that experience into the context of talking about the development of a stable economy and supporting the creation of jobs and full employment and joining that with shared prosperity throughout our communities. Many people are in favour of the strong economy, but they are perhaps not as committed to the consequence of that, which is the entitlement and right of all to share prosperity and to share and  participate in the economy. That is why it is important that we talk about good jobs and the national minimum wage and that we challenge employers in business in that regard. We must understand the geography of poverty, the impact of multiple deprivation and the impact on families of living in a community in which people must access illegal moneylenders, even if they do not do so. We must understand more what happens to the most vulnerable people in our most vulnerable communities. That is why we need to continue the hard, unpublicised and difficult work and the day-to-day small successes of addressing employability, supporting people who have drug problems and dealing with the nitty-gritty of people's chaotic lifestyles and the impact that they have on communities and individuals. We must understand that illegal moneylending is not just about income and that poverty and deprivation are not simply about income. Different families who have the same money coming into the house can experience life differently because of how that money is spent, the family's priorities and the pressures on the family. We need to understand why and how illegal moneylenders thrive in poor communities and their link to poverty and exclusion if we are to address the problem. I am sure that I am not only the member who has been shocked by the distress that very small amounts of debt have caused somebody who has come to a surgery. I still remember that somebody who came to me was highly distressed at owing less than £200, because that had massive consequences for their life, health and capacity to find a way out. It is also a shock that poorer communities are the most seriously affected. We recognise the credit unions' critical role, which Trish Godman mentioned. One critical aspect of credit unions for the broader community is that they are wise about saving. They offer people wise words rather than false hope. They say that there is nothing for nothing and that people who sensibly and logically manage and save their money before taking a loan are less likely to get into trouble. I understand what Christine Grahame says about the name "credit union", but the state did not invent credit unions and perhaps we should leave it to the credit union movement to decide what it should be called. We could not invent credit unions, but communities did and understood their importance. The Scottish Executive has led the charge and done important work to support credit unions because of what they bring to the table. Through allowing loan guarantee funds from services of general economic interest, we have afforded credit unions the opportunity to offer a wider range of  products. Credit unions offer services such as Christmas savings clubs and savings clubs for children and they go into schools. They also do hard stuff in dealing with illegitimate lenders. They offer a better place to go to. My colleague Des McNulty mentioned the credit union in his area and it would be remiss of me not to mention Pollok Credit Union, which creatively addresses need every week in its community, most recently through selling white goods at reasonable rates and taking out the high street lenders that offer those goods at extortionate prices. We know the importance of credit unions and that they do a critical job of financial education for the broader community. Credit unions also offer the intelligence and understanding of the volunteers who work in them. Credit unions and the broader voluntary sector bring to the table not just the capacity to talk to individuals, but an understanding of the experience locally. They offer communities trust. I had the privilege of attending the 25 th anniversary celebration of the Scottish Transport Credit Union, which I think started with a tenner a head from half a dozen shop stewards who worked on the buses. That credit union offered someone to stand next to people who had a crisis or a difficulty to offer a bit of wisdom and advice and to support them. Michael McMahon talked about the credit union in his area and I have had the privilege of going to Newarthill. An issue exists with funding for the voluntary sector, but Newarthill Credit Union has a beautiful building and not one coin from the public purse went towards building it. That is because the people who started in a back room to address the situation and to support communities worked in a businesslike way. In understanding what is happening in the community, it is important to recognise that bit of the voluntary sector, but I do not gainsay the significance of what was said about core funding. Patrick Harvie mentioned that the social acceptability of debt is unhealthy. A broader issue is the idea that people can have something now without having to plan, which involves an interesting argument. However, the reality is that the victims of illegal moneylenders are not people who overstretched themselves with massive mortgages, but people who are trying to cope with small and unpredictable events, such as a funeral, a birthday party or a school trip. It is important to address the general issues of debt and unnecessary debt and to address education. Kenny MacAskill implied that if the Parliament does not deal with the inappropriate offering of credit by the financial sector, it will somehow not be addressed. As our motion says, it is possible to work with Westminster, local authorities and a range of partnerships to tackle  the issues. I would argue that John McFall is a champion of the consumer and—dare I say it—a champion of those communities who are most at risk. It is a matter not of whether we do it, but of how we do it. The issue is about political will and commitment rather than about the place where the debate is taking place.

That seems to be more about the political argument than about where the responsibility lies. It is about the colour of the political commitment rather than whether the Scottish Parliament has the power to act. The work that has been done by John McFall and others to challenge and address the financial sector has been significant.

Clearly, there is a constitutional argument. However, I believe that the last answer that poor communities and people who are challenged with unmanageable debt require is a constitutional answer. What they need is practical action to deliver for them. Education is important in preventing people from getting into debt problems; however, the reality is that the poor and the most vulnerable are the least likely to have access to that education. They are also less likely to have the confidence to go to organisations such as Money Advice Scotland and Citizens Advice Scotland, which would give them support. In my previous job, I met people who voluntarily helped people to enter debt arrangement schemes or to consolidate their debts. Ironically, those people would rather do  that—or thought that they had to do that—through something that was advertised on the television, which they would have to pay for. That is a huge frustration. The other side of the issue is about enforcement and the commitment of the police. We have a record number of police officers, and there is an important role for them; however, we must also understand how enforcement is experienced by individuals, as was mentioned earlier. It is not just about policing; it is about challenging the police to work with local communities. It is about the way in which they police, the way in which they listen to people and the way in which they take evidence. When we look at the differences in enforcement between Scotland and England, we must think hard about what it is in our legal system that makes enforcement and prosecution more difficult here. Perhaps we must move from a position of certainty and ask some hard questions about that. As Jeremy Purvis says, there is the opportunity for approaches such as the use of ASBOs to prevent behaviour and activities that blight our communities without making witnesses vulnerable. Perhaps we need to be more imaginative in that regard. Colin Fox talked about community development finance initiatives. An approach is being taken in Glasgow that addresses that issue, giving loans in a more accessible way. There is a huge argument about the tension between owner-occupiers and tenants in the Glasgow Housing Association, and there needs to be a creative solution to the problem. Indeed, constituents have raised that issue with me. Nevertheless, the idea that the GHA, as a social landlord, is the equivalent of an illegal moneylender is absolutely ludicrous. It diminishes the argument about illegal moneylending and it diminishes the argument that owner-occupiers are currently pursuing with the GHA. We need a range of approaches. We have changed the DAS to make it more attractive. However, we recognise that people are not coming forward and that we do not have people training in the same way. There are a huge number of initiatives from a range of organisations—including some banks that take an ethical approach. I urge members to support the motion and, critically, to support an approach to the Executive's priorities that is about supporting a strong economy and insisting that, side by side with that, that prosperity should be shared. For the most vulnerable communities, there has to be local activity and work that supports their particular needs and the organisations that work with them. That is why, later today, Des McNulty and I will  chair a round-table discussion of people from a range of areas to talk about the hard bits of this, rather than the easy bits. There is no silver bullet on this. We must listen to local communities, support those who work closely with them and ensure that enforcement goes with that in order to expose those who know, in a calculated way, that they are preying on their neighbours for their own interests and enforcing that with violence. Such activity is intolerable and will be eradicated.

My point was that the test is what the parties actually do when they have the opportunity to protect victims. We considered that recently, and the Tories have been found wanting. They committed themselves to protecting a principle on trial in absence in the face of evidence that large numbers of cases in sheriff courts were being recalled again and again. Vulnerable witnesses were being forced through an unnecessary process when, in the interests of justice, they could have been protected. The Conservatives have been found wanting in relation to the practicalities.

I will do my best to last that long. I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in this interesting debate. The position of the Executive on the matter is that we recognise that this is an issue that, for the reasons that have been highlighted, must be considered seriously in the context of Scots law. The approach must be neither, "Because England is doing it, we should do it," nor, "Because England is doing it, we should not do it." It has been said that the fundamental principle of double jeopardy has been around for centuries. For some people, that is sufficient reason for it to be held on to. However, the record of the Executive shows that we are happy to challenge the comfortable view that things should remain a certain way because they have been that way for ever. Clearly, good arguments have been made today, both for retaining double jeopardy and for reconsidering it.  There has been an attempt to suggest that the Tories' motion represents a matter of principle and that members must vote either for it or against it on principle. However, as Stewart Stevenson said, there are lots of other ways in which the same ends could be achieved, and there are many opportunities for addressing people's reservations about double jeopardy. To me, the motion is not a matter of principle; rather, it merely highlights an issue. As the Executive's amendment says, once we recognise that there is an issue, we must recognise that certain things will flow from addressing it. Our amendment also puts the issue into the broader context of supporting victims, which is a legitimate position to take. Should there be a review, of course it should take into account the differences in procedure between Scotland and England and whether there could be some way of preventing people from being unfairly pursued again and again other than by holding on to double jeopardy. I know that some people ask hard questions about moving forward because they want to stop change, but I think that the way in which change can be delivered is by being prepared to take on those hard questions—and, in this case, by being open to considering whether getting rid of double jeopardy would solve the problem or whether it might be better to use other measures. My position is that a review would expose the hard questions for which solutions are required. It is entirely legitimate to recognise the issue in the context of our approach to the way in which the court system serves the needs of those who are victims of crimes and defends the rights of those who are accused of crimes. Kenny MacAskill talked about cultural change and recognised the role of the Lord Advocate in that regard. However, we should not forget that none of that change happened by accident; it happened because people were willing to take hard political decisions and argue the hard case against the professionals who spoke with authority from within the legal service. The professionals said that those changes could never happen and that they should not happen because the new way was not the way in which things happened in the past. This Executive understands that although we must have full regard to the principles involved, we must also push the professionals in relation to the practicalities of people's experience of the court system. Our record shows that we are willing to listen to those who tell us about the problems in the system and take the argument to those who are satisfied with the system. Instinctively, a move against double jeopardy is in line with the Executive's approach. However, the Executive prioritises the issues that are of most importance—I have mentioned already the priority that this issue has been given in  Parliament—and does the hard work of grinding out the practical ways in which we can protect individuals through legislation and delivery of culture change. Members can support the Executive's amendment, recognising the challenge that double jeopardy represents and seeing the issue in the context of our broader commitment to being tough and rigorous in our approach to the justice system and to making changes where they must be made. I trust that members will support the Executive's position at decision time.

Many of us in the Parliament have come to criminal justice issues through direct experience of the justice system or because our constituents have come to us with their concerns. Our experience of the system and our reactions to it are shaped by people's—often bad—experiences of it. In the short time for which I have been in my job, I have been on a steep learning curve. I now know what tholed assize means. That, in itself, makes it worth while for the Conservatives to bring the matter to the chamber.

No. [ Laughter. ] I will not let the member push my level of understanding of the phrase "tholed assize". The tholed assize or double jeopardy rule is long established in Scots criminal law. Annabel Goldie is right to say that, as with other areas of the legal system, some people find it difficult to understand why the system developed in the way that it did. If they have direct experience of it, they perhaps feel that it is unfair. The rule is simply that, when somebody has been prosecuted and acquitted, they cannot be retried for the same crime. The principle is based on the view that the state cannot persistently prosecute someone for the same crime. We can understand the logic of that. The Conservatives' motion seeks to allow retrial in Scotland for certain serious offences if compelling new evidence comes to light. It does not seek to abandon the rule entirely, but proposes that it should be changed in certain circumstances. As has been said, the view has been shaped by the development of forensic  science and the fact that the law has been changed in England and Wales. As Annabel Goldie suggested, we should not create the impression that getting rid of double jeopardy would involve only a simple decision. A lot of work would need to be done to investigate the matter first. Furthermore, making that change is not the only way in which we can show our commitment to victims in the justice system. The change to the law in England and Wales was not introduced as a result of a whim by the Home Office; it arose from the Macpherson inquiry into the death of Stephen Lawrence. In that case, a private prosecution was brought, but it failed. The double jeopardy rule meant that it was not possible to bring a fresh prosecution. The Macpherson report recommended that consideration be given to reforming the law of double jeopardy. In turn, a consultation paper was issued. In my research for this debate, I was interested to find that only one question about the double jeopardy rule has been asked in the Scottish Parliament. In 2002, my colleague Brian Fitzpatrick asked the Scottish Executive for its response to the white paper "Justice for All". At that time, the Executive made a commitment to keep a close eye on developments. There has been no further parliamentary pressure on the matter since then. Following the white paper, the UK Government developed the provisions in the Criminal Justice Act 2003, which allows retrial for various serious offences including murder, rape, drug offences and terrorism, and not just for murder, as the Law Commission recommended. The provisions came into force in April 2005. Since then, only one case has been retried and it resulted in a conviction for murder. The changes to the double jeopardy rule in England and Wales were subject to extensive research, deliberation and consultation. If we were to consider making changes in Scotland, we would need to do the same. We would have to recognise—others in the chamber know a great deal more about this than I do—the significant differences between the criminal justice systems north and south of the border. Private prosecutions are far less likely in Scotland. Indeed, I can recall only one case—X v Sweeney in 1982—of a private prosecution. Our evidential base is a lot tougher and our majority system in the jury is different. Those are important aspects of the Scottish legal system and we would need to reflect on them. Annabel Goldie and others know that the Administration is not averse to reforming the criminal justice system when there is a proven  need to do so. Our record over the past four years speaks for itself. We have implemented a coherent and unprecedented reform programme and put victims at the heart of the criminal justice system. We might want to discuss double jeopardy and pursue the matter, but the Executive has pursued practical change, including victim support via witness services, the protection of vulnerable witnesses and changes to protection for the victims of sexual offences. Only recently, under my watch, we dealt with trials in absence in the sheriff court. Sadly, the Conservatives were found wanting. They could have done a little to protect victims and witnesses, but they chose not to support the radical steps that we took.

Not at all. There is clearly an issue. Annabel Goldie identified it and members throughout the Parliament understand it. However, if we are to act on that and make changes, we have to consider the matter in the context of Scots law rather than saying, "It happened in England and Wales, so it should happen here." The member knows that the Executive has been radical in challenging some matters that previously were regarded as fundamental. People said that they could never be changed. They said, "It's not possible to move on that," or, "This is the way things have always been." If we consider the matter in a future Administration, we will need to do so in the context of Scots law and a rigorous review of the implications, given the way in which the legal system in Scotland works. The critical point is that we cannot consider the matter in isolation. We should be judged on our actions on the range of issues that we have examined to support victims in the justice system. Rather than taking the matter in isolation, we should consider the approach that the Executive has taken over time. That is reflected in our amendment. I move amendment S2M-5613.1, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "recognises the issue of the double jeopardy rule in the operation of the criminal justice system; recognises that this issue must not be seen in isolation, but instead should be considered within the wider context of the Scottish Executive's ongoing reform and modernisation programme; commends the Executive's commitment to placing the needs of victims at the heart of the criminal justice system and its achievements over the last four years in fundamentally modernising and reforming that system, including the introduction of the Victim Information and Advice Service across Scotland and the Victim Notification Scheme, and further recognises that any decision on the future of double jeopardy should be taken within the context of Scots law."

On your part.

Does Patrick Harvie accept that those who argued most strongly for the Parliament to take action on enforcement were the deprived communities in which people were under the cosh—communities that were being destroyed because the police were not prioritising their demands and interests? It is in response to their needs that many of the measures on antisocial behaviour have come about.

Today offers an important opportunity to discuss and debate community safety and the challenge that antisocial behaviour presents to community security and well-being. Four years ago, we pledged to build safer and stronger communities—building on the experience that we had all shared as MSPs in the first session of Parliament—and to put tackling antisocial behaviour at the top of our agenda. We listened to the people of Scotland, who made it clear that improving community safety and tackling antisocial behaviour were what they wanted from us and expected us to deliver on. I start by putting some things in perspective. Crime in Scotland is falling. Last year, 20,000 fewer crimes were recorded by the police; housebreaking was at around half its 1997 level; and robberies were at their lowest level for 30 years. Scotland is becoming a less violent place. With 1,000 fewer victims of serious violent crime last year, violent crime is at its lowest level since devolution. Homicides are their lowest level for 15 years. We are seeking to tackle long-standing social problems such as knife carrying, and more than 12,500 weapons were taken off the streets during our first national amnesty. Record numbers of police officers are helping to prevent and detect crime; there are nearly 1,500 more officers now than there were seven years ago. The police and other agencies are using new powers and resources to help people stand up to antisocial behaviour. We are taking assets seized from criminals and reinvesting them in our communities; £2 million has been invested this year in areas hard hit by serious violent crime. Much-needed reforms in our courts are working for victims, witnesses and jurors. There were fewer adjourned cases; less time was wasted in courts; and more than 16,000 fewer witness appearances were needed for the most serious cases. It is important to acknowledge such progress as we acknowledge the further challenges that we face. The message from that progress is that we do not need to feel hopelessness in the face of crime in our communities: there are things that we can do, and it is possible to turn things around. The view that problems are with us and we must  simply tolerate them is one that can be challenged. Before moving the Executive's motion this afternoon, I will highlight in more detail the substantial progress that we have made in delivering on our pledges. I will also talk about the future and about what more needs to be done. Investment in the police service in Scotland is at a record level. Since 2003, we have increased annual funding by £156.5 million to £1.1 billion in 2006-07. Police officer numbers rose to a record level at the end of 2006. Those police officers are making a valuable contribution to making our streets and communities safer.

An important discussion and debate is to be had with the police about resources and how they are deployed, and about the challenges in the spending review for further resources to be made available to the police. In the work that we have done already, we have been smart in liberating the police from some duties that they did not need to do, so that they could tackle the really critical issues in local communities. Resources are increasingly targeted at the areas in communities that need them the most. We are achieving results. Initiatives such as safe city centres are returning our streets to our law-abiding citizens. We backed our antisocial behaviour legislation and wider work to promote community safety with funding of £130 million over four years for community safety partnerships to enable a wide range of local services, including community wardens, antisocial behaviour investigation teams, mediation and witness and victim support. We provided additional money for noise teams and youth justice, and £1 million was made available for additional closed-circuit television projects, to help combat and detect crime.  By the end of 2004, every council area in Scotland had at least one community warden team working with local people in hard-pressed neighbourhoods, to prevent and tackle antisocial behaviour and to improve the local environment. More than 550 wardens are now patrolling our streets to help make them safer. We know that local agencies are increasingly making use of the powers available to them under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which I have to say was passed in the face of overblown and rather desperate opposition at the time. By the end of last September, there had been 13 dispersal orders, 21 closure orders, 1,908 noise warnings, 118 fixed-penalty notices for noise, 170 vehicle seizures and 1,900 vehicle warnings. It is clear that we are taking firm action to tackle antisocial behaviour and, critically, responding to people who, in the past, would have been told that nothing could be done. Following a successful 12-month pilot in Tayside, when more than 3,000 fines were issued, we announced last week that police throughout Scotland will have new powers to issue fixed-penalty notices for minor incidents of antisocial behaviour, saving them time and reducing the burden on the courts. Fixed-penalty notices are immediate and visible justice for victims and keep officers out on the beat longer. Indeed, the Tayside pilot showed that it was possible to have 1,300 extra hours of police time, with officers out doing what we want the police to do, yet the Tories have taken a dismissive approach to a process that has been welcomed by local communities. We are taking unprecedented steps to tackle the mindlessly violent acts that blight too many of our communities. We know that real change will take time, but we have made significant progress over the past year. The first national knife amnesty, intelligence-led police enforcement campaigns and the steps that we have taken to strengthen the law are some examples of our direct action to tackle the problems head on. We acknowledge that drugs and drug misusers have a serious impact on our communities.

I can go back and check the comparison that Phil Gallie is making. Perhaps the Tory years were so troubling to me that I have tried to wipe them out.

I am quite happy to be corrected on that point. However, while the Tories were introducing an amnesty, they were creating  such terrible mayhem in our communities without addressing the issue of crime that it has taken devolution and the measures that we have introduced, in terms of both investment and police powers, to address the challenges for our communities. I realise that I have entirely run out of time, but I want to flag up issues around drugs and my recognition of the challenges posed by those issues. I commend the drug dealers don't care campaign and Crimestoppers. The campaign empowers communities by allowing people anonymity in reporting problems with drug dealers. We must recognise the critical work that it has done in communities. We have listened again to the challenges that people face when they are frightened by the crime that goes on around them. We must recognise how those communities are liberated when people are able to give information anonymously. We know that people want to see crime fall, offenders punished and individuals take responsibility for their own actions. We have listened to those concerns and are delivering reforms and results that demonstrate that we are on people's side. We are doing practical things as a consequence of our commitment. We know and understand the challenges. We talk and work with people in communities who tell us how those challenges are experienced locally. We know that more action is required and we will not hold back until we win back respect at the heart of Scottish communities. We have agreed that, from the next funding round in 2008, we should amalgamate community safety and antisocial behaviour funding streams and work with community safety partnerships to agree how that funding should be developed and supported for communities. We will continue to listen to what people tell us needs to be changed and to work with people in communities who are determined that safety and security should be our first priority. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the good progress being made towards making our communities safer; notes that crime is falling and violent crime is at its lowest level since devolution; welcomes the record numbers of police officers now helping to prevent and detect crime; notes that antisocial behaviour legislation has made a real difference, with effective use being made by the police and local authorities of new measures contained in the Antisocial Behaviour etc. (Scotland) Act 2004; welcomes work by community safety partnerships to focus resources on tackling crime and disorder in response to local community needs, and supports the Scottish Executive's determination to keep working with communities and to make further progress with its partners towards ensuring that decent and law-abiding people can feel safe in their homes and on their streets wherever they live.

The irresponsible behaviour of some retailers is damaging to young people. Alcohol in particular is often the cause of youth disorder in communities. We have already taken effective action on enforcing underage sales measures, which has included the roll-out of proof-of-age cards to enable retailers to operate a no-proof, no-sale policy and revising prosecution policy to enable test purchasing. We are considering several additional measures to tackle the problem, including the roll-out of alcohol test purchasing and temporarily or permanently banning retailers from selling tobacco and alcohol if they choose to flout the law.

I recognise the issue that Cathie Craigie and her community are concerned about. Off-licence premises can become a focus of disorder for the greater community as a result of people knowing that those premises sell alcohol to those who are under age. The supply of cigarettes and alcohol to underage children is a health issue for those young people and an issue that relates to the health of the community. We have provided a range of powers to address the matter in our antisocial behaviour legislation. Through the licensing legislation and the roll-out of test purchasing, we are determined to give retailers the clear message that there will be serious consequences for them if they do not operate a no-proof, no-sale policy. The enforcement regime, which could ultimately lead to a licensed premises losing its right to trade, is critical. People in licensed premises should understand that encouraging such disorder in communities will result in significant consequences.

There is clearly a problem with demand. Schools and communities are doing huge amounts of work using preventive measures to address the desire of young people to smoke in the first place. That work has been discussed this week in relation to role models. Access to cigarettes is an issue, which is why we are looking to roll out a test-purchasing approach. We want to identify what the real problem is and meet the challenges of enforcement. That said, we must give out the strong message to retailers that being responsible and not knowingly selling to under-16s is critical to their reputation. The test pilot scheme will identify the challenges that are involved.

No. We do not accept the arguments that have been made in favour of that proposal. The provisions in the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill will deliver an end to automatic unconditional early release; the criminal justice voluntary sector forum's proposals would not do so.

With respect, the member's concern about my response to his question might be prompted by the fact that he asked the question. We will, of course, have that debate in committee, and the Executive will have the opportunity to say in a great deal more detail why we think that the view of the criminal justice voluntary sector forum is not the right approach and, to some extent, is not in tune with the policy approach of the bill. I will be more than happy to develop that argument in committee where the positions can be properly scrutinised. I emphasise the importance of the fact that the bill came out of discussions that took place over a long period of time with interested groups and local communities. Only this morning, I met representatives of the Association of Directors of Social Work, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, community justice authorities and Sacro to talk about the principles of the bill and, critically, how they will be implemented to ensure our shared objectives of addressing reoffending, tackling offending behaviour in communities and giving our communities confidence that problems in the justice system can be resolved.

This has been a consensual debate, but it has not been born of consensus. We recognise that people have struggled for many years for recognition: recognition of the problem, and recognition of the need for Government to act to solve it. It is an absolute privilege to be involved in this debate, not simply because everyone welcomes this important bill at stage 1, but because I have had to do very little to make that happen. That is to be welcomed, and having a nice time at committee is even more of a pleasure. However, although there is consensus and people have come together, we acknowledge that it was not always thus. We also acknowledge that during the evidence taking at stage 1, all those involved in the debate, from all sides—or from what could be perceived to be sides—came together and were focused on achieving the solutions that the bill identifies. Mary Mulligan said that we can be perceived as trite when we say that we wanted to become an MSP because we wanted to make a difference. However, I hope that people in Scotland will take confidence from seeing a real closing of the distance between elected representatives and those whom they represent. I believe that the bill shows that it is possible for the walls of a Parliament to be breached and for those in our communities who have suffered injustice and who are entitled to have that injustice sorted to have the matter addressed by a Parliament. Sometimes, solutions come through conflict and argument, but sometimes solutions come through building a consensus round an entirely logical position. I believe that this is a good day for the Parliament and that the bill will make a significant difference to those who have campaigned on the issue for so long. Carolyn Leckie said a lot of people suffer from the problem as a consequence of the jobs that they did. The cruelty of someone suffering in their retirement as a consequence of what they did before they were retired has already been identified. The way in which people resisted taking responsibility for that reflects a time of reckless disregard for the health and entitlements of others in the workplace. It is good that there has been movement and that there is now recognition of the significance of health and safety measures in protecting working people in their everyday lives, so that, later in life, people will not have to live with the consequences of such recklessness. This is a straightforward and simple bill. It demonstrates the Executive's and the Parliament's ability to respond quickly, positively and with  compassion to secure changes in the law when faced with a compelling human need. We know about the cruel dilemma that the bill seeks to address. We know that sufferers are forgoing, or have forgone, the comforts that compensation might provide before they die so that they do not disadvantage their families. We know that most sufferers are men who were exposed to asbestos in the course of their work, but members of their families have also been at risk through contact with the fibres. Most deaths from the disease occur between the ages of 60 and 80, with only 18 per cent occurring before the age of 60, and we know that the problem will continue. About 80 per cent of cases can be associated with occupations in which there was a greater likelihood of exposure to asbestos, such as shipbuilding and construction—as evidenced in Des McNulty's and Duncan McNeil's constituencies—but I recognise the point made by Stewart Stevenson, and we should be alive to the fact that other groups have also suffered. Although I came late to the matter, I had responsibility for the bill in committee. During the oral evidence sessions, I was particularly struck by the fact that the issues go far beyond financial considerations, such as damages—that is one of the dilemmas. For example, someone who suffers wants the person who caused their suffering to acknowledge that. They are denied not only that but the finance that would give them comfort at the end of their life. They are denied the opportunity to hear someone say, "This was my fault. It is my responsibility. This is what I have done to you." The sufferers want that acknowledgement. I found that a powerful message: even if this is not about the money, it is important for us to address the provision of an opportunity for the suffering of individuals to be acknowledged. The bill will allow sufferers to hold someone to account before they die without worrying about disadvantaging their family. I have been genuinely heartened today to hear from members throughout the chamber their warm support for the bill. I will make some brief points on the issues that have been identified. As Mike Pringle said, there was a great deal of discussion of retrospection in committee. Frank Maguire stated: "I take the convener's point ... that the insurers and defenders have not had notice that that"— that is, retrospection— was going to happen. If the Scottish Executive indicated now that, once royal assent is given, the act will be retrospective from now, that might make me feel a bit easier regarding any human rights challenge in future."—[ Official Report , 6 December 2006; c 4127-28.] That measure gives certainty to those who want to use it from now, but at the same time it reduces  the opportunity of challenge. The evidence to support that exists: in the month before 20 December, only one sufferer took up a case, but since 20 December 13 sufferers have been able to raise a case. Dealing with retrospection to enable us to capture that small group has been a significant step, which addresses a slightly different point from the one made by Carolyn Leckie. On the issue of one court action rather than two, we have recognised the importance of the point made by the Justice 1 Committee and we are currently taking the recommendation forward with external stakeholders. Sandra White identified the issue of Alimta. As she said, an appeal against the NICE final appraisal document has been upheld on several counts. NICE is therefore looking again at Alimta and plans to announce its decision in September. When NICE has come to a view, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will consider the appraisal and advise whether it should apply in Scotland. Once NHS QIS has come to a view, Scottish NHS boards will be expected to follow its advice. I do not pretend to be an expert in this area, but my understanding is that that advice would be taken in line with the criteria for which the boards have responsibility; it would not be about the sufferers' incomes. Whether someone has secured damages ought not to be taken into consideration if Alimta is considered to be appropriate in their case. Work has already begun on the Scottish Law Commission review of the law of personal injury damages. It cannot be done very quickly, but the Scottish Law Commission will report in 2008. It will be a major and important piece of work, as has already been said. The level of damages is a matter for the courts, or for a jury, if one is involved in the case. We recognise the importance of what we are doing here today. We are sending a signal to those who are suffering about their right to have their suffering recognised, to have those who are at fault held to account and not to have the dilemma of worrying about their families. I thank the members of the Justice 1 Committee, the clerking staff and the officials who had to deal with me at such a late stage in the process for their support. I am grateful for the thoroughness of all those who were involved in the process.

Indeed. As was said earlier, Des McNulty also represented those interests. We have already recognised the very significant role of all the groups in forcing the issue on our attention. We are showing the flexibility of the Scottish Parliament in using the most appropriate solution to remedy the problem. We are sending out an important message about our accessibility and willingness to seek solutions to the problems that people have identified. Perhaps those solutions will not make the headlines, but they will make a significant difference. We are considering another appropriate solution to a problem—this time, that faced by people in Scotland who suffer from mesothelioma. The bill was the right thing to do. It will provide justice to those who suffer from this terrible disease. We were encouraged by the unanimous support that was given last summer to the legislative consent motion in relation to the Barker judgment, and I hope that today members will support the motion on the general principles of the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill in a similarly whole-hearted way.

This is a significant debate. I have to say that I disagree strongly with the contention from our friend from the Green party that some folk in the chamber would want to do something that was offensive to the Jewish community in relation to Holocaust spoliation. That is not what the LCM is about. There are concerns about the matter throughout the Parliament and no one would want to strike a balance on the issue that meant that we in Scotland brought in for exhibition items that were not ethically sound. It is on that basis that we sought to develop the guidance. We are aware of and understand the concerns of those who have expressed reservations about the consequences of the bill. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport has proposed amendments to address the concerns that have been expressed about possible spoliation claims. The criteria for approval would focus on the ability of museums and galleries to demonstrate the satisfactory nature of their due diligence procedures in considerable detail. They would need to demonstrate that they had sought to establish the provenance of the items that they brought in. The regulations and the criteria for registration as a body that can seek immunity reinforce the guidance that is already in place. I do not think that, in the main stream of our cultural life, there are bodies that wish to bring such items in. In fact, the bill will not affect any claims on objects in UK national collections or other museums, including Holocaust spoliation claims. The UK Government and UK national museums have been in the vanguard of international action on provenance research on the 1933 to 1945 Nazi era and response to Holocaust spoliation claims, so they are very aware of the issues. Under the proposed amendments, immunity may be conditional on the publication by museums  of information about objects before they are exhibited. That relates to David Davidson's point. Museums might be required to provide a description that is sufficient to identify the object, to state the identity of the lending institution and to give the dates of the exhibition. I acknowledge the concerns about drafting. The comments that were made in the chamber and in committee will, of course, form part of our commentary to the UK Government. I assure the Parliament that all the points that have been made will be brought to Westminster's attention. In relation to the concerns about drafting, however, members should note that the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Justice 2 Committee explored the issues and supported the provisions. We do not understate the strong concerns that Ken Macintosh highlighted and we will ensure that they are expressed, but we are clear that there are enough safeguards to ensure that we strike the right balance and that things that are ethically unsound are not exhibited. Museums and galleries will be expected to establish their procedures for checking on provenance and, in those circumstances, Scottish ministers can grant them the right to be part of that register. This is a small measure that seeks to allow the kind of cultural exchange that we support. In no way does it do anything to allow items of Holocaust spoliation to be displayed in this country without any account being taken of that. I assure Parliament that the issues that have been raised will be pursued with Westminster, but I urge members to support the LCM as a means of protecting the interests of the museums and galleries in Scotland and the cultural life of the people of Scotland.

Presiding Officer, I am conscious of the limited time available, so, with your permission, I will speak only briefly in my opening contribution. I hope to be able to respond to any issues that arise in the discussion that follows. Two parts of the bill are within devolved competence: tribunal reform and immunity of works of art from seizure. On immunity, the provisions will protect our ability to attract loans from overseas of cultural objects and works of art for public exhibition. Increasingly, major cultural exhibitions rely on loans of works from abroad, so as to allow the public and tourists a significantly enhanced appreciation of culture and art. However, sometimes works of art have been seized while on international loan, for example because of disputes over ownership or debt. Museums and galleries are increasingly concerned about that risk. Part 6 of the bill, on protecting cultural loans in carefully constrained circumstances, will bring the UK into line with many other countries. Scotland will be disadvantaged if the provisions are not applied here. I stress that we are acutely aware of the sensitive issue of the balance to be struck between the benefits of providing immunity and the rights of people who might legitimately claim ownership of the works of art concerned. We are aware of the particular concern to do with the significant issue of Holocaust spoliation. The bill sets up the statutory framework for the new Tribunals Service covering reserved tribunals such as social security and taxation. The new Tribunals Service will create a more coherent and transparent tribunal system that is flexible enough to meet the differing needs of its users. Ministers and the Justice 2 Committee have given detailed consideration to the proposals in the bill, which we consider are in Scotland's best interests. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the relevant provisions of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Bill, introduced in the House of Lords on 16 November 2006, (a) relating to the establishment of a new Tribunals Service and an Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council and (b)  providing immunity from seizure for international works of art on loan to exhibitions in this country, so far as these matters fall within the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, should be considered by the UK Parliament.

There you are. See what happens when we rip up the script. The Executive has much to be proud of in the reforms to Scotland's justice system that it has delivered. Many of the proposals that were outlined in our criminal justice plan, which was published in 2004, are already making a positive difference to the lives of ordinary people up and down the country day in, day out. We have record numbers of police officers—an increase of nearly 1,500 since 1999—on our streets; more crimes are being solved than ever; serious violent crime is on the decrease; and serious criminals are being hit hard through the seizure and disposal of assets that are then put to use to further improve our communities. We have reformed the operation of Scotland's High Court, leading to fewer adjournments and sparing thousands of witnesses the stress of unnecessary trips to court. Our antisocial behaviour legislation is making a real difference in tackling the scourge of antisocial behaviour and is helping people and communities to fight back and reclaim their local areas for the benefit of the law-abiding majority. We have tackled the justice agenda from all angles, addressing the causes of crime, the effects of crime and, just as important, the systems that are needed to deal with crime and make Scotland safer. The Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill is an important part of that process and reflects the importance of not only the aspiration to reform, but the practical detail and procedure that must be developed to fulfil that aspiration. Reform of the summary justice system is critical. The vast majority of offenders first come into contact with the criminal justice system at the summary level, so a quick and effective response  to offending can stop a life of crime in its tracks. The summary process can and must play its part in reducing offending and reoffending, and the bill will allow it to do just that. It will ensure that public safety and the interests of the law-abiding majority are put first. It will improve the speed and efficiency of the system and ensure that it plays its part in reducing reoffending. I thank the Justice 1 Committee for its detailed scrutiny throughout the bill's parliamentary progress. That scrutiny has led to a number of positive changes. I give the committee my personal thanks for tolerating me when I took on the final stage 2 meeting at short notice. I thank Hugh Henry, who preceded me as Deputy Minister for Justice and oversaw the process so effectively that there was little for me to worry about when I came into post. I also thank the bill team, which was able to ensure that I was briefed appropriately to pursue the last stages of the bill's progress. The consensus that has emerged at stage 3 does not mean that we are dealing with issues that do not matter, but is a reflection of the fact that the committee team, the ministerial team and the bill team worked hard together to address the issues. That work has paid a dividend in our having a largely consensual stage 3 debate, and I acknowledge the hard work of all the people who were involved in the process. The bill sets out the law on bail clearly and makes it easier for the public to understand. In response to a committee recommendation, we lodged a stage 2 amendment to make it absolutely clear that consideration of public safety is always part of the bail decision. If an accused is charged with a serious violent, sexual or drugs offence and has a previous record for such offending, the court should grant bail only in exceptional circumstances. Penalties for breach of bail are increased. An accused who is given bail will be in no doubt that they are in a position of trust. If they abuse that trust, action will be taken. Judges will be required to make their decisions clear and to explain the consequences of breaching bail, thereby improving clarity and underlining the responsibilities on the accused. Nothing in the bill will change the fact that courts make individual bail decisions. It is right that the courts make those decisions, but it is also right that the Parliament sets the parameters within which the decisions are reached. That is what we are doing through the bill. Through the provisions of the bill, we seek to ensure that there will be increased respect for bail and increased public confidence in the justice system, and that people living in communities throughout Scotland can have safer daily lives. The bill reforms a number of procedures in the summary system that are sometimes seen as slow  and bureaucratic and which have caused concern to victims, witnesses and the communities that have been subject to offending. We have listened to those concerns and we have responded. The bill makes detailed changes to criminal procedures, which, taken together, will lead to greater efficiency, less inconvenience for victims and witnesses and swifter punishment of those who offend, which underlines the fact that low-level crime will be dealt with effectively by the system. The bill reforms the structures of the summary system. It makes sense for the Scottish Court Service to run district courts, because it is a specialist court provider whose main task is to run the courts effectively. The bill also increases the disposals that are available for tackling offending quickly and effectively. It increases the availability of alternatives to prosecution and allows the right disposal to be used at the right time. Through the introduction of fines enforcement officers, fines will be robustly enforced against those who can pay but choose not to, ensuring that the fine is a credible and effective disposal and that the judicial system is no longer an unwilling partner in an individual's desire to seek headlines, as a result of which they end up in court instead of paying a fine that they can afford. Fines enforcement officers will have smart enforcement powers to use against those who have the means to pay but choose not to do so. The ability to deduct fines directly from salaries and from moneys that are held in bank accounts, coupled with the fact that the officer will be a dedicated case manager for the enforcement of fines, will ensure that fine defaulters are not able to frustrate the aims of justice by wilfully not paying their fines and ending up in jail. There are, of course, those who want to pay their fines but who have genuine difficulty in making payment. Those individuals will be offered advice and assistance to ensure that they pay their fine in a way that they can manage. The combination of hard-edged enforcement and access to advice will ensure that imprisonment for fine default is a genuine last resort. The bill will revitalise Scotland's long-standing practice of lay justice. Lay justices play a crucial part in giving communities a direct link with their justice system. However, it must be more than just a tradition. Reforms to the recruitment, appointment, training and appraisal of justices of the peace will ensure that they play a leading role in the reformed system. A programme of practical work is already under way to ensure that the reforms will be effectively implemented. The reforms will help us realise our key aims of reducing reoffending, improving public safety and ensuring that our criminal justice  system builds safer daily lives for all those who come into contact with it. I am very much aware that I have come into the process at a late stage and that the Minister for Justice, Cathy Jamieson, has been there throughout a very long process, which started long before the introduction of the bill. It is a privilege for me to have become engaged in the process at a late stage in the scrutiny of significant legislation. I thank all those who did all the hard preceding work. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

There is a clear case for increasing the small claims limit. We are continuing to consider all the arguments and representations on the correct levels for jurisdiction limits to ensure that any increase has the clear support of Parliament.

I will resist the temptation to  be flattered into saying something on which I cannot make a commitment. It is clear that the issue is serious. Given the pedigree of my predecessors in post, I know that if there were a simple solution it would have been found by now. It is important that all the jurisdiction limits in the system fit together: there would be consequences if we were to change one without changing the others. There is clear recognition and acknowledgment of that. I know that John Home Robertson has a long-standing interest in the matter. We have announced that there will be a review of civil justice. It is clear that the matter could usefully be explored further during that review so that all the competing interests, concerns and arguments can be addressed and a solution found.

It is most unjust to imply that because of lethargy among officials no progress has been made on the matter, and it would be entirely inappropriate for a minister to park responsibility where it does not lie. The issue has been on-going since at least 2002, but it has not just been parked. People have wrestled with it but have, for example, been unable at one stage in the parliamentary process to secure parliamentary support for the approach that was being taken. A clear and compelling case has been made, but it is essential that we get the limit right. Dealing with the matter during the review of civil justice will ensure that all the bits of the process marry up with each other and make sense. That will deal with the issue that John Home Robertson has highlighted.

We are currently considering the results of an independent evaluation of our 12-month pilot of fixed penalty notices in Tayside. The pilot concluded in March 2006 and the final evaluation report was presented to the Executive in November 2006. Decisions on a national roll-out require careful consideration with the police and other criminal justice partners. An announcement will be made in the near future.

Obviously, we wish to await publication of the evaluation report before we give members the full flavour of what has been said and set out the next steps. I am sure that Bill Butler will look forward to receiving that information. However, I can say that the feedback, including that from Tayside police, is positive. Officers are keen on fixed penalty notices because, as the member suggested, they save time, as officers can often issue a notice on the street and do not have to go back to the station, and they allow officers to respond to low-level offences. Equally, it is clear that the public approve of the notices, because they deliver highly visible immediate justice and send a strong message to people who commit low-level offences that doing so is unacceptable. We have received positive responses on the pilot. More detail will be provided later.

Fixed penalty notices are intended to be used for low-level offences and perhaps to deter people who offend on a first occasion from doing so in the future. We acknowledge that persistent offenders pose a greater challenge. In our general approach, we understand that there is progression in all such matters. We do not expect fixed penalty notices to be given inappropriately to persistent offenders. As the evaluation is considered, we will ensure that those issues are dealt with. Fixed penalty notices are not compulsory; they are a matter of judgment by officers. However, they are absolutely intended for first-time offenders and low-level offending and are not a substitute for the other options that are available to the police.

Indeed. Amendment 55 is a minor and technical amendment that updates a cross-reference in the Criminal Justice Act 1988. Section 133 of that act requires the Scottish ministers to pay compensation in certain circumstances when the High Court determines that a miscarriage of justice has occurred. The Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission refers cases to the High Court, which used to be a function of the secretary of state before the SCCRC was established. The amendment simply corrects an out-of-date cross-reference to reflect the fact that all references to the High Court following a suspected miscarriage of justice are made by the SCCRC and not the secretary of state. At present, one out-of-date cross-reference suggests that the secretary of state and not the SCCRC refers cases to the High Court. The amendment has no substantive effect on the policy that relates to miscarriages of justice, the payment of compensation or the SCCRC's functions. I move amendment 55.  Amendment 55 agreed to.  Amendments 57, 56 and 58 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendment 59 ensures that extended sentences can be imposed for the offences that the Protection of Children and Prevention of Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005 recently created. As Parliament will recall,  that act created new offences of grooming children for the purpose of engaging in unlawful sexual activity; of paying for the sexual services of a person who is under 18; and of causing, inciting, controlling, arranging or facilitating child pornography or the provision of sexual services by children. Section 210A of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995 allows the courts to impose extended sentences on some sex offenders and violent offenders when they consider that necessary to protect the public from serious harm. That extends the period during which the offender is on licence and under supervision once released from prison. Extended sentences are available for a range of sexual offences that are specified in section 210A. The courts should be able to impose extended sentences in appropriate cases for the new offences that were created in 2005. The 2005 act did not make the necessary amendment to section 210A of the 1995 act to allow that to happen. We are now taking the opportunity to ensure that extended sentences can be imposed following conviction for one of the new offences, when the court thinks that appropriate. The amendment will not change the provisions of the 2005 act; it will simply ensure that the courts have the option of imposing an extended sentence in appropriate cases. I move amendment 59.

I will just glow.  Amendment 59 agreed to.  Amendments 60 to 62 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

I reassure everyone that the Executive is committed to monitoring and effectively reviewing its work and recognises that its approach has to be holistic. However, even if  that were not the case, we have a parliamentary process that is committed to scrutiny and can conduct inquiries into matters at any time. In fact, this Parliament has a good record in relation to legislation coming from communities, going into the committee system and on to the statute book. Our process is such that the situation is not necessarily comparable with the situation that pertains at Westminster. Equally, the precedent that Stewart Stevenson talked about is not proportionate, given that we are talking about summary cases. We do not want to overstate what has been done in relation to these matters. Members should be alert to the fact that, on occasion, a requirement in legislation for a report to be written has meant that time has been spent producing a report at an entirely inappropriate time. For example, in relation to the right-to-buy policy, a report had to be written before the changes in the right-to-buy process could be properly evaluated. It would have been more informative to consider the matter at a slightly later stage. We have a Parliament and an Executive that are committed to monitoring, reviewing and taking effective action if necessary. I concur entirely with what was said about the inadvisability of a sunset clause that would force Parliament to revisit the matter even if it were working well. We know that, even if there is more legislative time in this Parliament than elsewhere, it remains precious and should be used to deal with the priorities of the Parliament of the day.

Amendment 48 makes a minor addition to new section 226D(11)(g) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, as inserted by section 43. New section 226D(10) of the 1995 act provides that ministers may make regulations in connection with the seizure of vehicles by a fines enforcement officer. Section 226D(11) lists—[ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Section 226D(11) lists what those regulations may cover, and paragraph (g) states that they may make provision as to the payment of fees, charges or other costs in relation to the seizure of vehicles. Amendment 48 adds a qualification to section 226D(11)(g) to the effect that any provision made in regulations will relate to the payment of  reasonable fees, charges and other costs. The addition of the word "reasonable" follows comments made by the Subordinate Legislation Committee. Although I do not think that the addition of the word changes the policy effect of the provision, as any regulations made under it would have sought to recover only reasonable costs, I am happy, given the committee's suggestion, to include the word "reasonable" in the bill. I thank the committee for its comments. Amendments 49 and 50 make small technical additions to section 43 to ensure that enforcement action in respect of unpaid financial penalties can be taken forward as effectively as possible. The bill as introduced provided that, if court-imposed financial penalties were transferred from one court to another and it became necessary for the outstanding fines to be referred back to court for some form of action, the court to which the outstanding fines were referred would be either the court in which the fine was imposed or, if the fine had been transferred to another court, the court to which it had been transferred. That provision will ensure that any follow-up court action needed in respect of unpaid fines can take place in a single court hearing in the area where the offender lives. The fines enforcement officer and the clerk of court would ensure that all fines were transferred to the sheriffdom in which the accused lived before any court action took place, avoiding the need for multiple hearings in different parts of Scotland in respect of a single offender's unpaid fines. Multiple hearings would be a waste of court time and would not benefit the offender, whose outstanding fines should be considered all together by his or her local court, not in a piecemeal way. On further examination of those technical provisions, it became clear that the bill as introduced would not provide the same flexibility in respect of non-court-imposed fines, such as fiscal fines and fixed penalties for road traffic offences. In those cases, any subsequent court action would always have to take place before the court whose clerk issued the penalty—even if it was a speeding fine issued in Inverness against someone who lived in Dumfries but happened to be driving that way. That is not a sensible position. It would frustrate attempts to ensure that all outstanding penalties against an individual can be dealt with at a single court hearing in the area where the defaulter resides, should subsequent court action prove necessary. Amendments 49 and 50 rectify the position by extending the provision that applies to court-imposed fines so that it will also apply to non-court-imposed fines. Any subsequent court action in respect of the penalty will fall to the court to  which the penalty had been transferred if a transfer has taken place, not the court of issue. Amendment 50 also ensures that that flexibility can be applied to any relevant penalty specified by ministers in future, which will ensure that the provisions can adapt to deal with new or amended penalties introduced after the bill comes into force. I move amendment 48.  Amendment 48 agreed to.  Amendments 49 and 50 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendments 51 and 52 are technical and clarify the provisions relating to a JP's jurisdiction and powers. The current wording of section 49(5A) could be interpreted as meaning that a JP could not exercise signing functions in their own sheriffdom. Such an interpretation would be contrary to our policy intention. Amendment 52 puts it beyond doubt that JPs can exercise their signing functions anywhere within Scotland, including the sheriffdom in which they sit as a JP. A JP's power to sign documents that relate to criminal proceedings within their sheriffdom is set out in section 49(5). That allows JPs to sign documents such as warrants and judgments relating to proceedings in their sheriffdom. Although the power conferred on JPs by the section is to sign certain documents, it must be stressed that the signature of such documents is part of the JP's judicial functions and not a part of their more general signing functions. It would be helpful to state clearly in the bill that the functions are of a judicial nature, so that there can be no doubt that it is only JPs, not other people who have more limited signing powers, who may sign the documents listed in section 49(5). Amendment 51 makes that position clear by stressing the judicial nature of the functions. It does not change the substance of section 49 in any way and is proposed for the sake of clarity. Amendment 53 changes the specified purposes for which an order can be made under section 51(4) to repeal any or all provisions of the District Courts (Scotland) Act 1975. The bill currently states that ministers may make such an order "to such extent as they consider to be appropriate in connection with the disestablishment of district courts." The Executive anticipates that the provisions of the 1975 act will be repealed not only for the  purpose of disestablishing the district courts as they are replaced by JP courts, but to enable reforms to be made to the system of lay justice in Scotland. For example, the new system requires some amendments to the process by which tribunals for JPs are established. The current wording of section 51(4) refers only to the disestablishment of the district courts. It could therefore be argued that the section does not currently allow the 1975 act to be repealed for the purpose of reforming lay justice. That would be contrary to our policy intention and could frustrate the process of reform. Amendment 53 therefore changes the wording of section 51(4) to put it beyond doubt that the power to repeal the 1975 act can be used for the purpose of reforms to the lay justice system as well as for disestablishing the district courts. Amendment 54 removes provisions in the bill amending section 2 of the Public Records (Scotland) Act 1937 and inserts a new section 2A into that act in order to make appropriate provision for the preservation of JP court records in future. The provisions are similar to those that are in place for sheriff court records, although our view is that extending in their entirety the existing requirements for sheriff court records in section 2 of the 1937 act to JP court records would be unduly onerous.  JP court records will be the relevant sheriff principal's responsibility, unlike the records of their predecessors—district courts—which were the relevant local authority's responsibility. Accordingly, it is necessary to arrange for their preservation by the keeper of the records of Scotland. The main differences in treatment between sheriff court and JP court records will be that JP court records will be transferred once they are 10 years old; the order to transfer them will be made by the relevant sheriff principal rather than the Lord President; and records will be transferred within six months of the date of the order. Amendment 62 makes a minor change to the Public Appointments and Public Bodies etc (Scotland) Act 2003 and is a consequence of the proposed changes to the lay justice system. A recommendation to be appointed as a JP is currently made by a justices of the peace advisory committee—a JPAC. Ministers make appointments to JPACs, so the office of the commissioner for public appointments in Scotland regulates those appointments. JPACs are listed in schedule 2 to the 2003 act as specified authorities that are subject to the code of practice for  ministerial appointments to public bodies in Scotland. Appointments to the offices and bodies that are listed in schedule 2 to the 2003 act are made by the Scottish ministers or on their recommendation. We propose that sheriffs principal, rather than ministers, will appoint people to JPACs, so it will no longer be appropriate for JPAC appointments to come under the scope of that schedule, which, as I mentioned, deals with appointments that are made by or on the recommendation of the Scottish ministers. Amendment 62 therefore removes the reference to JPACs from the schedule. I move amendment 51.  Amendment 51 agreed to.  Amendment 52 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendment 47 inserts a new section into the bill to insert new section 303ZB into the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, and provides that the procurator fiscal may set aside the offer of a fiscal fine, compensation offer, work offer or work order in certain circumstances. The procurator fiscal will be able to set aside an offer or order where he or she considers that the original offer or order should not have been made because, subsequent to making it, information has come to light that renders the basis of the decision to do so untenable. That power applies whether or not an offer has been accepted or is deemed to have been accepted. Where an offer or order is set aside, the procurator fiscal will give notice of that fact to the alleged offender, as well as notice that he or she cannot be prosecuted for the alleged offence to which the offer or order relates. That provision will be useful where offers are occasionally made and accepted and, for various reasons, the accepted offer turns out to be unreliable. An example of that could be where a person provides false details to the police and, as a result, the offer is sent to the wrong person. If the fact that false details were given comes to the attention of the procurator fiscal, he or she, by use of the power, will be able quickly to remedy the situation with the minimum inconvenience to the innocent third party. Amendment 47 provides a further safeguard in the new system of alternatives to prosecution, in addition to the recall procedures that are already provided for in the bill. Those procedures were strengthened at stage 2 following a number of helpful observations by the Justice 1 Committee in its stage 1 report. The additional provision bolsters the safeguards that are in place to ensure that, where appropriate, an accepted offer of an alternative to prosecution can be set aside, which will help to ensure that the system is both just and efficient. I hope that members will be further reassured by amendment 47. The opt-out scheme that the bill introduces will provide a credible, effective and efficient system of alternatives to prosecution while ensuring that the system is fair and protects the interests of the alleged offender. I am grateful to Pauline McNeill for lodging amendments 39 and 67, and I am happy to support them. My predecessor made it clear to the Justice 1 Committee when the equivalent amendment was introduced at stage 2 that we supported it in principle, subject to some minor drafting alterations. We are firmly of the view that it is important to give prosecutors increased scope for the use of alternatives to prosecution. That, in turn, will enable better use to be made of court time.  We also accept the Justice 1 Committee's concern that, at this stage, the argument for an increase in the maximum fiscal fine to £500 has not been made. I am grateful to the committee for its constructive approach to the issue. My understanding is that a maximum fiscal fine of £300 should, in the majority of cases, allow procurators fiscal to deal quickly and proportionately with alleged offenders where a fiscal fine is thought to be the best way of dealing with the matter. I therefore support amendments 39 and 67. On amendments 65 and 66, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, section 39 makes changes to the process of accepting fixed penalties, otherwise known as fiscal fines, and makes provision in relation to compensation offers, which are a new alternative to prosecution. Section 40 creates the work order, which is a further alternative to prosecution. Amendment 65 would compel a future Executive, as a matter of law, to produce a report on the operation of the changes that are being introduced to the system of alternatives to prosecution under sections 39 and 40. Amendment 66 would cause sections 39 and 40 to cease to have effect within five years of the provisions coming into force and would, in practice, compel a future Executive and Parliament to reconsider the provisions for alternatives to prosecution. Depending on the result of that consideration, the Parliament would have to make further provision through primary legislation if it wished to retain the changes that are being made now by sections 39 and 40. Additionally, amendment 66 would leave us with an untidy system on the statute book. In opposing the amendments in the name of Margaret Mitchell, I make it clear that we are committed to developing an effective system for monitoring and evaluating the changes that the bill and the wider summary justice reform programme will make. That was alluded to previously by Stewart Stevenson. However, we must do that in a way that helps further improvements to be made to the system, not in a way that forces us to look in a blinkered manner at one particular aspect of the package, which may or may not be worthy of such detailed attention at a point in the future. There is limited benefit in considering one part of the summary justice system in isolation. Many people made that point during the considerations that led to the introduction of the bill—and have done so throughout its passage—which is why we asked Sheriff Principal McInnes to prepare a report on the entire summary justice system, end to end, and why the bill deals with all aspects of the system. To commit a future Parliament to review one part of the package would rather miss the point.  Of course, the Executive as a whole is accountable to Parliament. Members of any future Parliament will be free to ask questions about the operation of the new legislation and its practical impact, just as they are free to do in other areas. Future committees of the Parliament may wish to take up that issue. New legislation is not required to hold the Executive to account on legislation or matters of policy. Amendments 65 and 66 would mean that a future Parliament would be compelled to use some of its time to reconsider this area of the law and to make further legislative provision, even if the existing provisions were working well. Amendment 66 would negate the effects of sections 39 and 40 five years after they had come into force. That might be a waste of time for the future Parliament, which no doubt will want to address its own priorities rather than issues that its predecessor thought might be a priority. Amendment 66 would also create a degree of uncertainty for those who implement the reforms. New systems and changes to existing systems will be required to ensure that the operation of fiscal fines, fiscal compensation offers and work orders is effective in future. Amendments 65 and 66 would leave a shadow hanging over the bill. As I am sure Justice 1 Committee members will recall, sections 39 and 40 were the subject of much debate at stages 1 and 2—debate that led to a number of changes. At the conclusion of stage 2, I think that the majority of the Justice 1 Committee were of the view that the provisions in those sections struck the right balance between fairness and efficiency. However, the issues are complex, and any future parliamentary scrutiny would need to be similarly detailed. I firmly believe that we should let members of a future Parliament exercise their own judgment as to what issues are important to them, which may mean members enacting new legislation or amending provisions in this bill when enacted to deal with any concerns that arise. However, that is a judgment for the future, not for today. If members believe that sections 39 and 40 should be passed, they should pass them in the usual way. If my checks are correct, with the exception of the convener of the Justice 1 Committee, I am the only member who has lodged amendments to these sections at stage 3. I assure members, however, that that was to further improve them and not because I am in any doubt. I reassure members that the information that we will need to monitor the operation of alternatives to prosecution will be forthcoming from the Crown Office, the police and the Scottish Court Service. Also, I remind members that other provisions in the bill place the Crown Office inspectorate on a statutory footing. That body will have the power to  inspect the operation of the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, including its detailed procedures and practices. Structures and systems will be in place to ensure that those new measures are effectively and appropriately used. Alternatives to prosecution have been part of our justice system for almost 20 years, in the form of fiscal fines. They are well understood and they work. In appropriate cases, those accused of minor offences can avoid picking up a criminal record, and the courts are left free to deal with more serious cases. The introduction of the fiscal compensation offer and work order will further improve that system. We want to build on that system using the recommendations that have been made by an expert committee and which have been scrutinised and supported by this Parliament. Amendments 65 and 66 have the potential to create exactly what the entire bill seeks to eliminate—wasted effort. They would force detailed work on one aspect of a much wider programme and force a future Parliament to spend its time on issues that it might not consider to be a priority. For those reasons, I encourage the chamber not to support the amendments in Margaret Mitchell's name.

The Executive takes the view that it would not currently be appropriate to extend the use of DTTOs and CSOs in the way in which amendments 35 and 36 envisage. That is not to say that we do not recognise the role and value of the district courts or the potential for such extension in the future. Our first priority for DTTOs was to roll them out in sheriff courts first, and it is heartening that they have been as successful as they have been. Moreover, although we might want to consider broadening the options for disposals in district courts, it is not necessary to support amendments 35 and 36. We are alive to the possibility of broadening the options and are willing to consider it further. Less than 1 per cent of district court cases outside the stipendiary magistrate courts result in custodial sentences. Currently, CSOs and DTTOs are explicitly regarded as alternatives to custodial sentences. Therefore, there are very few cases at present in which it would be appropriate for district courts to impose such orders. However, that might not be the case in the future, as district courts might take on work that is more appropriate for custodial sentences and, therefore, the use of CSOs and DTTOs could perhaps be extended. It is worth noting that district courts currently have access to a number of community sentences. For example, they can and do impose probation orders. In addition, supervised attendance orders for fine defaulters have been available to district courts for many years. We are exploring how the range of community disposals that is available to district courts might be extended. For example, the use of SAOs as a disposal of first instance is being piloted in Renfrewshire and West Dunbartonshire. Mary Mulligan and other members will know that we are, as ever, alive to imaginative and creative ways of developing and using community disposals. We are also piloting the use of community reparation orders as disposals for dealing with acts of antisocial behaviour in three areas. Both sets of pilots are being independently evaluated and the findings will inform decisions on wider roll-out. If wider roll-out is thought to be appropriate, it could be achieved by an administrative circular rather than by amending primary legislation. The current sentencing practice of district courts suggests that there is little need for additional disposals that provide direct alternatives to custody. However, if a significant change to the current situation were to occur as a result of the bill's other provisions, we could and would think again about whether there was a need to reconsider the availability of DTTOs and CSOs in the district courts. If such a move was thought to be appropriate, it could be achieved administratively without a need for legislative change. For that reason, the current position  seems to us to be preferable to amendments 35 and 36. We are not saying that we should never widen the use of DTTOs and CSOs, nor are we disregarding the opportunities that the district courts provide. The use of DTTOs and CSOs could be widened in the future and we do not consider amendments 35 and 36 to be necessary or appropriate at this stage. Therefore, I invite Mary Mulligan to withdraw amendment 35.

Amendments 37, 41, 43 and 44 make minor wording changes: where the phrase "liability for conviction" occurs in sections 39 and 40, they change it to "liability to conviction". The change ensures consistency with existing provisions in the 1995 act and the effect of sections 39 and 40 is unchanged. Amendments 38 and 42 make minor changes to section 39. They substitute the current form of wording in proposed new sections 302(4) and 302A(4) of the 1995 act, which section 39 would insert, with more detailed provision. Proposed new sections 302(4) and 302A(4) set out when notification should be given to the procurator fiscal by the clerk of court of whether the offer of a fiscal fine or compensation offer has been accepted, deemed to have been accepted or rejected. Those sections currently place a requirement on the clerk of court to notify the procurator fiscal about the outcome of an offer of a fiscal fine or compensation offer upon the expiry of the 28-day period or such longer period as may be specified in the offer. Having considered the issue further, we think that the use of the word "upon" in that context may create some administrative difficulties. It suggests an immediate obligation on the clerk of court to notify the outcome of an offer to the procurator  fiscal as soon as the time period has expired. If notification by the clerk had to take place immediately, it could create difficulties for the information technology systems that are operated by the clerk, the procurator fiscal and the Scottish Criminal Record Office. Amendments 38 and 42 substitute more detailed provision that makes clear that the clerk is required to notify the procurator fiscal of acceptance or deemed acceptance of an offer after the expiry of the relevant period, rather than immediately upon its expiry. They also make clear that the clerk of court does not have to wait for the expiry of the relevant period before notifying the procurator fiscal that an offer has been actively refused by an alleged offender. That would build in an unnecessary delay to subsequent action by the prosecutor. Amendments 38 and 42 allow the clerk to intimate the outcome of an offer when it is practicable to do so. I stress that the change will have no direct impact on the accused. The obligation in question requires the clerk of court to advise the fiscal of the outcome of an offer of an alternative to prosecution so that the fiscal can update the case records and take appropriate action. Amendments 45 and 46 make very minor changes to proposed new section 303ZA(9) of the 1995 act, which section 40 would insert and which relates to work orders. The expressions "the alleged offender" and "an alleged offender" in subsection (9) are exchanged, as a general reference to "an alleged offender" is more appropriate at the first occurrence of the words "alleged offender", and a specific reference to "the alleged offender" is more appropriate at the second occurrence of the words "alleged offender". I hope that that is clear. The proposed changes have no effect on the bill's policy. I move amendment 37.  Amendment 37 agreed to.  Amendment 38 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendment 28 is a purely technical drafting amendment to section 30. Section 30 adds new subsections to section 271I of the 1995 act that relate to the taking of evidence on commission. Amendment 28 seeks to shorten the wording of one of those subsections to make its meaning clearer. The effect of the provision remains the same and the policy behind section 30 is unchanged. Amendments 56 to 58, 60 and 61 are technical in nature and will not change the substance of the bill. Paragraphs 7 to 17 of the schedule to the bill seek to amend and repeal various sections of the 1995 act to ensure that the provisions of the bill will operate effectively. To improve readability, the amendments should appear in ascending order of the section of the 1995 act to which they relate. Under the current drafting, several provisions are out of sequence. Amendments 56 to 58, 60 and 61 seek to correct that. I move amendment 28.  Amendment 28 agreed to.

Amendment 29 seeks to make a minor change to section 31A. Section 31A will insert into the 1995 act new section 298A, which deals with the procedure to be followed when bills of advocation, petitions to the nobile officium or orders of the High Court relating to those bills or petitions—which are all forms of appeal—are intimated. Amendment 29 will allow the intimation of those documents to be carried out by serving documents on the respondent or on the respondent's solicitor, which should help to improve the process of communicating the documents and to ensure that the appeal process goes smoothly. The documents in question are often technical in nature, so it makes sense to allow them to be sent to the respondent's solicitor, when that is appropriate. Increasing the number of ways in which the documents can be served will improve the progress of appeal proceedings. Practically speaking, it is the solicitor, in consultation with the respondent, who will need to consider the approach to be taken to the appeal as a matter of urgency, so getting the appeal documentation to him or her as quickly as possible makes sense. Amendments 30 and 31 are consequential to amendment 29. Amendment 30 will make it clear that when those documents are served on the respondent's solicitor, that service is to be effected by post. Amendment 31 seeks to update a reference in section 298A(10), which deals with modifications to section 141 for the purposes of section 298A, to ensure that it applies only to service on the respondent. The substantive law relating to such appeals is not affected by amendment 31. I move amendment 29.  Amendment 29 agreed to.  Amendments 30 and 31 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendment 32 is technical in nature. Section 26A of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 allows powers under section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972 to be used to impose a higher maximum sentence, on summary conviction, than would usually be  available under that act for crimes associated with the implementation of the habitats directive. However, as presently framed, those powers cannot be used for offences that relate to the protection of the species of animal that were added to annex IV of the habitats directive after the accession to the European Union of Austria, Finland and Sweden in 1997. That is because section 26A of the 1981 act refers to the form and content of the habitats directive only up to the time of those countries' accession. The directive has subsequently been amended to take account of other new states that have joined the European Union. It is therefore necessary to ensure that enforcement of those amendments can be supported by the higher penalty. Amendment 32 is necessary because of the amendment of the habitats directive by the act concerning the accession of the Czech Republic—and those of other new member states—which extends the protection of the directive to species that are native to those new member states. The amendment increases the maximum custodial sentence on summary conviction that can be imposed for crimes against those species from three months to six months. That will bring sentencing for crimes against those species into line with that for all other species that are listed in annex IV of the directive. This is not a change in sentencing policy; rather, we are correcting a technical deficiency under which the appropriate level of penalty cannot be applied to certain offences simply because they relate to species of the newer EU member states. Amendment 32 will have the effect of making section 26A of the 1981 act ambulatory, which will allow any future amendments to the habitats directive to be taken account of. That will ensure that the correct maximum level of penalty can be applied to all offences that are created in pursuance of the directive in the future. I move amendment 32.

I emphasise that amendment 32 is a technical amendment. The issue of the communication and awareness of changes in the law is a challenge that we all face. I am sure that the Executive and those who are involved in the legal process and our committee structure will ensure that important opportunities are made by  which we can keep ourselves well informed and ensure that the issues are properly communicated.  Amendment 32 agreed to.

Amendments 33 and 34 are technical amendments. They clarify the definition of "relevant enactment" in sections 35(6) and 36A(7). The policy behind those sections remains unchanged. Section 35 makes provision for increasing the maximum period of imprisonment that may be imposed in respect of all statutory offences that are triable under either solemn or summary procedure to 12 months on summary conviction. Section 36A and section 37 increase the maximum fine that may be imposed in respect of all statutory offences that are triable either way to £10,000 on summary conviction. Those maxima are being increased to allow the sheriff summary courts to deal with a wider range of appropriate business. The purpose of amendments 33 and 34 is to make absolutely clear the enactments to which sections 35 and 36A will apply. Those sections will apply to a relevant enactment, which is defined as an act that is passed before the bill is passed. Amendments 33 and 34 make clear that, for the limited purposes of sections 35 and 36A respectively, an act of the Scottish Parliament will be treated as having been passed when the bill for that act is passed by the Parliament at stage 3. The amendments in the group will in no way affect the time at which the provisions of any act of the Scottish Parliament may come into force. Provisions in acts come into force only after royal assent has been given. The amendments simply make it clear that the provisions in sections 35 and 36A apply to offences, or powers to create offences, that are contained in any act of the Scottish Parliament that has completed its Parliamentary procedure before the passing of the bill. That will ensure that, should any act that contains a lower summary maximum be passed before the bill, it can be uprated. That is in line with the policy of allowing the sheriff summary court to deal with an appropriate level of more serious business in the future. I move amendment 33.  Amendment 33 agreed to.

I appreciate that very much, Presiding Officer—although I have to say that I am almost lost for words at what the new Tories now claim is their attitude. Anyone who could accuse me of being oppressive is perhaps offering a challenge too far.  Bill Aitken does not help his case by hugely overstating what the Executive is doing, by hugely overstating its consequences, and by hugely understating the significance of the problem when people wilfully seek not to take responsibility for their own actions and do not appear at court. The provisions in the bill would be a deterrent. People who thought they could benefit by not bothering to turn up at court now know that their actions will have consequences. However, the bill also contains safeguards. It is in the interests of justice—a reasonable test—that there should be a means of appeal if a person is knocked down by a bus and cannot come to court. Identification was mentioned. Clearly, it would not be appropriate to hold trials that involve dock identification in the absence of the accused, but no one is suggesting that that would happen. Why, however, when identification has already been made, when some witnesses are vulnerable and when professional witnesses can give professional evidence regardless of whether the accused is there or not, is it not possible for that trial to continue? I do not think that the alternative case has been made. There will be an appeal mechanism and we have considered the interests of justice. Bill Aitken's position is ludicrous and is entirely out of step with those who want to ensure that the justice system serves the interests of the accused and the interests of victims and witnesses. He made points about warrants but refuses to challenge people to take responsibility for their own behaviour. The issue is not simply one of warrants not being issued. Even if it were, problems would arise over the time it takes to issue warrants. I turn now to the points that were made by Pauline McNeill. Although there could be a trial in absence, there cannot be a sentence in absence. Once a trial has taken place, the court will be adjourned, a warrant issued—

Yes.

For a start, some summary cases last only one day—the procedure that Bill Aitken suggests would inevitably extend such cases beyond one day. Professional witnesses  and others would have to appear and there would be delays in the process. We are not saying that the only approach is to hold the trial in absence, but there are sufficient safeguards in the bill to address Bill Aitken's points. I will finish the point that I was making in response to Pauline McNeill. If the accused was not present in court, the court would be adjourned, a warrant for their arrest issued and the accused brought to court for the announcement of the sentence. That situation is not all that far from other situations in which courts defer sentencing in order to obtain more information. I reassure Parliament that the test that a trial in absence must be in the interests of justice is written into the bill, as is the fact that trial in absence will not go ahead if there are issues specifically to do with identification. Along with the fact that there is an appeal, that should allay members' concerns. It should be acknowledged that people not appearing at their own trials is a significant problem. By failing to confront their responsibility to appear, they put everyone else at huge inconvenience.

This group of amendments is important. I will deal briefly with Executive amendment 27 and then deal with the issues that Margaret Mitchell has flagged up. Amendment 27 will make a minor change to section 14(4), which will insert proposed new section 150(A) into the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, on proceedings in the absence of the accused. The policy of section 14 will be unchanged. Subsection (10) of proposed new section 150(A) of the 1995 act provides that an accused cannot be sentenced to imprisonment in his or her absence if he or she is an adult, or to detention in a young offenders institution, remand centre or other establishment if he or she is a young person. After further consideration, it was decided that the words "young offenders institution, remand centre or other establishment" are unnecessary, because section 207 of the 1995 act makes it clear that "detention" means detention in a young offenders institution. There is therefore no need to qualify the reference to detention in section 14, so amendment 27 will delete that qualification. Amendments 1 to 9, in the name of Margaret Mitchell, would provide that no summary trial could commence in the absence of the accused and that a trial could continue in absence only after evidence had been led that substantially implicated the accused. That approach mirrors the provisions on solemn proceedings in the Criminal Procedure Amendment (Scotland) Act 2004. My predecessor as Deputy Minister for Justice set out at stage 2 the reasons why such an amendment would be undesirable, but I will do so again. It might superficially seem to be sensible for the same rules to govern trials in absence in both summary and in solemn procedures. However, in practical terms, trials under those procedures  operate quite differently. If amendment 1 were agreed to, we would severely limit the possibility of a trial in absence taking place in a summary case and we would defeat the aim of section 14, which is to reduce the number of accused who wilfully fail to attend for trial, safe in the knowledge that proceedings will be adjourned, to the inconvenience of the courts, the victims and the witnesses who have turned up for the case. The issue is not natural justice, as Margaret Mitchell said; the fundamental right to a fair trial is protected. However, there is a feeling that on occasions our legal and judicial system rewards the ingenuity of the accused instead of ensuring that a case is heard fairly. The failure of the accused to turn up has significant implications for the victims and witnesses who take their responsibilities seriously and must confront the situation in which they find themselves. We ought not to overstate what is being done in section 14, but we should acknowledge that the approach is about fairness, justice and protection of people's rights. Unlike solemn trials, the vast majority of summary trials start and finish on the same day. If that happens, the situation does not arise in which the accused fails to turn up for the trial the day after evidence that substantially implicates them is led. Therefore, for trials that are to be dealt with in a single day, amendment 1 would rule out the possibility of any part of the trial proceeding in the absence of the accused. Amendment 1 would also rule out the possibility of a part-heard trial in absence. Under the current provisions, a judge could decide that the accused should be present for at least part of the case, but that evidence from witnesses who turned up at the right time, such as expert or vulnerable witnesses, could be heard in the absence of the accused, thereby allowing progress to be made and saving the witnesses from the inconvenience and stress of having to turn up again later. That approach seems to be fair and just. The court could hear the relevant evidence, adjourn the case to a later date and issue a warrant for the arrest of the accused in order to ensure that he or she would be present for the remainder of the trial. The amendments in Margaret Mitchell's name would make that impossible. I ask members to bear it in mind that when a trial diet and intermediate diet is fixed, the accused will be notified of the dates and told that if he or she fails to appear the trial may proceed in his or her absence, so that he or she can be in no doubt that that might happen. There are further safeguards. For example, before a trial in absence can take place, the judge must be satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for the trial to proceed and that the accused is aware of the date and place of the  diet. In assessing whether it is in the interests of justice to proceed, the court will still be required to ensure that the accused receives a fair trial, as well as to consider the interests of witnesses and victims. The McInnes report pointed out that in 2002-03, around 4,000 summary hearings had to be adjourned because of the failure of the accused to appear. Can it be right that victims and witnesses attend court time and again, only to be told that the accused has decided not to turn up, so they cannot give their evidence? As the then Solicitor General for Scotland suggested at stage 1—and as Mike Pringle said at stage 2—there is strong anecdotal evidence to suggest that often, in cases that involve multiple accused persons, one of the accused persons does not turn up for trial on one date and another does not turn up on the next date, safe in the knowledge that the trial will not proceed. That can result in cases being abandoned because witnesses are no longer available or are unable to recall events. Should we allow that to continue?  If the accused has a solicitor who is prepared to continue to act, the court may allow him or her to do so. As the intermediate diet becomes more robust, cases will continue to trial on the basis that the solicitor is properly and fully instructed about the position and line of defence of the accused. The solicitor will therefore be in a good position to act at trial in the interests of the accused, despite his or her absence. If the solicitor declines to act, the court may appoint a solicitor to act in the interests of the accused. We think that solicitors will be prepared to do so. Members should bear it in mind that decisions on whether a trial should take place in the absence of an accused and on whether it would be in the interests of justice for that to happen will always rest with the court. We acknowledge that circumstances arise in which people are genuinely unable to attend court. As my predecessor made clear at stage 2, section 14 was considered carefully prior to its introduction and is designed to facilitate wider use of trials in absence while ensuring that appropriate safeguards exist to protect the rights of the accused. The provisions are part of a range of measures, which I hope will mean that accused persons turn up when they are supposed to—that is what we all want. Agreement to amendment 1 might allow some accused persons to continue wilfully to frustrate the ends of justice, and to cause upset and inconvenience to victims and witnesses, delays in the court system and wasted effort for the prosecution and the defence. I am surprised that the Tories want to associate themselves with such an approach.  The approach in amendment 1 was considered by the Justice 1 Committee at stage 2 but was heavily defeated. Amendments 2 to 9, also in Margaret Mitchell's name, would make consequential changes to the bill. I urge members to reject amendments 1 to 9.

I thank members for their responses and for welcoming the amendment, but we should not overstate what is being done. Imposing standard conditions is not an onerous task—I think that people accept that doing so is fairly straightforward. We recognise that special conditions require more consideration. We have discussed matters with the police, who are happy that the appropriate ranks will be involved and that those ranks will have the appropriate training and awareness of all the issues. However, we should not forget that we are trying to make the system more rational and effective. The provisions will speed up the system; at the very least, they will not slow it down. I assure Stewart Stevenson that we, the police and others will keep a close eye on the matter.  Amendment 26 agreed to.

I will come back to Margaret Mitchell's point at the end of my contribution—whether fines enforcement officers are effective is a separate point. Although there is a crossover, the amendments in group 3 deal with something slightly different. Kenny MacAskill's amendments 10 to 19 would provide that only judicial officers—formerly known as sheriff officers and messengers-at-arms—would be able to carry out certain functions, such as serving citations personally on witnesses and accused persons in criminal proceedings. At the moment, those citations can be served by officers of law, who include judicial officers but also the police, authorised civilian employees of the police and prison officers. If, as I think Kenny MacAskill said, the objective of the amendments is to reduce the amount of police time that is required to serve citations, then I assure members that we agree with that aim and are working hard to achieve it. I do not believe that the amendments are the best way to achieve further progress. I will outline some of the work  that is under way before explaining why the amendments could be extremely damaging to the operation of Scotland's criminal justice system. Since 2003, the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, which is responsible for the citation of the accused and prosecution witnesses, has issued postal citations for most witnesses in summary cases, which covers the vast majority of cases before the courts. In April 2006, that use of postal citation was extended to civilian witnesses in sheriff and jury cases with the important exception of witnesses with special requirements, such as children, vulnerable adults and witnesses whose first language is not English. Those special classes of witnesses need some form of police involvement. Postal citation has proved to be an extremely effective system. It is more convenient for witnesses than traditional citation in person. Since 2003, about 76,000 citations have been issued each year by ordinary post to civilian witnesses, who responded to them positively. By virtue of the fact that the witness signs and returns a receipt for postal citation, the witness is giving a personal commitment. That underlines the importance of witnesses attending court to give evidence. The bill already provides for additional methods of citation for witnesses and accused in order to reduce the need for citation in person. The accused as well as witnesses will be able to be cited by first-class post. E-mail citation is an option that we will also consider and develop, although there must be confidence in that process. It has already been piloted with success for police witnesses in one city-centre division in Glasgow. Over 18,000 citations were sent by e-mail leading to savings in police time and resources. Less police overtime was needed as notification of the case came earlier, which allowed more time to accommodate the alteration of shift patterns. On average, officers received their citations five days earlier than before and less police time was wasted at court as there was earlier notification of cases that would not go ahead. That made it possible for police officers to be on the front line rather than stuck in court for cases that were not called. The wider roll-out of the pilot is now planned. A number of police forces are now using civilian staff to serve their witness citations, which ensures that police time is freed up to deal with higher priorities. I welcome that practice and hope that it will develop further. In a number of cases in which personal citation is required, the police already have information or intelligence as to the whereabouts of the individual in question, which they can use to ensure that the citation is served effectively. There will always be some cases where postal citation of civilian  witnesses will not be successful. Some civilian witnesses are reluctant to attend court for a number of reasons. The retention of police delivery of citations to such witnesses allows the witness to ask questions of the police. The police are well placed to offer reassurance and assistance should that be required. The bill allows citations to be effected by judicial officers. The effect of Kenny MacAskill's amendments would be to put judicial officers in a monopoly position. Service could be effected only by judicial officers. Is it right that it should only be private businesses that can play that important part in the criminal justice system? Police officers could no longer serve any citations and prison officers could no longer serve documentation, including indictments, on accused people who are in prison. Judicial officers would have to be instructed at a cost to come from their office into the prison, walk past the prison officer who used to be able to serve documents and serve the indictment. That would be good work for the judicial officers but not good value for the public purse. There are other serious problems with the practicality of the amendments. Not every court district has resident judicial officers and some of the island courts and more remote areas do not have judicial officers nearby. The police, by their very nature, have some form of local presence. Would court business have to be programmed to accommodate visits to such courts from judicial officers? In summary cases where the accused appears from custody, a judicial officer would have to be in the custody area of the court to serve the complaint on the accused. What if there were no resident judicial officer who could serve the complaint? Would the court have to wait until the judicial officer attended from his office, which might be miles away? Would the accused have to be liberated until a judicial officer could attend? The bill as introduced provides for additional methods of service on the accused; it does not rule out the use of judicial officers. In no way does our position refuse to acknowledge the work and expertise of judicial officers. It is important to keep our options open in this area, while seeking to ensure that police involvement is minimised. That is what we are working on. Amendments 10 to 19 would build in delay and risk and would place private companies in a monopoly position at a time when we are developing the service of citations through a variety of initiatives. Margaret Mitchell and others will be aware that the role of fines enforcement officers goes far beyond simply delivering a citation. They manage cases, look at the person in the round, consider their other debts and whether fines are due to  other courts, and carry out the critical job of separating those who cannot pay from those who will not pay. The role of fines enforcement officers ought not to be misunderstood. Although there is a role for judicial officers, I do not support what Kenny MacAskill proposes in these amendments. I ask him to withdraw amendment 10 and not to move the other amendments in his name.

Amendment 20 is made for the sake of clarity and has no substantive effect on the provisions in section 1. It makes clear that in section 23B(3) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, as inserted by section 1 of the bill, the question that is to be determined by the judge is whether bail should be granted to an accused person under section 23B(1) of the 1995 act. Amendment 21 makes a minor change to section 24 of the 1995 act, which deals with bail conditions. Section 24(4)(b)(ii) of the 1995 act currently provides that the court, when granting bail, may impose further conditions on the accused to ensure that he or she participates in an identification parade. Amendment 21 provides that any further conditions may require the accused to participate in an identification parade or other identification procedure. Given that other forms of identification procedure are increasingly used by the police in place of the traditional ID parade, it will be important to ensure that an accused can be compelled to participate in such procedures as a condition of bail, in the same way that he or she would currently be required to participate in an ID parade. Amendment 21 will also ensure that pressure can be brought to bear on the accused to participate in the identification procedure, as failure to do so could be regarded as breach of a bail condition. Although the amendment has no  effect on general bail policy, it will allow the law to keep up with the developments in practice and ensure that the accused is under a condition to participate in identification procedures in future. Amendments 22 to 24 clarify the effect of provisions in section 5 of the bill, but the policy behind the section is not changed. Section 5 provides that bail applications must be dealt with before the end of the day after the date on which the person accused or charged is first brought before the court. Often such applications are continued to allow investigations to be made into the bail address given by the accused person, for example. However, the provision as introduced could be construed as requiring the court to sit on a Saturday, Sunday or court holiday in order to process bail applications before the end of the next day. That is not the intended policy. It is not the norm for courts to sit at the weekend. Section 8(1) of the 1995 act provides in general terms that a court is not required to sit on a Saturday, Sunday or court holiday. Amendments 22 to 24 are provided for the sake of clarity in this context. They put beyond doubt that when the accused first appears, the court must make a decision on bail by the end of the next day on which it is sitting. Courts will not need to sit on a Saturday, Sunday or court holiday unless they choose to do so. Amendment 25 makes a minor procedural change to the way in which a particular type of bail appeal is processed. Following amendments at stage 2, in almost all cases an appeal against refusal of bail in the sheriff or district courts is lodged with the court that dealt with the bail application. That is a sensible process, as a clerk of that court can then send a note of appeal to the High Court of Justiciary along with the full papers for the case to ensure that the High Court has all the papers that it needs to consider the case fully. The one exception to that is in section 200 of the 1995 act, which details the procedures to be followed in cases where a court has adjourned the case against an accused for an inquiry into his or her physical or mental condition and has remanded the accused in custody or committed them to hospital. In such cases, the appeal against refusal of bail is lodged with the High Court, which then has to refer the matter back to the original court for the papers, which causes delay. Amendment 25 brings the process for appealing against a refusal of bail under section 200(9) of the 1995 act into line with all the others in the 1995 act. It provides that the note of appeal must be lodged with the clerk of the court from which the appeal is to be taken and that the clerk of that court must send the papers, without delay, to the clerk of justiciary, to ensure that the High Court is in possession of all the papers relating to the case.  I move amendment 20.

Amendment 26 makes a change to the procedure concerning the addition of special conditions to an undertaking, in recognition of concerns that the Justice 1 Committee raised on the subject at stage 2. When an accused person is released on an undertaking to appear at court, the terms of the undertaking will always contain the condition that the accused must attend a specified court on a given date and at a given time. The bill currently provides that police officers may also attach additional conditions to an undertaking and that the Scottish ministers may make regulations setting out the rank or other description of police officer who will be required to authorise the imposition of additional conditions on an undertaking.  Those conditions fall into two types. First, there are the standard conditions, which mirror the standard conditions that would be imposed by a court on an accused who is given bail—namely, not to offend, not to interfere with witnesses and not to behave in a way that causes, or is likely to cause, alarm or distress to witnesses. Our view, which was backed by the committee at stage 2, is that those conditions are not unduly onerous and any accused person who is required to attend court on an undertaking should be able to abide by them. We are therefore of the view that it is not necessary to stipulate that the conditions can be imposed only by police officers of a certain rank. The second category of conditions covers specific conditions that are imposed on a particular accused and are designed to secure compliance with the standard conditions. Those are sometimes referred to as special conditions in the bail context and may include, for example, a condition of curfew or a condition that the accused must not approach or contact a particular person or enter a named street or area. Such conditions will generally be more onerous and restrictive and will need to be imposed with discretion and sensitivity by police officers. Members of the committee will recall that an amendment that was lodged by the convener at stage 2 sought to place in the bill a requirement that an officer of the rank of inspector or above must authorise the imposition of special conditions to an undertaking. At the committee meeting on 22 November 2006, I gave an assurance that ministers would ensure that an officer of the rank of inspector or above must authorise the imposition of special conditions to an undertaking. Having considered the position further, I acknowledge the concerns that the convener and other members of the committee expressed about the imposition of special conditions to an undertaking and agree that that process must be carefully regulated with the involvement of a senior officer. Amendment 26 therefore provides in the bill that the imposition of special conditions must be authorised by a police officer of the rank of inspector or above. It also removes the regulation-making power in proposed new section 22(1E) of the 1995 act, as that will no longer be necessary. The law will clearly state that any officer may apply the standard conditions to an undertaking, but the imposition of special conditions must be authorised by a police officer of the rank of inspector or above. I am sure that members of the committee in particular will welcome my response to the issues that they raised. I move amendment 26.

I add my congratulations to Paul Martin, not just on securing the debate and on the thoughtful and measured way in which he raised the issues, but on his long-standing commitment to his constituents, which led in large part to the antisocial behaviour legislation being on the statute book. I know that he shares my great passion for addressing issues such as antisocial behaviour, and I hope that I shall not let him down by following his good cop with a bad cop. I shall seek to recognise the positive tone that has been taken throughout the chamber. Paul Martin opened by talking about how his community had engaged with the process. Something powerful about the antisocial behaviour legislation and the debate about antisocial behaviour has led communities from feeling disempowered and frightened and from not having control of what was going on in their immediate areas to a position in which we can say that, by coming together as communities, they can do things that can make a difference. The message that they are being listened to is hugely positive for communities.  The debate on antisocial behaviour reflects the fact that our communities took an opportunity. Antisocial behaviour was not something that politicians came into the Parliament to discuss; communities drove the issue on to the political agenda and into the priorities of the police, the court system and community services. That is a great testament to all the people in our communities who had the courage to do that. I regard dispersal orders not as an admission of failure, as Patrick Harvie suggests, but as a recognition of the significant successes of communities in demanding that the injustices that they faced should be confronted. Antisocial behaviour, the debate about it and how we tackle it are not simply an event but a process. We will learn more and understand more about how the legislation works, how antisocial behaviour is experienced and what causes it, which will allow us to take further measures as appropriate. Dispersal orders do not involve simply one action by the police; they bring with them a range of issues and services, which I can list. They include all the measures that the significant funding to deal with antisocial behaviour has covered, such as community wardens, investigation teams and mediation, and involve understanding why antisocial behaviour exists at different levels and how it can be addressed. The Parliament has reflected a change in the debate. I was privileged to be at a conference yesterday with the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, at which I talked with people from communities who are working on antisocial behaviour. I was struck not only by the energy of those people, who talked about good practice, but by how the debate has moved on from being about why the measures in the antisocial behaviour legislation cannot work to being about how we make them work and why it is important that they do so. We no longer have a counsel of despair. All sides acknowledge that we need to address a serious issue, and people must be commended for that. It is important to understand the level of intimidation and problems that have existed—that has been reflected in the debate. I welcome whole-heartedly our police forces' use of the power to stop mindless and irresponsible behaviour by a few. Such behaviour saps communities' confidence and undermines the law-abiding majority's quality of life. In the longer term, it can cause some communities to spiral downwards, so that folk want to get out and public investment in those communities is subsequently lost. We know that people who have experienced dispersal orders view them as significant. Wherever orders have been used—from Aberdeen  to Dumfries and Galloway and from Dingwall to Sauchie—the public response has been overwhelmingly positive. In all those communities, the quality of local residents' lives improved immediately. There are several examples of people reflecting on that. We must not forget that dispersal orders were not intended to deal with the underlying causes of disorder; they were introduced to give communities rapid respite and a breathing space while longer-term solutions were found. That is why the legislation set out procedures that the police must follow when deciding on the use of dispersal orders. They must consult the local authority and local people, so that together they can work out ways of sustaining the benefits of dispersal orders. That is not always easy, because some underlying problems are deep seated. However, I am heartened by the way in which all the people who are involved are working together to find solutions. I understand that in Dennistoun, a range of agencies have come together to determine how they can solve the underlying problems, as Paul Martin said. Glasgow Community and Safety Services, Strathclyde police, the local housing association and local people are all working together to provide young people in the area with productive and interesting things to do when they are getting into trouble. We do not understate the importance of working with young people. Glasgow City Council was given £4 million over four years to engage in diversionary activities with young people and to consult them on what those activities should be. The provision of facilities is important, but facilities also need to be protected. We must acknowledge that some community facilities that young people in particular want to use are denied them by other young people exercising a veto on who can use them. Addressing that is also an important part of tackling antisocial behaviour. When it passed the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, the Parliament asked for an evaluation of the new legal measure of dispersal. Although the immediate benefits to communities speak for themselves, we rightly need to reflect on the longer-term impact of dispersal orders. I am happy to assure Paul Martin that we will reflect on the experience in Dennistoun and consider issues such as displacement. The extension of the dispersal order in Dennistoun is a matter to be decided locally, where people are best placed to determine, in consultation with local partners, whether that would be appropriate. However, the tools to extend the order exist if they decide that they want to do so.  The Executive has put in place a thorough evaluation of dispersal orders and will report to the Parliament in October 2007. I do not want to pre-empt the evaluation but, so far, the signs are positive. Communities feel the benefits and the police find the orders to be a useful additional approach. We are also seeing tangible outcomes. For example, in Sauchie there has been a 60 per cent reduction in antisocial behaviour-related calls to the police and the nature of such calls is much less serious than it was before the dispersal order. In Dennistoun, a menu of approaches is being used as the authorities move to the next stage in dispersal. I agree completely with Paul Martin's point about talking to young people. A huge amount of work is being done on that by groups such as Young Scot, which is a wonderful organisation with a capacity to engage young people in all sorts of ways. Many local organisations are doing the same thing, and we need to talk to them too. At the heart of the dispersal provisions is an understanding that we truly respect young people if we challenge behaviour that prevents them from achieving their potential. We should not infantilise our young people and say, as we may have done in the past, that they somehow cannot help it because antisocial behaviour is what happens in their communities. We should take them sufficiently seriously to tell them that we want them to address the problems that they face and that we have a right to challenge them about how they affect the communities in which they live. I reiterate the messages that the First Minister and the Minister for Justice have already given to police forces: they should use the powers in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 when appropriate. The people of Scotland expect them to do so and deserve no less. We welcome the positive messages that are coming from Dennistoun and elsewhere, but we also know that antisocial behaviour remains a challenge and that local communities, strengthened by the dispersal measures, will insist that we continue to address the issues.  Meeting closed at 18:48.

I still do not know what obtemper means, unless it describes my speaking style when I am under pressure. I will go and look at the dictionary when I leave the chamber. I thank members, who spoke so clearly in the debate. I acknowledge the interest in the bill and I would have been surprised if members had not spoken on it in such a thoughtful manner. We have had a useful and constructive discussion—with perhaps some honourable exceptions. We acknowledge the seriousness with which many members have approached the debate and the points that they have made. We will certainly reflect on those points and engage with everyone as we progress through the later stages of the bill. We all understand the importance of the issues  involved and do not understate the significance of the critical points that have been raised. I am grateful for the general tone of the debate and I know that members will continue to contribute in the same way as we proceed. We will of course provide a full response to the Justice 2 Committee's stage 1 report on the bill before the end of the month and will continue to work with not just the Justice 2 Committee, but all others who have an interest in the matter to ensure that the bill is as robust and fit for purpose as it can be. Like Michael Matheson, I came to the bill slightly late and I record my thanks to all those on the committee, officials and others who have supported me in getting to this stage. I will, of course, use the fact that I came to the bill late as an alibi if I come under pressure from questions. I remind Parliament that the bill is about not what might have been, but what will be. It is about building on our already substantial package of reforms aimed at tackling reoffending to produce a more effective sentence and management regime that incorporates both custody and community parts. I listened to what Kenny MacAskill said and was struck by the consensual tone of his serious contribution. I say to him that we want to work with the judiciary. It is critical that we work with those who have a direct interest in the effectiveness of the bill. The bill has been shaped by the judiciary and politicians, but it has also been shaped by the experience articulated by victims of crime. I commend those who, since the Parliament came into existence, have had the courage to speak up. Victims of crime, who have felt further victimised by the justice system, have given practical expression to how that experience felt. I commend constituents of mine—I know that other members have similar experiences—who have said that they are determined that no other family should have to experience what they did. The bill is part of the process of addressing the demand on us from the people of Scotland. We understand that clarity is important. Taking account of the helpful comments that have been made, we will see where we need to make things clearer and we will continue to consider measures for achieving greater clarity. As the Minister for Justice said, we are already identifying some parts of the provisions that could benefit from fine-tuning and will take steps at stage 2 to do that. Section 6 has been flagged up, so we will consider it carefully. We are committed to ending the current time-driven system of early release that determines what will happen to an offender based solely on the length of the sentence. We believe that that  approach is no longer effective and does not give confidence. We will replace it with a framework that delivers effective punishment and public safety but also gives offenders the chance to stop offending, if they are prepared to take that chance. We believe that the custodial sentence measures strike the right balance between punishment and rehabilitation. The proposals do not change how the courts go about their business. If a judge thinks that custody is the right option in a particular case, he or she should continue to apply the same considerations, which must include public safety, as they do now in reaching that conclusion. Somebody asked how judges balance all those issues. We employ judges and sheriffs to apply their experience, expertise and knowledge to the process and to make that judgment. That will not change. The bill will not change how sentencers arrive at decisions on whether custody is appropriate. They will continue to take account of all the information that is available to them, including any concerns about the risk to public safety. I do not know what kind of calculator Colin Fox requires to calculate the sentence in a case where the judge says, "Your sentence is four years. Two years will be served in prison and two years will be served on licence in the community, unless you are deemed to be a risk, in which case you may spend up to a maximum of three years in custody." That seems clear to me. Also, I say to Colin Fox that the bill is not about reducing community disposals, because it deals not with sentencing policy but with sentence management. The judge or sheriff will make a judgment about whether custody is appropriate. They might decide that it is not appropriate, in which circumstances they will make a community disposal.

If I may, I will press on. On the point about confidence and trust in the community part, the bill might have the consequence of giving sentencers more confidence that the community believes that a community disposal is reasonable. That will be a long-term process, but it is a serious prospect. The public, and especially the victim, will know when the sentence is handed down how long the offender should expect to spend in prison for punishment. They will also know that, if the offender's risk assessment continues to cause concern and the judge has not imposed the maximum punishment period, the offender can be kept in prison for longer.

Obviously, we have to continue the dialogue with all those who have an interest, including the Sheriffs Association, but the provisions seem to me to be particularly straightforward. If someone is given a four-year headline sentence, they will spend two years in prison and two years on licence in the community unless it is deemed inappropriate for them to leave prison after 50 per cent, in which case they will stay there for longer. As always, however, I am happy to continue the dialogue. If it is proposed that the offender should be kept in prison for longer, the case will be referred to the Parole Board, which will review the case and, if necessary, direct that a further period should be spent in custody. Such offenders should find that the conditions that are placed on their licence are tougher as a result. Jeremy Purvis raised an issue about the definition of retribution, but he will know that, since 2001, the punishment part for a life sentence prisoner must satisfy the requirements for retribution and deterrence. It is therefore reasonable to accept that that concept is familiar to the judiciary. I was disappointed by the tone of Bill Aitken's speech. To be honest, the Scottish Socialist Party and the Tories have become a bit of a sideshow in relation to the difficult matter of balancing the two sides of the argument. The debate is partly about an issue of trust. People must have confidence that the custody part is real, that it will be taken seriously, and that the sentence that is handed out will be served. People on one side of the argument want the provisions on the custody part to be strong. However, if there is to be trust in the system, we must also give people confidence that the whole sentence matters and that the community part is a serious part of the sentence and not an easy option or a box to be ticked when the person gets out of prison. Building that confidence is a long-term job, but we must recognise the need to balance what is coming from the two sides of the argument. That relates also to the debate about whether short-term sentences work. The answer depends on what we want them to do. Of course, sentences must be proportionate to the seriousness of the offence that has been committed. Somebody who is sentenced to 15 days will have committed a different offence from somebody who is sentenced to 15 years. That is obvious.  Sentences might signal society's view of particular offences or they might relieve the community of particular problems in the short term, but the custody part will not be the only part of someone's sentence. I recognise the point about sentences of 15 days, but Michael Matheson should be careful not to create the impression that a sentence that includes a custody part and a community part is less serious than a sentence that is served only in custody. We hope to have further dialogue on that. There is a huge number of significant issues, but I have run out of time. We will talk further to the committee about licensing conditions and resources. I reiterate that we have given a reassurance that we will not think about using the home detention curfew power until the new provisions are firmly bedded in and are working effectively. We certainly do not want to cut across clarity. As for weapons, I said that the bill was part of the solution, not a partial solution. The bill will take measures that will make a huge difference, but they are not all that will be done. It does not help to have the counsel of despair that because we cannot do everything about knife crime immediately, we should do nothing and so undermine the drive towards the seriousness with which the licensing process will operate. I hope that members will support the bill because of both its elements. It should provide more confidence in the system and, by addressing knife crime, should keep people out of the system. I urge members to support the bill's general principles.

I congratulate Andrew Welsh on securing this important debate and on his powerful arguments on the key issues that have been identified in the debate. I thank him and other members for their speeches on a subject that concerns all members and people in communities throughout Scotland, who want peace and security for their families and neighbourhoods. I join other members in expressing our deepest sympathies to the family of young Damilola Taylor, whose loss was a tragic waste of a young life. Those of us who are parents cannot begin to imagine the pain and grief that his parents feel. We admire them and congratulate them on their efforts to continue their son's legacy through the work of the Damilola Taylor Trust and the recently launched respect your life, not a knife campaign. This is not the first time that I have been struck by how families who suffer tragedies find the strength not only to determine the truth about and causes of the tragedy but to ensure that what happened to them will not happen to others—that is a phrase that families often use and one that I know that Damilola's family has used. I am in awe of the courage of Damilola's parents and of families throughout Scotland who, when touched by tragedy, decide that their experience will shape and improve the lives of everyone in Scotland. We all know that knife crime has no place in our society. It is imperative that we all work together to tackle this blight on some of our communities. The Minister for Justice and I welcome members' continued support for the efforts that are being made to reduce knife crime in Scotland. We are under no illusions—real change will take time—but we have made significant progress in the past year and we will continue to take direct and effective action to tackle the problem head on. Serious violent crime is now at its lowest level since devolution. Recently published homicide figures for Scotland showed a substantial reduction in the number of people killed with a sharp instrument. We must not become complacent, although we have taken important steps in the continuing fight against knife crime and violence. Members have identified issues that require action. A combination of approaches is required. It is essential to understand, as we do in talking about bullying that, although we have to deal with the causes and what motivates people to take such actions, we must also ensure that the young people who are victims have the confidence to come forward. Therefore, enforcement is important, although we also need to think about education and diversion activities. From talking to the children's commissioner, we know that young  people identified having things to do as important, but they also identified safe streets as important. We cannot have good places for young people to go to in our communities if behaviour that involves facilities being trashed is not addressed. Young people need their self-esteem bolstered, but one difficulty in some communities is that carrying a knife bolsters young people's self-esteem. We must challenge them to acknowledge that that is not an appropriate way in which to feel good about themselves. I was a schoolteacher in a previous life and I remember telling young boys that they faced the prospect of losing their lives over a territorial battle in an area that nobody furth of their very small part of Glasgow even knew anything about. I challenged them on the importance of such battles to them. Together with the national violence reduction unit, we have made tackling knife crime a priority. Through the unit's safer Scotland anti-violence campaign, more than 12,500 weapons were surrendered during the first national knife amnesty. That was followed by two enforcement campaigns in July and November, which removed a further 1,500 weapons from our streets. Through the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006, we have taken steps to strengthen the law: we have doubled the maximum sentence for anyone who is caught carrying a knife, removed restrictions on police powers of arrest when someone is suspected of carrying a weapon and increased to 18 the minimum age for buying non-domestic knives. As members will know, further steps will be taken through the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill, which is going through the Parliament. The bill will introduce tough new restrictions on the sale of non-domestic knives, so that they can be sold only through licensed dealers, which should help to weed out unscrupulous traders and help legitimate traders to take steps to avoid dangerous weapons falling into the wrong hands. Again, those measures will be backed up with strong enforcement. Trading standards officers will have new powers to search premises and seize items. The bill will also introduce a ban on the general sale of swords, with exceptions for legitimate religious, cultural and sporting purposes. Those enforcement efforts are extremely important and, I hope, reassure communities that we are serious about tackling the so-called blade culture. However, to achieve change in the long term, we need to challenge attitudes and behaviours. Reducing knife crime should not be seen as the sole responsibility of the Executive and the police, although we will continue to do all that we can. The respect your life, not a knife campaign acknowledges that we need to talk to  family, friends and communities about what people expect of themselves, which is an important and powerful message from the Damilola Taylor Trust. In that context, the Minister for Justice last month launched our new hard-hitting anti-violence campaign, which has been mentioned and which focuses on knife carrying. I hope that members have seen or heard the campaign, which carries the powerful slogan, "Knives: let's not scar another generation". The campaign alone will not solve the problem, but we hope that its message will be understood and that, working together, we can make violence in Scotland the stuff of history lessons, not an everyday reality. We acknowledge that if we are to achieve change in the next generation, it is important to engage with young people. The respect your life, not a knife campaign seems to have done that successfully, so we need to take encouragement and lessons from it. We have taken steps to engage with young people through the education phase of the safer Scotland campaign, which seeks, through a range of school-led activities, to highlight to schoolchildren the dangers of carrying a weapon. We intend to build on that in the new year and take further steps to engage directly with young people in schools and communities. I congratulate the CAFE project in Angus. As has been said, it has been doing important work. I am pleased that the youth cafes have become a positive alternative in many areas by offering not only a safe environment but a range of activities for young people to enjoy. They also provide accessible advice and information about lifestyle issues such as sexual health, drugs and alcohol and ensure that there is a focus on giving young people a greater sense of freedom and responsibility while keeping them safe within a secure environment. That is good news not only for young people but for the wider community. There are now youth cafes in all alcohol and drug action team areas across Scotland and we are committed to continuing our support of those facilities and other alcohol-free environments for young people. I know that the Minister for Justice has been invited to visit the CAFE project in Arbroath and understand that she hopes to visit it at some point in the near future. We are working hard with our partners to break the link between alcohol and violence. Earlier this year, the violence reduction unit conducted a month-long enforcement campaign to tackle underage and street drinking, which resulted in more than 5,000 litres of alcohol being seized. Licensed premises were also targeted, with more than two thirds of all licensed premises in Scotland being visited and their staff being questioned on current legislation.  All the steps that I have mentioned form part of the package of measures that we are taking forward to help to provide a viable way of reducing knife crime. The package includes short and longer-term measures and initiatives, recognising that such a deep-seated problem cannot be solved overnight. We will continue to work closely with the violence reduction unit and support a range of innovative and sustainable diversionary projects that provide education, training and meaningful opportunities to young people. I have asked my officials to consider what can be learned from the respect your life, not a knife campaign and to continue examining ways of engaging with our young people. Although inner London inevitably has its own complex set of community problems and cultural issues, Scotland has much to learn from aspects of good initiatives south of the border. I am mindful of Andrew Welsh's comments about the importance of learning from good practice. It is in all of our interests to work together on these matters. All forms of violence are, ultimately, preventable, not inevitable. In that common realisation, we have a shared outlook with the rest of the United Kingdom. It is important that we continue to drive forward the anti-violence strategy with energy and help to instil a proactive rather than a reactive approach towards cultural attitudes to violence. I welcome this debate and recognise the longstanding commitment of people throughout Scotland to addressing the issues that we have discussed. I look forward to working with members on these important matters.

I thank the Justice 2 Committee for its thorough consideration of the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill. A number of refinements were made to the bill at stage 2 and I thank the committee members for their careful consideration of the issues. There is no doubt that a consensual approach was taken early on—perhaps my late involvement did not tamper too much with that. The bill has attracted much interest and comment from stakeholders, MSPs and the media. Although the Executive may not have agreed with all the concerns that have been raised or all the suggestions that have been made, we have listened carefully to what was said. There is clear evidence of a dialogue throughout the process and of movement and development as the bill has progressed through Parliament, which gives the lie to the false notion that the Executive introduces bills and then repels all boarders who wish to change them. In particular, we have taken on board concerns about the inequity of applying the complaints levy to all complaints, whether they are upheld or not. We have also taken seriously the questions that were asked about the bill's compatibility with the European convention on human rights so, to strengthen the bill, we have taken action to reinforce the Scottish legal complaints commission's independence and provide a right of appeal. The bill strives to build a new working relationship between practitioners and their clients. I believe that it now strikes the right balance in respecting the rights of both. A strong, independent and well-regulated legal profession in which the public has confidence is one of the cornerstones of the justice system. When they use lawyers, consumers need to understand their rights, the level of service that they can expect and their own responsibilities. When things go wrong, an effective process must be in place to ensure that the right remedies and redress are available and are provided quickly. The need to reform the current arrangements for handling complaints was originally highlighted in a report by the previous Justice 1 Committee in 2002. That committee's diagnosis was reinforced  by the public response to the Executive's consultation paper last year. The Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill takes forward the agenda for change by proposing a quick, efficient and consumer-friendly way of resolving disputes when people who have genuine complaints have been unable to resolve their complaints directly with their lawyers. The bill will set up the Scottish legal complaints commission, which will be an independent complaints-handling body that will act as a single gateway to receive complaints against members of the legal profession and which will handle them impartially, transparently and efficiently. That core proposal has been broadly supported; indeed, Parliament overwhelmingly endorsed the general principles of the bill following the stage 1 debate. However, there have been differences of opinion on matters of process. I understand that, at stage 2, there were a number of lively debates on a variety of issues, such as the appointment and dismissal of the commission's board members, powers of enforcement for the commission's recommendations and the appropriate maximum level of compensation for complainers. However, the most controversial issue that was debated at stages 2 and 3 was the bill's compliance with the European convention on human rights. Many members will be aware that the legal profession expressed concerns at stage 1 about how the bill would provide for the independence and impartiality of the commission. Notwithstanding the fact that the Presiding Officer certified that the bill is ECHR compliant and that the Executive was, and remains, assured of the bill's compliance, further concerns were expressed at stage 2 and today. Although the Executive does not accept the legal argument that was put forward, several amendments were lodged for the purpose of reinforcing the independent status of the commission as a regulatory body in a specialised area of consumer complaints handling. In particular, we introduced several measures to ensure compliance with article 6 of the ECHR and we removed ministers' powers to issue general directions to the commission. I add that there was never any intention to use those powers to influence the commission's decisions, although they could have been seen as enabling ministers to do that. We also clarified the appointments provisions to make it clear that appointments are for a fixed period, and we secured a consultative role for the Lord President of the Court of Session on the appointment of board members. The Lord President will also now have a role in dismissal of the members and chair of the board. The bill already required the commission to make rules about its practice and procedures, and we lodged  amendments to require that the Lord President be consulted on those rules. We also lodged an amendment to reinforce the demarcation between the commission's investigative function on the one hand and its determination function on the other. That amendment makes it clear that the determination committee cannot include any person who has been involved in earlier consideration of the complaint. We acknowledged the concern that the practice of the commission in fixing awards may differ from that of other courts, so we made it clear in the bill that the commission must, in considering levels of awards, take account of levels of damages that have been awarded by the courts in similar circumstances. Finally, the legal profession called for a full right of appeal of the commission's decisions to the court, again for ECHR reasons. We considered that carefully, and we accepted the need for a right of appeal. However, I emphasise that an appeal will proceed only with the leave of the Court of Session. That will ensure that only cases in which there are substantial grounds for appeal will proceed. We recognise that, for the new complaints handling system to work effectively, it must secure the confidence of both the users and providers of legal services. It must also be based on a secure statutory foundation. I hope that in developing the package of measures, we have reinforced the bill's ECHR compatibility and reassured the legal profession of the commission's independence. Those were the concerns of the legal profession, but I remind everyone that the central aim of the bill was to put the users of legal services at the heart of regulatory arrangements. People seek legal advice at critical times in their lives, so lapses from high standards, however rare they are, can have severe consequences for clients. The people of Scotland have the right to complain in such circumstances, and they deserve to have their complaints dealt with quickly, efficiently and transparently. When a complaint is upheld, redress needs to be appropriate and delivered swiftly. There was discussion both at stage 2 and this morning about the appropriate level of compensation for service complaints. The Justice 2 Committee questioned the basis for the maximum of £20,000 in the bill. We responded by saying that the figure is necessary to ensure that the commission can consider as many complaints that involve low-level negligence as possible. At present, all cases involving negligence must be pursued through court action, regardless of the amount of damages that is sought. It is vital for access to justice that ordinary people can pursue  a complaint involving low-level negligence without facing the uncertainty and expense of a court action. That is why we resisted attempts to have the figure lowered. It is also important that clients receive full redress for what they have lost and all that they have suffered. That is why we resisted calls for the £20,000 limit to represent a cap that also covers other measures of redress, such as the limitation of fees or the cost of rectification. The maximum level of compensation will be £20,000, and the sum will be in addition to the value of the other remedies available. As we have said, the figure is a maximum—any anxieties on the part of the profession that it might become an average level of award are completely unfounded. On the legal aid provisions, the bill will also implement some of the key recommendations from our "Advice for All" consultation where amendment of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 was required. The changes are part of a range of improvements that will pave the way for the development of a more flexible and proactive system of publicly funded legal assistance. We want to progress to a system in which unmet needs can be identified and addressed in a co-ordinated way and in which advice can be provided by whoever is best equipped to do so. In the stage 1 debate, Hugh Henry announced that he had asked the Scottish Legal Aid Board to set up a network of solicitors who are employed by the board to provide civil legal assistance where there are gaps in private sector provision. I am delighted to announce that that project is now under way. In response to the difficulties that some applicants have encountered in finding solicitors who will deal with domestic abuse cases in the Highlands and Islands, the board has advertised for a solicitor to provide that service. The key focus will be work with local organisations and women who have experienced domestic abuse. I know that that news will be welcomed in particular by Maureen Macmillan, who raised the issue with Hugh Henry and the chief executive of the legal aid board. We have listened to the views that were expressed by stakeholders in response to our formal consultation and during discussions that were arranged by officials while the committee took evidence at stage 1. That is why we lodged amendments at stage 2, including amendments to provide SLAB with a grant-funding power. That is not only to provide another funding stream for advice provision, but to give SLAB a strategic tool that it can use to help develop and support provision in areas where the problems are more fundamental than mere unavailability of advisers. We have also listened to views that were expressed by committee members during their  thorough consideration of the bill, and by John Swinney and Bill Aitken, who diligently attended the stage 2 meetings and contributed to the discussions. In response to an issue that was raised by Bill Aitken, we lodged an amendment at stage 3 to require the code of practice for registered advice organisations to include arrangements for complaint handling. We are committed to ensuring access to justice. It is important to recognise that the vast majority of legal aid provision comes from hard-working solicitors in private law firms. It is therefore important that we continue to monitor the legal aid system and its remuneration levels to ensure that an adequate supply of solicitors provide this crucial service. A report by SLAB—with the Law Society and the Executive—indicates that the civil legal aid reforms that were introduced in October 2003 and in 2004 are operating reasonably well, but it also identifies areas in which we could make further improvements. We hope to be able to introduce regulations soon, which will make important changes to the civil block-fee system, which will improve both flexibility and the reward for solicitors. Although I am sure that that will be welcomed, I have asked my officials to work with SLAB in the new year to review the overall level of fees that are payable to solicitors in civil legal aid cases, given that the new system was introduced in 2003. We will also review the financial eligibility rules for legal aid to ensure that it is not only the best and worst off people in our society who can receive help to get their legal problems resolved. There has been a great deal of interest in the bill from the legal profession, members of the public, MSPs and consumer interests. I thank everyone for contributing their ideas, expressing their concerns and challenging the bill's provisions in a positive and rigorous way. I believe that the bill strikes the right balance in dealing with complaints in a way that is fair and accountable to all parties. It incorporates safeguards to reassure the profession that the Scottish legal complaints commission will act in a reasonable way in handling complaints. Equally important is that the provisions in the bill will give a voice to consumers and provide them with an opportunity to work with the legal profession in raising the standard of legal service provision in Scotland. I thank again all those who have been involved, in particular the bill team, who had to deal not only with a very complicated bill but with a new minister at a very late stage. Their tolerance of me was very much appreciated. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Amendment 221 will update the list of exceptions to the disclosure rule in section 34(2) of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986. It will enable employees of the board to provide information to the Scottish information commissioner for the purposes of section 50 of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Without the amendment, the provision of information for that purpose would constitute a criminal offence under the 1986 act. I move amendment 221.  Amendment 221 agreed to.  Amendments 222 and 223 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Amendment 182 follows on from amendments that were made to the bill at stage 2, whereby complaints are to be screened out and not investigated by the commission if they are deemed to be "frivolous, vexatious or totally without merit" rather than simply "frivolous or vexatious". Paragraph 13(1A)(a) of schedule 1 contains a reference to "frivolous or vexatious" that should also be extended to include the new criterion of being "totally without merit".  Amendments 181, 183 and 183A would require that only a determination committee of commission members could be delegated by the commission to make decisions on whether a complaint is frivolous, vexatious or totally without merit, whether a complaint has been made timeously or prematurely, whether a complaint constitutes a conduct complaint or a services complaint, and whether the complaint has been made by an eligible complainer. At present, the bill provides that the first of those decisions—whether a complaint is frivolous or vexatious—may be delegated to any committee of the commission or to a commission member. The other decisions could currently be more widely delegated and could be taken by commission staff. I believe that the existing mechanisms provide adequate safeguards. It is in no one's best interests for the debate on whether a complaint is frivolous, vexatious or totally without merit to be prolonged. Some exercise of judgement will be involved in such decisions, but the correct decision will generally be obvious to a disinterested person. Although the decision will have an important impact on the complainer, delegation to a commission member is reasonable. The issue whether a complaint has been made timeously or prematurely will largely be resolved by applying the commission's own rules. In deciding whether a complaint is a conduct complaint or a services complaint, the commission will apply criteria that have been developed and applied by the Law Society over many years along with precedents that the commission has set internally. The issue whether a complaint has been made by an eligible person should be fairly straightforward, given that anyone is permitted to make a conduct complaint whereas services complaints may be made by anyone who has been directly affected by the standard of service plus a list of defined public bodies and office holders. The task of deciding the category of the complaint can safely be delegated to competent members of staff. Consideration needs to be given to ensuring that commission members are not overwhelmed and that staff are able to act to progress cases through the system. For example, every complaint that comes through the commission's doors must be categorised as either a services complaint or a conduct complaint. If that task had to be performed by determination committees, the process of dealing with complaints could grind to a halt. Section 11 permits a complaint to be recategorised at a later stage if it appears that the original classification was wrong. We should also not forget that, if a statutory test that is contained in the bill has been misunderstood or wrongly applied, judicial review procedure will be available to correct the error.

It is always advisable for members not to push their luck. Ministers are committed to ensuring the transparency of the proposed commission's annual accounting and reporting processes. Amendments 185 and 186 relate to the commission's annual statement of accounts. Paragraph 15(2) of schedule 1 requires the Scottish ministers to send it to the Auditor General for Scotland for auditing. Amendment 185 will tighten and clarify that duty by requiring that it be performed "as soon as practicable". Amendment 186 will add a new requirement for the Scottish Ministers then to lay the audited statement before Parliament "as soon as practicable". Paragraph 16(4) of schedule 1 requires the Scottish Ministers to lay a copy of the commission's annual report before the Scottish Parliament. Amendment 188 stipulates that this is to be done "as soon as practicable", in line with amendments 185 and 186. David Davidson has lodged alternative amendments. Amendment 184 would require the commission to send its annual statement of accounts to Parliament rather than to ministers, but ministers would not be able to send the statement to the Auditor General for auditing or to lay the audited statement before Parliament, if the statement has not been sent to us in the first place. Amendment 187 is an alternative to amendment 186. It uses the wording "as soon as is reasonably practicable" rather than "as soon as practicable". I do not think that this would make any difference in practice to  the way in which the duty will be interpreted. I am content that ministers would be more than happy to perform the duty "as soon as practicable". I invite David Davidson not to press amendment 184 and not to move amendment 187, and I urge members to support amendment 185.

Amendments 190 to 192 are intended to address a continuing concern of the Law Society. Paragraph 1(c) of schedule 3 will currently oblige the proposed commission to make rules requiring it to have regard to the European convention on human rights in deciding whether to hold a hearing in relation to a complaint, and whether that hearing should take place in public or private. The Law Society has argued that such a reference to "having regard to" convention rights dilutes the requirement on the commission to act compatibly with ECHR. I do not believe that that is the case. Like all public bodies, the commission will be under a duty to act compatibly with ECHR in everything it does. It is not required that that be stated in the bill and it would not be possible for paragraph 1(c) of schedule 3 to detract from that duty. The wording is intended purely as a special reminder to the commission in the context of decisions about hearings, where ECHR considerations are particularly likely to arise. However, ministers have listened to what the Law Society has said, so we accept on reflection that the reference to "having regard to" convention rights may be infelicitous. I believe that it is preferable to remove the controversy about that relatively minor point, so amendments 190 to 192 will remove the reference to "having regard to" convention rights. Paragraph 1(c) of schedule 3, as amended, will simply oblige the commission to make rules that will require it to hold a hearing where it considers that to do so is appropriate, and to decide whether such a hearing should be in public or in private. Amendments 193 and 198 are intended to provide reassurance that the proposed commission will be rigorous in its approach to evidence-gathering, and will treat evidence according to clear criteria. They will oblige the commission to make rules as to the evidence that may be required or admitted in relation to complaints, the extent to which evidence may be oral or written and the consequences of a person's failure to produce information or documents that have been required by the commission. Previously, the commission had discretion as to whether to make rules on that topic. Amendment 198 will delete that provision from the commission's discretionary rule-making powers, and amendment 193 will insert it into the list of matters that must be covered in the commission's rules. Amendments 194 and 195 reinforce what has always been our policy, which is that the proposed commission and its determination committees will act as independent and impartial tribunals when making binding rulings on the merits of services  complaints. Within the commission there is, of course, a two-stage dispute resolution process. First, there is an initial informal investigation of the complaint, which will usually result in a provisional settlement being proposed to the parties. That initial stage will normally be carried out by commission staff, although it is possible that commission members may be involved, for example if the case might set an important precedent. Such a provisional settlement will not be binding unless all the parties accept it. I hope that over time that will increasingly become the norm as confidence in the process grows. It is in everyone's best interests for disputes to be resolved informally and amicably if possible. However, if all parties do not accept the provisional settlement, the complaint will be referred for a formal determination. That can be done only by the full commission or by a determination committee of commission members. Paragraph 1(f)(ii) of schedule 3 specifies that, where a provisional settlement has been proposed to the parties but not accepted by all of them, the commission's rules must require the members of the determination committee that rules on the complaint to have had no involvement in the formulation or making of the proposed settlement. It is designed to eliminate any possible appearance of bias. Amendment 194 will extend that provision slightly, to require the commission's rules also to stipulate that members of the determination committee must have had no involvement in any aspect of the prior investigation of the complaint, including any decision as to whether the complaint was frivolous, vexatious or totally without merit. That will further reinforce the separation between informal initial complaints handling and the final binding adjudication that is required where a complaint cannot be resolved informally. Amendment 195 provides additional reinforcement along the same lines by ensuring a corresponding separation between initial investigation and binding determination if the full commission chooses to adjudicate on a complaint itself, rather than to delegate the matter to one of its determination committees. I am aware of the second opinion that the Law Society has obtained from Lord Lester, arguing that the commission will not be an independent and impartial tribunal because it will be an investigative and not a judicial body. However, I firmly believe that that view wrongly conflates the two processes of investigation and determination, which are entirely separate. Amendments 194 and 195 will reinforce that separation. The commission and its determination committees will act as an independent and impartial tribunal when they rule on complaints.  Amendment 212 will permit the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal to make rules entitling or requiring persons to appear, or to be represented, at any appeal from the council of the Law Society on an unsatisfactory professional conduct complaint against a solicitor, or in relation to a direction requiring a solicitor to undertake further training. That can be used to ensure, for example, that the solicitor appears where required, and that any individual complainer appears or is represented where appropriate. I move amendment 190.  Amendment 190 agreed to.  Amendments 191 to 198 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

I do not see it as a loans system.  Amendment 163 agreed to.

Amendment 166 extends the availability of publicly funded legal assistance for proceedings before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council that are not currently covered under the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986. It provides that persons whose cases raise devolution issues that are referred to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council under paragraph 33 of schedule 6 to the Scotland Act 1998 may receive legal aid. Those comprise proceedings in which the Lord Advocate, the Advocate General, the Attorney General or the Attorney General for Northern Ireland has required a court or tribunal to refer to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council a devolution issue arising in proceedings before that court or tribunal. In such cases, the eligibility tests that are laid down in the 1986 act must be satisfied. Where criminal legal aid has been made available in connection with the proceedings in which the reference is made, the legal aid certificate for the principal proceedings would already cover the reference. For that reason, the amendment provides that in such cases the legal aid provided is not by virtue of section 25AB of the 1986 act. The amendment extends legal aid provision to cases in which devolution issues have arisen in judicial proceedings in the House of Lords. Paragraph 32 of schedule 6 to the Scotland Act 1998 allows the House of Lords to refer such issues to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The amendment extends the availability of civil legal aid to provide that it will be available for such references when the eligibility tests that are laid down in the 1986 act are satisfied. For cases in which the House of Lords considers that, given all the circumstances, it should determine the devolution issue, legal aid may already be available under the 1986 act, where the proceedings are appeals from the Court of Session and the eligibility criteria apply. A recent case has illustrated the lack of legal aid provision in direct references under paragraph 33 of schedule 6 to the Scotland Act 1998. That will now be corrected. The provisions will be brought into force as soon as possible. I move amendment 166.  Amendment 166 agreed to.

Amendment 175 would require commission members to be appointed by the Lord President of the Court of Session rather than by the Scottish ministers. Amendments 177, 178 and 179 are consequential on amendment 175. We still think that it is essential for appointments to the commission to be made by ministers and that that is entirely compatible with the European convention on human rights. Our proposals are coherent and consistent with our policy position—we do not want a halfway house, which David Davidson perhaps implied that we wanted. A wide range of qualities will have to be taken into account in appointing commission members, such as the person's experience of complaints handling and consumer awareness. Commission members will also have an important strategic management role. The range of qualities that will be needed will be best assessed in a selection process that is carried out under the umbrella of the Scottish ministers. I repeat that the appointments will be supervised by the commissioner for public appointments in Scotland and will not be political appointments. Therefore, I invite David Davidson not to press his amendments. However, I have been persuaded that the Lord President's being given a consultative role would provide reassurance to those who still have concerns about the appointments process and that that will help to reinforce the fact that members of the new commission will have to be able to adjudicate in an independent and impartial way. Those judicial qualities will be assessed as part of the appointments process. Amendment 176 is therefore a small but significant amendment, which will require ministers to consult the Lord President before appointing members of the commission. Paragraph 5(1A) of schedule 1 states that where the expression "the Lord President" is used, the Lord President of the Court of Session is meant. That clarification has been provided in amendment 176, the text of which will appear earlier in the schedule. The words to that effect in paragraph 5(1A) of schedule 1 are therefore no longer necessary and will be removed by amendment 180.

Amendments 154 and 155 concern solemn criminal legal aid. Amendment 157 concerns legal aid in criminal appeal cases and cases before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Amendment 165 concerns legal aid in certain proceedings that relate to children. The amendments widen the scope of the Scottish Legal Aid Board's condition-making powers. Such powers were introduced at stage 2 for civil and summary criminal legal aid, and the amendments introduce such a power in relation to solemn criminal legal aid. Amendments 156 and 164 are consequential amendments. The amendments in the group will ensure that publicly funded legal assistance and representation is appropriately provided at all stages of cases in which it has been made available. Amendment 154 will allow the Scottish Legal Aid Board the flexibility to impose such conditions as it considers expedient during the currency of a solemn case. Solemn criminal legal aid will still be available under section 23 of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 subject to the existing financial eligibility test, which determines  that legal aid should be available for an applicant who cannot meet the expenses of the case without undue hardship to them or their dependants. Amendment 154 will enable the board to ascertain that people who receive legal aid continue to meet the financial criteria throughout the currency of their case. At present, when solemn legal aid is granted, it is not reviewed to establish whether the financial conditions continue to apply throughout the case. Cases can last a long time and the person's financial circumstances might change considerably. Amendment 154 will enable the board to ensure that legal aid should remain in place. Amendment 155 provides the safeguard of a review mechanism whereby the board will establish a procedure that allows anyone who receives criminal legal aid that is subject to such conditions to apply for a review of those conditions. Amendment 157 will give the board greater flexibility in imposing conditions to grants of legal aid in criminal appeal cases and cases before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Legal aid will still be available subject to the eligibility tests in sections 25(2) and 25AB(2) of the 1986 act. Amendment 165 will allow the board similar flexibility to impose conditions in certain proceedings that relate the children. As before, legal aid will still be available subject to the eligibility tests in section 29 of the 1986 act. Amendments 157 and 165 will allow the board to require a person who receives legal aid to comply with such conditions as it considers expedient. Conditions may be imposed either when legal aid is granted or subsequently. The amendments will ensure that there is a consistent approach to the various types of legal aid. As with solemn criminal legal aid, the amendments will provide a review mechanism whereby the board will review decisions to refuse legal aid or to grant legal aid subject to conditions, if an application is made to it. In criminal appeal cases, there is an existing power under section 25(2A) of the 1986 act for the High Court to determine that it is in the interests of justice for legal aid to be available in criminal appeal cases where the board has refused legal aid on the basis that it is not satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for it to be made available. Amendment 157 seeks to add new section 25(2B) of the 1986 act to provide for an extension of the High Court's powers. It provides that where, as a result of a condition that the Scottish Legal Aid Board has imposed, it terminates legal aid on the ground that it is no longer satisfied that it is in the interests of justice for legal aid to be available, the High Court can determine that legal aid should be  made available for an appeal if it thinks that it is in the interests of justice for it to do so. Following such a determination, the board shall make legal aid available. I move amendment 154.

Just that clarity is always my watchword. We ensure that everything we do is clear to everyone who needs the information in order to proceed.  Amendment 154 agreed to.  Amendment 155 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

The draft adviser code that the Scottish Legal Aid Board submitted to the Justice 2 Committee at stage 2 requires registered organisations to have procedures in place for dealing with complaints and, when appropriate, for enabling complainers to pass on complaints to the board. There is, however, no requirement in the bill for complaints handling to be covered by the code. Amendment 158 provides that the board is required to include such details in the code and fulfils a commitment that was given to the committee at stage 2 by Hugh Henry. I move amendment 158.

Amendments 159, 160 and 161 are intended to provide clarification on the provisions in the bill that relate to grant funding. The grant-funding power and the extension of advice and assistance to non-lawyer advisers that are established by the bill are limited to matters of civil law only. Amendment 159 makes it clear that the board may make grants in respect of advice and assistance that are provided by a non-lawyer adviser only in respect of matters of civil law. Amendment 160 clarifies that the board can use its grant-funding power to support the full range of publicly funded legal assistance activities. It specifies that representing a member of the public is to be included in the list of fundable activities, along with advising them on the application of law to their individual circumstances and assisting them to remedy their legal problems. Our intention for the operation of the grant-funding power is that the standard eligibility tests that individual applicants for legal aid must meet need not be applied automatically in respect of grant funding for the provision of advice, assistance or representation that is not traditional civil legal aid or advice and assistance. There are many good reasons why that may be appropriate when the award of a grant does not relate to the direct provision of advice to an individual. It would be incongruous to apply criteria that assess an individual's financial eligibility or the merits of an individual case to an application for funding towards work to develop advice standards or for the provision of advice to a group of people. The bill originally disapplied the sections of the 1986 act that contained the relevant eligibility tests and definitions but allowed the board to apply them to individual grants, when appropriate. On reflection, we consider that new section 4A(2)(c) of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986, which is introduced by section 45A of the bill, is sufficiently flexible not to require the disapplication of those sections, as it does not make provision for the traditional civil legal aid and advice and assistance that are defined in the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986. However, when civil legal aid or advice and assistance is provided in terms of a grant under section 4A(2)(a) or section 4A(2)(b) of  the 1986 act, the usual eligibility and other tests that are contained in the 1986 act will apply. Amendment 161 therefore removes the provisions that would otherwise disapply the relevant sections of the 1986 act from grant funding. Amendment 161 makes it clear that grants may be made both to individual persons and to organisations; Maureen Macmillan raised that point at stage 2. It does that by clarifying the definition of "person" in relation to the provision of grants under section 4A of the 1986 act only. That is to avoid confusion elsewhere in the 1986 act, where "person" importantly refers to an individual applicant for legal aid. I move amendment 159.  Amendment 159 agreed to.  Amendments 160 and 161 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

Section 10 of the Legal Aid (Scotland) Act 1986 sets financial limits to grants of advice and assistance by solicitors. It also provides that solicitors must seek the prior authorisation of the Scottish Legal Aid Board before giving advice and assistance over and above the financial limits that are set down in the section. Amendment 162 has two purposes. First, it will build on the reforms that are soon to be made to advice and assistance under regulations. An amendment that was passed at stage 2 to create section 46A of the bill allows regulations to be made to provide the Scottish Legal Aid Board with additional powers to determine the matters that are or are not to be treated as distinct matters for advice and assistance. Taken together, that amendment and amendment 162 will make the changes to advice and assistance that were outlined in the consultation on the proposed reform of advice and assistance in civil cases that Hugh Henry, the then Deputy Minister for Justice, issued in late 2004 and which ran to early 2005. Several changes are being developed in response to the views that were expressed in the consultation. They will ensure that, in civil cases, the advice and assistance scheme will be flexible and will operate as efficiently as possible. Under the reformed advice and assistance scheme, solicitors in some cases will be paid a fee for the initial interview and work that relates to it but no more. That will apply when the case's  subject matter is neither listed by the Scottish Legal Aid Board as a distinct matter nor treated as such. The cases that would be caught are the same ones for which solicitors claim minimum fees now. Amendment 162 is necessary to ensure that solicitors cannot ask for the financial limit of such initial interviews and work that relates to them to be exceeded. Allowing increases for such work would in effect remove the gains that would be made in removing the current abuses of the minimum fee arrangement. Secondly, amendment 162 will allow the Scottish Legal Aid Board to make advice and assistance available retrospectively in some cases. It provides that the board may do so only when the advice and assistance were required to be given by the solicitor urgently and when it was impossible for the solicitor to obtain the board's prior authorisation. An example is giving advice and assistance outwith office hours in a criminal defence case because a client was taken into custody late at night. The amendment provides the Scottish Legal Aid Board with discretion to grant such applications only when it is satisfied that the advice and assistance required to be given urgently and when it was impossible for the solicitor to apply for an increase in authorised expenditure before doing the work. The amendment provides that such retrospective approvals of advice and assistance cannot be given for cases whose subject matter does not appear on the list of distinct matters or is not treated by the board as if it appeared there when the work that the solicitor performs is solely to do with an initial interview and work that relates to it. The 1986 act provides that the solicitor makes the initial assessment of whether, when the usual eligibility tests are taken into account, advice and assistance can be approved. The amendment makes no change to that arrangement. Solicitors will still approve and make the initial grant of advice and assistance. I move amendment 162.  Amendment 162 agreed to.

Section 17 of the 1986 act defines the net liability on the legal aid fund as the aggregate of the sums paid or payable out of the fund to a solicitor, counsel or non-lawyer adviser that are not recouped by the fund from expenses. Amendment 169 will amend section 17 so that an  assisted party who meets the net liability as a result of property that is recovered or preserved and whose opponent subsequently pays legal expenses to the board may receive any amount in excess of the net liability and therefore benefit from the outcome of the court proceedings in their favour. Amendment 167 will amend section 4 of the 1986 act so that such payments may be made from the legal aid fund. The other amendments in the group are intended to take account of changes that the bill introduces to enable advice and assistance to be provided by virtue of the board's new grant-funding power or by a solicitor whom the board employs to provide assistance with civil law matters. Their general purpose is to ensure that people who receive advice and assistance through those routes are not disadvantaged in comparison with people who are assisted through the more traditional route of services that are provided by a private sector solicitor. Amendment 163 enables the board to make payments out of the fund to assisted parties where such payments would have been likely, had advice and assistance not been provided by virtue of a grant or by a board-employed solicitor. Amendment 168 provides that payments may be made into the fund in respect of expenses or property recovered in proceedings where advice and assistance are provided by virtue of a grant from the board or by a solicitor employed by the board. Amendment 170 provides that, when the board calculates the net liability on the fund in instances where civil legal aid and advice and assistance have been provided through a grant from the board or by a solicitor employed by the board, the calculation should be made with reference to the sums that would have been payable from the fund if the civil legal aid and advice and assistance had been provided through the more traditional private solicitor route. I move amendment 163.

Amendment 103 introduces new subsections (6A) to (6C) into new section 53ZA of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980.  Subsection (6A) provides that any direction of the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal on an appeal relating to an unsatisfactory professional conduct complaint against a solicitor is enforceable in the same way as an extract registered sheriff court decree. It ensures effective enforceability of such directions. Subsections (6B) and (6C) enable the maximum amount the tribunal may fine a solicitor or award as compensation on such an appeal to be varied by order. The maximum fine is to be variable by negative resolution procedure in line with changes in the value of money. The maximum amount of compensation is to be variable by affirmative resolution procedure after consultation with the council of the Law Society and such consumer groups as ministers consider appropriate. The powers of variation are in line with those elsewhere in the bill. Amendment 125 provides an exact equivalent of amendment 103 as regards appeals to the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal following unsatisfactory professional conduct complaints against conveyancing and executry practitioners. It introduces new subsections (7), (8) and (9) into section 20B of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. They have the same effect as the new subsections (6A) to (6C) inserted by amendment 103. Amendment 110 concerns appeals to the Court of Session following unsatisfactory professional conduct complaints against solicitors. It provides for the maximum level of fine that the court may impose to be varied by order under the negative resolution procedure, in line with changes in the value of money. It also provides for the maximum level of compensation that the court may award on such an appeal to be varied under the affirmative resolution procedure following consultation with the council of the Law Society and such consumer groups as ministers consider appropriate. Amendment 133 provides an exact equivalent of amendment 110 for appeals to the Court of Session following unsatisfactory professional conduct complaints against conveyancing and executry practitioners. Amendments 135 to 138 are purely technical amendments. Section 38(1)(b) currently inserts new subsections immediately after section 53 subsection (7A) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. However, amendment 215 inserts a new subsection (7B) into section 53. The subsections inserted by section 38(1)(b) should follow immediately after this. Amendment 135 therefore provides for those subsections to come after new subsection (7B) and amendments 136 to 138 renumber them as subsections (7C) and (7D). Amendments 142 to 145 introduce into section  55 of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 a new power to vary by order the maximum fine that the Court of Session may impose on an appeal relating to a complaint of professional misconduct against a solicitor. The power is to be limited to making alterations in line with changes in the value of money, and is to be subject to the negative resolution procedure. Amendments 147 to 151 are technical amendments. Section 38(2)(b) inserts new subsections (11F) and (11G) into section 20 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. However, amendment 223 also inserts a new subsection (11F) into that section. Those new subsections should, in fact, follow immediately after that new subsection (11F). Amendments 147 and 148 provide for them to do so and amendments 149, 150 and 151 therefore renumber them as (11G) and (11H). Amendments 215 and 223 provide for directions of the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal in professional misconduct cases involving solicitors and conveyancing and executry practitioners to be enforceable in the same way as extract registered sheriff court decrees. They ensure effective enforceability of such directions. Schedule 4 paragraph 1 (6N)(b) inserts new subsections (8A) and (8B) into section 53 of the 1980 act. However, those subsections should now follow new subsection (9) of that section, which is introduced by section 38(1)(c) of the bill. Amendment 216 achieves that and amendments 217 and 218 accordingly renumber the new subsections as (10) and (11). I move amendment 103.  Amendment 103 agreed to.  Amendments 104 and 105 not moved.  Amendment 106 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.  Amendments 107 to 109 not moved.  Amendment 110 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.  Amendment 111 not moved.

Amendments 72 and 73 pave the way for the creation of a new criminal offence of wrongful disclosure of commission information by extending the prohibition on disclosure that is already contained in section 32A to information that is given to or obtained by the commission or anyone acting on its behalf. Amendments 81 and 82 perform the same function in relation to information held by the professional organisations. Amendment 75 creates a criminal offence of knowingly disclosing information obtained when employed by or acting on behalf of the commission. The penalty on summary conviction will be a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale. Amendment 83 applies an equivalent  offence in relation to the professional organisations and those acting on their behalf. Amendments 74 and 84 would create similar offences, but there are a number of differences. First, the level of fine is not the same. Not a great deal turns on setting the fine at level 4 as opposed to level 5. We consider that conviction and a level 4 fine are sufficient deterrents. Significantly, the Executive amendments apply only to information that is knowingly disclosed, therefore they provide an important defence of inadvertent disclosure, which David Davidson's amendments 74 and 84 do not provide. That should save the unfortunate employee who accidentally presses the wrong key on the computer and sends an e-mail to an unintended recipient or who leaves their briefcase on the train. Although such carelessness should be deplored, we should not criminalise otherwise law-abiding people for it. The Executive amendments will also apply the criminal sanction whenever the information is obtained by someone who was employed by or acting on behalf of the commission or the professional organisation at the time. David Davidson's amendments 74 and 84 would not cover disclosure by people such as former employees, who would escape any penalty, therefore I do not support David Davidson's amendments. I move amendment 72.

I have nothing further to say.

The amendments deal with an issue that was raised at stage 2 concerning what would happen if a practitioner was prosecuted before the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal for professional misconduct and the tribunal did not establish professional misconduct but thought that the case might amount to unsatisfactory professional conduct. Under the bill, prosecutions for professional misconduct will continue to take place before the tribunal, while the new and lesser category of unsatisfactory professional conduct  will be dealt with by the council of the Law Society of Scotland. We consider that this is a genuine issue, and that there should be a formal mechanism for ensuring that the case is properly investigated as one involving unsatisfactory professional conduct allegations. Amendments 96 and 112 therefore require the tribunal to remit the complaint to the council in such a situation. Amendment 96 deals with cases involving solicitors and inserts new section 53ZZA into the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. Amendment 112 provides an equivalent for conveyancing and executry practitioners, and inserts new section 20ZZA into the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990, which is the governing statute for those practitioners. Both amendments permit the tribunal to make any of its own findings in fact available to the council, to avoid duplication of investigations. Amendments 85 and 113 deal with what the council is to do on receiving such a remitted complaint. The details are contained in new sections 42ZA(1A) of the 1980 act and 20ZA(1A) of the 1990 act. The council is to notify the practitioner and complainer that the case has been remitted and that it is now bound to investigate the case as a complaint of unsatisfactory professional conduct. The council is to proceed to investigate and determine the case, but not before allowing the practitioner complained against the opportunity to make representations, and may rely on any findings of fact made available by the tribunal. Amendments 86, 91, 94, 95, 114, 118, 120 and 121 insert, where appropriate, references in sections 36 and 37 to the new subsections introduced by amendments 85 and 113. Amendments 200 and 201 are technical amendments that insert appropriate references to new sections 42ZA(1A) of the 1980 act and 20ZA(1A) of the 1990 act into paragraph 1(2)(a)(ii)(ab)(i) of schedule 4, as inserted by amendments 85 and 113 respectively. I move amendment 85.  Amendment 85 agreed to.  Amendment 86 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

For clarity, I indicate that as well as asking members to support the Executive amendments, we ask members to support non-Executive amendments 88, 89, 115 and 116 and to reject the other non-Executive amendments. I will explain why. Amendments 97 and 122 confer on the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal the power, when an appeal is made to it on a complaint of unsatisfactory conduct, to direct that the solicitor or conveyancing or executry practitioner concerned "undertake such education or training as regards the law or legal practice" as the tribunal considers appropriate. In the case of a conveyancing or executry practitioner, the direction would be limited to education or training on conveyancing or executry law and practice.  Following consultation, the tribunal thought that the additional powers would be helpful. Amendments 98, 106, 123, 128 and 140 insert maximum levels of fine into various provisions, where it is reasonable to do so. The approach is in line with that of existing provisions in the bill, the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 and the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990, whereby the maximum fine payable is £2,000 in a case of unsatisfactory professional conduct and £10,000 in a case of professional misconduct. I support amendments 88, 89, 115 and 116. Amendments 88 and 115 would allow the council of the Law Society of Scotland, in considering an unsatisfactory professional conduct complaint against a solicitor or conveyancing or executry practitioner, to take into account a previous determination of unsatisfactory professional conduct made against the practitioner by the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal or the court. In the bill as it stands, power is given to the council to take into account its previous determinations. Amendments 89 and 116 would additionally allow previous findings of professional misconduct against a practitioner to be taken into account. The amendments are reasonable and would permit the practitioner's disciplinary history to be more fully considered. Amendments 90, 100, 111, 117, 124, 129, 130, 141 and 146 are not necessary. There is nothing to prevent the various bodies involved from taking into account all relevant factors in making decisions about compensation and there is no reason to think that those bodies would not do so. An obligation to take previous awards of compensation into account, regardless of the basis on which a previous award had been made, might also unduly restrict judicial discretion. I therefore invite David Davidson not to move those amendments. I also invite David Davidson not to move amendments 99, 101 and 102. The appeals with which those amendments are concerned are complainer appeals against a decision by the council of the Law Society not to uphold a conduct complaint. The complainer has been given new appeal rights purely so that he or she can have the issue of compensation adjudicated at a higher level. The complainer's interest is in ensuring that an award of compensation is made against the solicitor where appropriate. That is why there is currently no power for the tribunal to fine the solicitor on such an appeal. In addition, no amendments have been proposed to make equivalent provision in relation to conveyancing and executry practitioners.  I do not believe that amendments 104, 109, 126, 132 and 139 are necessary. Clearly, on an appeal, the court has to decide whether the appeal succeeds or fails. That does not need to be spelled out. What is important is what the court has the power to do on a successful appeal. The bill already lists the powers of the court in that respect. I understand Mr Davidson's motivation in lodging amendments 105, 107, 108, 127, 130 and 131. It looks as if there are gaps in the bill as drafted, but the omission of the matters with which those amendments deal was not an oversight. The 1980 and 1990 acts impose corresponding conditions on the powers of the council of the Law Society and the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal to fine for professional misconduct. However, those acts do not apply those same conditions to fines that are imposed by the court on appeal. We thought it important that the new powers that are being introduced in relation to unsatisfactory professional conduct complaints were consistent with the existing framework. We did not want to interfere with the inherent powers and practices of the court, or cast doubt on the way in which those acts have operated to date in professional misconduct cases.

I appreciate that the aim of amendment 6 is to help the commission to fulfil its responsibility under section 29 to monitor the effectiveness of professional indemnity arrangements. Such arrangements are an important and integral part of the overall mechanisms for providing redress for clients who suffer as a result of poor service from a legal practitioner. However, our preference is to rely on the willingness of the professional bodies to co-operate with the commission when it seeks to carry out its duties under section 29. It will be very much in their interest to do so. If the commission were to report a lack of co-operation on the part of the professional bodies, it  would be open to the Scottish ministers to place before the Parliament regulations under section 31 to enhance the commission's monitoring powers. Such regulations could set out the procedures for the commission to follow in obtaining documentation and provide enforcement powers for that purpose. I note that amendment 6 does not deal with how confidential commercial documents would be treated. We propose to see how well section 29 works in practice and to review its operation in the light of experience. As I indicated, section 31 will allow us to improve its operation if required. At this point, I do not support amendment 6, for the reasons that I have given.

We continue this afternoon as we started this morning. Amendment 69 adds the Lord President to the list of those whom the commission is required to consult before making or varying its rules of procedure. That should help to provide further reassurance that the rules will be fair and will further reinforce the reality that the full commission and its determination committees will act as an independent and impartial tribunal when ruling on the merits of complaints. I welcome the support that has been given to the amendment. I support the other amendments in the group. Amendments 66 and 67 would place a slightly more stringent duty on the commission in relation to the publication of its rules and any changes to them. Instead of being required to publish the rules from time to time, the commission will be required to publish them as soon as is reasonably practicable and to make them available to the public in a readily accessible form. We accept that that will promote transparency.  Amendments 68 and 70 would remove the current exemption to the duty on the commission to consult before making or varying its rules, where those relate to the annual levy and complaints levy. Originally we thought that the commission's duty to consult the profession each year on the size of the levies under section 20 afforded sufficient protection, but we have no objection to a wider duty to consult.

Amendment 5 has some attraction, in so far as it would require the commission to review its operations after its first two years. We commend such reviews as good administrative practice and certainly expect the commission to hold a consultative review seeking the views of interested parties on issues arising from its first few years of operation. However, that is as far as we would go. The amendment reflects the unease that some feel about the split that the bill makes between conduct and service complaints and about the fact that responsibility for conduct complaints is to be retained by the professional organisations. As has already been said, those issues were debated by the Justice 2 Committee at stage 2 in the context of amendments lodged by John Swinney. There was also debate about where the split is and how difficult it can be to make that absolutely definitive, but the bill recognises that there is the capacity to shift from one to the other, and that is an acknowledgement that a complaint that starts off as one type may become another and might therefore have to be dealt with in that way. In our view, it would not be right to add conduct complaints to the commission's remit. The purpose of the commission is to provide an informal and consumer-friendly process, to promote mediation and dispute resolution at source and to focus on redress for consumer complaints. In contrast, conduct allegations carry with them the risk of a range of disciplinary sanctions against the practitioner, up to and including loss of livelihood. Disciplinary hearings against practitioners that could trigger sanctions of such severity require different, more formal and adversarial procedures, and full rights of appeal. If, in the worst-case scenario that John Swinney describes, it was found that that split was not working, it would not be a given that the commission would take over that role. A different solution may be needed, and the presumption that it would fall to the commission is not right. The professional organisations and, where appropriate, the discipline tribunals are already skilled at performing that sort of role and should be left to continue to do so. Given that the regulatory bodies set the standards of conduct for members of the profession, those bodies are in the best position to assess shortcomings. For those reasons, we do not support amendment 5. On amendment 7, we do not believe that it is appropriate to have a reserve power to remove, by means of regulations, responsibility for conduct complaints from the professional organisations. Even by John Swinney's standards, his suggestion that our acceptance of one  amendment to one bill constitutes past practice on the part of the Executive is a little elastic with the truth. In our view, an important principle of the bill is that service complaints should be dealt with by the commission and conduct complaints should be dealt with by the professional bodies. It is reasonable to argue that primary legislation would be the most appropriate way to make such a fundamental change, given that a range of options would need to be considered if, in the way that John Swinney fears, the approach in the bill had failed. We do not support amendment 5 and we do not recognise the need for the reserve power in amendment 7, no matter how attractive John Swinney might have managed to make it appear by claiming precedent.

All police forces in Scotland have published a disability equality scheme as required under the Disability Discrimination Act 2005. Implementation of those schemes is a matter for chief constables. HM chief inspector of  constabulary will scrutinise police forces for compliance.

I am happy to add to Marlyn Glen's congratulations my congratulations to Tayside police on what it has done. All police forces published their disability equality scheme documents by the deadline of 4 December and all have appointed a diversity co-ordinator. Some police forces have been more creative—they have adopted a multi-equality approach and have incorporated the six strands of equality into one document. Several issues relate to monitoring. Neither we nor the police forces want that to be a paper exercise. Monitoring is important. We all know that talking to people who will be most directly affected by decisions means that the right decisions are more likely to be made. I encourage people who seek to meet the needs of people with disabilities to ensure that they test the schemes against the demands of people who have disabilities. That is good practice for equality issues more generally, which I am confident police forces will follow.

I support amendments 56 and 61, in the name of Stewart Maxwell. On reflection, we agree that, in practice, ministers will always want to specify a rate of interest that applies both to the annual general levy and the complaints levy in the event of late payment or non-payment. The use of wording that permits ministers to decide not to set a rate is unnecessary. Amendments 196 and 197 remove two further uses of "(if any)" in schedule 3. In the situations to which they refer, a rate of interest will always be specified, so those references are redundant. Amendments 57 to 60, 62 and 63 are all intended to achieve the same purpose. On reflection, it is not necessary to refer to a debt as a civil debt, therefore the amendments seek to remove references to civil debts where they occur. However, amendments 58, 60 and 63 still specify that unpaid sums due to the commission by the professional organisations, such as annual general levies, complaints levies and interest, are recoverable as debts. That usefully specifies that a court action to recover any of those sums will be a debt action. I welcome David Davidson's indication that he does not intend to move his amendments 57, 59 and 62.  Amendment 56 agreed to.  Amendment 57 not moved.  Amendment 58 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.  Amendment 59 not moved.  Amendment 60 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.  Amendment 61 moved—[Stewart Maxwell]—and agreed to.

I reiterate the Executive's commitment to ensuring that the commission's annual budgetary consultation is transparent. However, the timescale in amendment 64, in the name of David Davidson, is unnecessary for the annual consultation that the bill requires on the commission's proposed work plan and budget for the following financial year. The period from January to April is sufficient time for the commission to consult on its proposed budget and lay its finalised budget before the Parliament. For that reason, I do not support amendment 64 and I ask David Davidson to withdraw it. As has already been indicated, amendment 65 builds on an amendment that was lodged by Jeremy Purvis at stage 2. Members of the Justice 2 Committee will recall that my predecessor undertook to lodge an Executive amendment along similar lines at stage 3. Amendment 65  requires the commission to publish by 31 March each year the responses that it receives to its annual consultation and proposed budget. However, in line with the Executive's current practice, the duty to publish will not apply if the consultee requests confidentiality.

I see no reason why the commission and professional organisations should not be required to send copies of notices and reports relating to the handling of complaints to the individual practitioner concerned. I am therefore content to accept amendments 41, 43, 45 and 47. Amendments 42 and 44 would require the commission not to investigate a handling complaint whenever it was made more than six months from the date on which the professional organisation sent its determination to the complainer. We believe that that would be too rigid. It does not take account of the technical reasons for the existing order-making power in the bill. The reason for taking the power is that different dates are required for different purposes. For example, in relation to unsatisfactory professional conduct, it would be the date on which the Law Society of Scotland made a determination; but in relation to professional misconduct, it would be the date on which the society decided to prosecute before the tribunal. The appropriate dates in relation to conduct complaints that are dealt with by each of the other professional bodies will also be covered in the order. I therefore ask David Davidson not to move amendments 42 and 44.

Amendment 46 would remove the commission's power to recommend that the professional body investigates further or reconsiders a conduct complaint. The Law Society of Scotland believes that the power will trespass too far into the remit of the professional bodies. However, the power has the potential to be important in cases in which the complainer legitimately feels that his or her version of events has not been taken seriously or properly investigated. I will not support amendment 46, and I invite David Davidson to withdraw it. In other ways, once again consensus seems to be breaking out. David Davidson managed to lodge his amendments 48, 49 and 52 before identical ones from the Executive were lodged. We support those amendments, which should ensure effective compliance with commission directions by the professional bodies. The purpose of amendments 49 and 52 and Executive amendment 50 is to achieve that while avoiding an immediate resort to the concept of contempt of court. The amendments will permit the commission to petition the Court of Session when there is non-compliance with a direction. The court will then be able to order the professional organisation to comply with the recommendation contained in the direction. Of course, breach of the Court of Session's order could itself trigger contempt of court, but that is the case with most court orders of this type, so there is no need to specify as much in the bill. However, I am confident that professional bodies will obey any orders of the court. Amendments 49, 52 and 50 should achieve compliance with commission directions by less coercive means.

Amendments 53 to 55 are technical amendments to section 17, which provides for the abolition of the Scottish legal services ombudsman. Under the bill, the bulk of the ombudsman's current functions will transfer to the Scottish legal complaints commission, but for certain of the ombudsman's functions, relating to the ombudsman's powers to investigate complaints in reserved areas, that will not be the case, because regulation of the legal profession in certain sectors is dealt with in acts of the United Kingdom Parliament, the subject matter of which is reserved. Examples are the Consumer Credit Act 1974 and the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000. It is not within the legislative competence of the bill to transfer the ombudsman's functions in those areas to the new commission. That will be achieved by Scottish clauses in the UK Legal Services Bill, which was recently introduced at Westminster. Amendment 54 provides that, on commencement of section 17, all the ombudsman's functions cease to be exercisable, other than those functions in the reserved areas that are specified in section 47(2). It also removes the current section 17(3), which enables ministers to modify functions of the ombudsman by order in preparation for abolition. We no longer think that that is necessary. The ombudsman's functions will simply cease to be exercisable under section 17 or the relevant provisions of the UK Legal Services Bill. Amendment 53 provides that the ombudsman is not to be abolished until she no longer has any exercisable functions. Amendment 55 deletes sections 17(4) and 17(5), which enable ministers to make incidental, consequential, transitional and  saving provisions in relation to modification of the ombudsman's functions and abolition of the ombudsman. Again, we no longer think that those powers are needed. The ombudsman's functions will simply cease to be exercisable on commencement of the relevant provisions. Amendment 226 removes the requirement for the order abolishing the office of the ombudsman to be subject to any parliamentary procedure. As amendment 53 specifies that the office will be abolished only once commencement of the relevant provisions of this bill and the UK bill have stripped it of all its functions, abolition will be entirely consequential on the effects of primary legislation and should not require to be subject to any parliamentary procedure. The order-making powers conferred by the current text of sections 17(1), 17(3) and 17(4) are included in the list of powers subject to the affirmative procedure. Amendment 227 removes them from that list. The existing order-making powers in sections 17(3) and 17(4) are being removed by amendments 54 and 55, and, as I have already explained, it is no longer appropriate for the power contained in section 17(1) to be subject to any parliamentary procedure. I move amendment 53.  Amendment 53 agreed to.  Amendments 54 and 55 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.

I apologise, Presiding Officer. Any bill could be challenged on those grounds, but we are confident that we have advice that says that the bill is compatible with the ECHR. As a matter of course, we do not introduce legislation willy-nilly that has not been tested in that way, and we are confident of the advice that we have on the  bill's competence. We take competence seriously, and I would like to explain briefly why we are confident that the provisions in the bill are ECHR compatible, and to explain that we have examined all the suggestions on their merits and gone further than the ECHR demands if the case was well made. The specific question is about whether the provisions of the bill relating to the determination by the commission of complaints against members of the legal profession provide those members with a convention-compatible remedy. Article 6 of the convention provides that, in the determination of their civil rights and obligations, everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial tribunal established by law. Since the decisions of the commission would, in some cases, amount to a determination of a practitioner's civil rights, article 6 applies. However, I ask members to note that article 6 does not require there to be a full appeal in the usual sense of the word. One of the principal aims of the Scottish ministers in promoting the bill was to provide people who had genuine complaints about the quality of legal services with a quick, efficient, consumer-friendly way of resolving those complaints, avoiding the expense and delays of a court-based system, and so that good decisions could be made that took the complaints seriously and sought to make a judgment on whether the complaints were legitimate. There was a perception—I put it no higher than that—that the system that was operated by the professional bodies was obstructive, overtechnical and slow; I suspect that John Swinney would put it higher than that. However, we were not trying to write a charter for professional complainers. There are awkward clients just as there are inefficient lawyers. The challenge for us in preparing the bill was to get the balance right and to deliver the type of complaints-resolving machinery that I have described, while also protecting the legitimate interests of all parties. When we introduced the bill, we did so on the basis that it was within the competence of the Parliament, as is the case with any bill. When the Law Society raised its concerns about human rights, we took them seriously, recognising that the Law Society is an organisation that looks beyond the narrow interests of its members to the wider constitutionality of legislation. Accordingly, to address those concerns, we went further than the human rights convention perhaps required and took steps to make it explicit in the bill that the commission would be an independent and impartial tribunal in human rights terms. We further distanced ministers from the commission, we provided for fixed-term appointments, we put dismissals in the hands of the chairing member  and the Lord President of the Court of Session, Scotland's most senior judge, and we required any determination committee to be chaired by a legal member of the commission. In fact, we went the second mile to address the Law Society's points about the constitution of the commission from an ECHR perspective. In our view, the commission is now clearly independent of Scottish ministers and impartial as between the parties to the dispute. We have not stopped there. We have lodged amendments to require the commission to consult the Lord President on the rules of the commission. Furthermore, Executive amendment 26, which we have already discussed, requires the commission to take account of awards made by other courts when it comes to fix compensation levels. That allays a major concern of the legal profession that awards of the commission might get out of step with those in the courts. Of course, rules about the practice and procedures of the commission must themselves be compatible with the convention. The bill makes it mandatory that the rules must provide for when hearings are to be available in relation to complaints and whether they should be in public or in private, and there must be rules for the giving of reasons for decisions, where they are not already in the bill. The bill already contains the framework for the commission to make its rules in a way that is wholly compatible with the convention. It is clear and necessary that we strike a balance with the legislation. David Davidson's amendments seek a full appeal on all matters of fact and law, but that is one step too far for us to go. If we agreed to the Law Society's continued demands for a full right of appeal to the ordinary courts, we would lose one of the most important features of the bill—the provision of quick, consumer-friendly resolution of disputes between lawyers and their clients. We would risk the whole process becoming submerged in long, drawn-out appeals on technical grounds, and there is no reason for us to do that. It is not legally necessary and it is not right on the merits of the issue. However, we have examined the amendments that were lodged by Jackie Baillie and Jim Wallace, and we have decided to support them because they would preserve the essence of the current policy, not undermine it in the way that John Swinney fears. David Davidson's amendments would allow a full appeal on fact and law, whereas in Jackie Baillie and Jim Wallace's amendments the grounds are limited first to error in law; secondly to procedural impropriety if a hearing is held; thirdly to cases in which the commission has acted irrationally; and fourthly to cases in which the commission's decision was not supported by the facts found to be established by the commission—according to the classic House of Lords analysis of the formulation, that the facts  found by the decision-making body are such that no person acting judiciously and properly instructed as to the relevant law could have come to the decision under appeal. We recognise that that is not contrary to our policy, but supportive of it. We are happy to support a restricted right of appeal to the Court of Session. The proposed provision responds, as far as we are able to do so, to the Law Society's campaign for an appeal mechanism but it does not go as far as to provide for a full appeal on fact and law because we need to preserve the commission's ability to work in the interests of consumers by moving quickly and without unnecessary delay. The restricted right of appeal will not affect the policy aims underlying the creation of the Scottish legal complaints commission. The small number of important appeals that might go to the Court of Session by this route will emphasise the commission's ultimate accountability to the courts for its decisions. Our decision to accept a restricted right of appeal to the Court of Session should reassure MSPs and others who have followed the bill closely that the commission will be a properly accountable body. A welcome feature of the Parliament's consideration of the bill is the consensus that has been built on key issues. That is demonstrated by our decision to support amendments 3, 3D, 3E, 3F, 4 and 4A. No matter how those amendments might have been characterised, they will ensure that practitioners have a limited and very restricted right of external appeal while sustaining our ultimate policy aim for the commission. I assure members that the bill, as adjusted by those amendments, will provide an excellent system for resolving disputes that balances the interests of all concerned.

The effect of amendments 39, 40, 71 and 80 would be radically to change the carefully structured provisions of the bill in terms of which the commission and the professional bodies can obtain documents and evidence. At present, the bill provides that such bodies can require production of documents and other evidence. If the person who is put under such a requirement resists on the grounds of confidentiality or legal privilege, it will be necessary for the commission or professional bodies to go to court to seek an order. A court will not grant an order that breaches legal privilege and, in the public interest, it will try where possible to preserve other obligations of confidentiality.  The amendments would mean that all persons who were served with a requirement to provide documents would be put under an immediate statutory duty to comply with the requirement. That would result in a complete override of legal privilege and confidentiality. However, legal privilege is an automatic right that not even the courts can overrule without explicit authority. At stage 2, we amended schedule 3 to the bill to require the commission to make provision in its rules to prevent investigation of a complaint unless the complainer has waived any relevant rights of confidentiality. Accordingly, the whole framework of legal privilege is protected and respected in the bill. Even the complainer's rights are preserved unless he expressly waives them. The bill should enable the commission and professional bodies to obtain most of the documents that they need without making inroads into rights of confidentiality or legal professional privilege, which are considered by the Executive to be of fundamental importance. Both the commission and the professional bodies will need to go to court if persons do not hand over documents or evidence that is required from them. In such cases, the legal machinery in schedule 2, which is based on provisions in the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980, would apply. In other words, the bill preserves the status quo on legal privilege and it adopts a procedure for going to court that is well tried and which works. The amendments would radically alter the status quo in the wrong direction and against the public interest. On that basis, and in the interest of protecting client confidentiality, I oppose all the amendments in the group.

Members will have recognised from the tenor of the debate that ministers have decided to support the amendments that were lodged by Jackie Baillie and Jim Wallace, namely amendments 3, 3D, 3E, 3F, 4 and 4A. It is clear to us that we should support that position rather than the one behind Mr Davidson's amendment 38. There has been some discussion, as we have recognised, about the way in which people have engaged with the debate from all sides and have sought to get solutions that people find acceptable. That applies both internally, across the Parliament, and externally, because stakeholders beyond the Parliament have an interest in the bill. However, the debate has not been helped by those who have chosen to substitute lambast for debate and who think that by battering people over the head they can somehow persuade them of the strength of their argument. Nevertheless, there have been those externally who have been willing to recognise the challenge that the Parliament faces. I urge John Swinney, who clearly has a record on the matter, based on his local experience, not to allow himself to be put in a position whereby that becomes the acid test of the bill, as others have sought to do. There is agreement on a huge number of things in the bill, and I do not accept that we stand or fall by our position on specific amendments on the right of appeal. The key amendments in the group concern the type of appeal that there should be against commission decisions and touch on issues that have been of concern to many members. A particular concern has been whether the type of appeal that we have is sufficient to bring the bill within the competence of the Scottish Parliament by properly respecting the rights of practitioners under the European convention on human rights. Bill Aitken mentioned the opinion of Lord Lester QC, commissioned by the Law Society of Scotland, which has suggested that the existing provisions of the bill may not be compatible with convention rights. In reality, any bill could be challenged on those grounds. That would be tested largely through the courts, but we are absolutely clear that the bill—[ Interruption. ]

I accept that the bill does not prescribe detailed procedures for professional bodies to follow as regards the possible mediation of conduct complaints remitted to them by the commission. That should not, however, be interpreted to mean that mediation is not an option for professional organisations. It is highly desirable, in policy terms, that mediation of a complaint should be pursued whenever it is sensible for that to be done. It is not inconsistent, therefore, that section 11(1) includes two express references to mediation by a professional organisation. I note also that amendment 34 has been drafted on the basis that there is only one such reference. For both policy and technical reasons, therefore, I cannot support amendment 34 and I invite David Davidson to withdraw it. I agree that, when it appears to the commission that it is reasonably likely that a services complaint may be re-categorised as a conduct complaint, it is reasonable that there should be a reciprocal requirement to transmit the complaint and related material. I accept that the bill should require the commission to send a copy of the complaint and other material to the relevant professional organisation, just as a professional organisation is already obliged to do in the reverse situation. I therefore urge members to support amendment 35.

To be consistent with the position that I have argued before, I say that the limit is entirely clear and that there are safeguards, given that the figure is a maximum rather than anything else.

Members will be aware of my instinctively consensual approach. Therefore, to support amendments 23, 24, 27, 33 and 77 gives  me no pain. We urge members to support the Executive amendments in the group, but we resist amendments 28 and 93. On amendment 23, our policy is that the professional bodies should decide whether a practitioner is sufficiently competent in any aspect of the law or legal practice. That policy is appropriate because the professional bodies are responsible for admission to the profession and take a close interest in the education and training that their members require. The function of the proposed commission, as will be clarified by Executive amendment 22, will be to report to the professional body when it suspects that a practitioner may not have sufficient competence in a particular aspect of the law or legal practice. As the professional body must make a decision on such matters, it is not essential to require the commission to copy its report to the employing practitioner in advance of a decision by the professional body. The professional bodies will no doubt judge for themselves whether to inform employing practitioners of decisions on the training needs of their employees but, on balance, we see no difficulty in requiring the commission to send a copy of any report under section 8(2)(e) to the employing practitioner. Therefore, I am content to support amendment 23. Amendment 24 seeks to ensure that the commission takes into account prior directions that have been given to the employing solicitor and that the commission must, in considering what steps to take under section 8(2), take into account any prior direction that has been given under section 8(2)(d) not only to the practitioner, but to the employing practitioner. I thank David Davidson for lodging the amendment, which I support. We also support amendment 27, which follows up the logic behind section 8(2A), which we proposed at stage 2. There is a case to be made for the employing practitioner receiving a copy of the documents. I understand the concern that underlies amendment 28. Currently, section 9(2) provides that reasons need be given only when a determination has been made by a determination committee, which suggests that reasons need not be given when a determination has not been made by a determination committee—for example, if it has been made by the proposed commission or when a direction or report has been given. However, the amendment overlooks the fact that schedule 3 to the bill will require the commission to make rules on when reasons are to be given, expressly in circumstances in which they are not required to be given in the eventual act itself, for determinations, directions, decisions or recommendations under part 1 and in respect of  related matters. There is a mandatory rule-making power, so the commission must make rules and consult interested parties before making or varying them. Therefore, I urge David Davidson not to press amendment 28 as it is inappropriate. Amendment 29 is a small technical amendment that will replace a reference to paragraph 13(1A)(c)(i) of schedule 1 with a reference to paragraph 13(1A)(d)(i) of schedule 1. Amendment 33 would require the commission to give the practitioner notice of its intention to identify the practitioner in a report. We do not envisage the commission having regular recourse to the sanction of naming and shaming a practitioner against whom it has upheld a services complaint, which is why the bill sets a high threshold for such action—namely that the case is exceptional and that it would be in the public interest, in the opinion of the commission, for the identity of the practitioner to be included in the report. However, it is important to be scrupulously fair to the practitioner while seeking to protect the public. Therefore, I do not oppose practitioners' receiving a four-week period of notice. I appreciate the thinking behind amendment 77, on the giving of notices by electronic means, and I have no objection to supporting it. Its approach is consistent with the approach that is taken to individuals and may serve to ensure that notices are safely received. Amendments 92, 93 and 119 will impose a duty on the council of the Law Society to supply reasons in relation to its decisions on complaints of unsatisfactory professional conduct. Amendments 92 and 119 will, respectively, apply to complaints against solicitors and conveyancing and executry practitioners. They follow the pattern that is followed by section 9, which requires a determination committee of the commission to provide reasons only for its determinations, such as on whether to uphold a complaint, and not for its directions, such as requiring a certain amount of compensation to be paid, although the commission will have the power to specify in its rules additional circumstances in which reasons must be given. Amendments 92 and 119 therefore seek to put the council in a similar position to the commission as regards the duty to provide reasons. Amendment 93 would apply to complaints against solicitors only, but otherwise goes further and would require the council to give reasons for the particular sanction that has been imposed. However, in the case of a censure, the only reason that could be given is that the council is under a duty to censure all solicitors who are found guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct under proposed new section 42ZA(3)(a) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980, which will be  inserted by section 36 of the bill. In the case of other sanctions, it may be difficult to specify exactly why, for example, a fine of £1,000 has been imposed rather than a fine of £800 or £1,200. The council will have to make judgments about what is broadly appropriate in the circumstances.

In the midst of our technical debates, it is useful to remind ourselves that the commission is to be set up as a consumer complaints handling body in order to provide quick and effective solutions for practitioners and complainers alike, and to award redress where appropriate. Amendment 26 will make a small but—I hope—reassuring addition to section 8A of the bill. I am aware that some people are concerned that the new commission may award large sums in compensation for minor lapses in service standards, but that fear has no basis. Experience of similar schemes, such as in the Financial Ombudsman Service, shows that compensation for distress and inconvenience without financial loss—the so-called botheration factor—is unlikely to be more than a few hundred pounds. There is no reason to think that substantial compensation will be ordered if no substantial financial loss has occurred. We sought to reassure people who were concerned about that at stage 2 by imposing a specific duty on the proposed commission to take account of the relevant law, which would obviously include the law of negligence. Amendment 26 will add the further clarification that the relevant law includes levels of damages that are awarded by the courts in similar circumstances. I hope that that will make clear what we have always said: when a services complaint might alternatively have been brought as a court action, compensation will be broadly in line with what a court would have ordered.  Nevertheless, it is a key element of the new scheme that the proposed commission will take the lead role in setting and policing service standards, drawing on the expertise of both its non-lawyer and lawyer members. Amendment 25 would be inappropriate and unduly restrictive in relation to the commission's deliberations. The bill already provides that the criterion that the commission must apply to its determination of complaints and awards of redress is what is fair and reasonable in all the circumstances. In our view, that is an entirely appropriate and well-precedented criterion, which the Financial  Ombudsman Service already applies successfully. I urge members to support amendment 26 and I ask David Davidson to seek to withdraw amendment 25.

Jackie Baillie should know as well as anyone that nothing is ever "conjured out of nowhere" for legislation here or, I am sure, at the House of Lords. People devote a great deal of time and thought to such matters. The parliamentary process adds to that, which ensures that the legislation that we end up with is as robust as it can be. Our intention in setting a compensation limit of £20,000 is to provide access to justice for complainers who seek to pursue low-level negligence actions without facing the expense, uncertainty and delay of court actions. We accept that there might be initial anxiety in some parts of the legal profession about the proposed limit of £20,000, but the bill provides a number of safeguards. First, complaints about the service that has been provided by a solicitor may be made only by people who appear to the proposed Scottish legal complaints commission to have been directly affected by the suggested inadequate professional service. Secondly, the bill requires the commission to reject any complaint that it determines to be "frivolous, vexatious or totally without merit". Thirdly, the bill requires the commission to assess what is "fair and reasonable" in deciding whether to uphold a service complaint and whether to award compensation and, if so, of what amount. We are confident that the new commission will behave competently and professionally in deciding on compensation. I emphasise that £20,000 is the maximum that the bill sets for compensation. Jackie Baillie is quite right to point out that the Financial Ombudsman Service may award up to £100,000, but there is no suggestion that that amount has become the norm. We see no reason why maximum awards would be any more common for the legal profession than they are in the financial sector. In its evidence to the Joint Committee on the Draft Legal Services Bill, the Law Society of England and Wales opposed an upper limit on total redress and favoured a cap of £20,000 on compensation only. Given that Jackie Baillie's research indicates that 90 per cent of master policy settlements fall into the up-to-£15,000 category, with a small number falling into the £15,000 to £20,000 category, I argue that it is equally logical for £20,000 to be the most appropriate maximum limit for capturing most, if not all, the low-level out-of-court negligence settlements.  I emphasise that the £20,000 limit will not be set in concrete for all time. The Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill provides a power for ministers to vary the limit after consultation, by means of the affirmative resolution procedure, so that the limit can be adjusted in the light of experience. I invite Jackie Baillie to seek to withdraw amendment 1. Amendment 22 will make a minor adjustment to section 8(2)(e), which enables the commission, on upholding a services complaint, to report any perceived lack of competence in any aspect of the law or legal practice "to the relevant professional organisation." That organisation may then decide whether to order the practitioner to undergo further training. As the body that will have the lead role in legal education, it is ultimately for the professional organisation to decide whether there is a lack of competence that should be remedied through retraining. Section 8(2)(e) should refer to the commission considering that the practitioner "may not"—rather than "does not"—have sufficient competence. I thank Jeremy Purvis for pointing that out at stage 2. I urge members to support amendment 22.

I hear what Mr Davidson says and I have argued our position on the amendment. That should be sufficient.  Amendment 9, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendment 10 seeks to add chairmen of tribunals to the list of public officer holders who can make a service complaint to the commission, but it does not define what a chairman of a tribunal is or indicate which tribunals would be covered. Members will note that, because of the large number and variety of tribunals that exist, section 2(1B), which mentions exempting from conduct complaints "a practitioner acting in a judicial capacity in a court or tribunal", provides that courts and tribunals would be specified by order by the Scottish ministers. Amendment 10 is therefore unworkable and I invite David Davidson to withdraw it. Amendment 211 would enable both a sheriff and a tribunal chairman to make a complaint of professional misconduct to the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal. It seeks to align the list of  people in section 51 of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 who can make a complaint of professional misconduct to the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal with the list of public office holders in section 2(1A) who will be able to make a service complaint to the commission. However, the amendment is flawed. The reference to "judge" in section 51 of the 1980 act is defined by section 65 of that act to include a sheriff. Secondly, as I have already explained, a reference to a tribunal chairman would cause difficulty because the term is not defined in statute. That is why section 2(1B) of the bill gives ministers an order-making power to specify the tribunals in which practitioners can be taken to be acting in a judicial capacity and therefore cannot be the subject of a conduct complaint to the commission. Section 2(1A)(b)(iv) refers to "any judge (including a sheriff)" because the definition of "judge" in the 1980 act does not apply in the bill. I invite David Davidson to withdraw amendment 10 and not to move amendment 211.

I do not support amendment 17 because it is unnecessary. A complaint that is made under section 6A(1A) is a complaint that the commission has determined under section 4(1) to be either a conduct complaint or a service complaint. Under section 4(1), the commission also determines whether the complaint constitutes separate complaints that fall into more than one category and, if so, which categories those complaints fall into. Amendment 17 assumes that the mention of complaints in section 6A(1A) refers back to the receipt of a complaint under section 2, which relates to the preliminary step of sifting out complaints that the commission determines to be frivolous, vexatious or totally without merit, and thus fails to take account of the section 4 stage. I invite the member to withdraw amendment 17. I am content to support amendment 18. Mediation clearly cannot continue if either party withdraws from the process, so it might be argued that an express requirement on the commission to discontinue mediation in that situation is unnecessary. However, I have no objection to the matter being made clear in the bill for the avoidance of doubt.

There are a number of amendments in the group, so I ask members to forgive me for the length of my comments. The amendments are consequential on work that was done at stage 2 and will make the bill consistent. Amendment 20 is a small technical amendment. At present, section 7(3) refers to a proposal for assessment of a services complaint being made by the commission under section 7(1) but, in fact, such a proposal would be made under section 7(2). Amendment 20 will simply substitute a reference to the correct subsection. Amendment 30 will clarify that a report on a complaint that has been dealt with by mediation may be published only once the mediation has been completed. It is only once the mediation is concluded that there could be an outcome that the complainer and the practitioner accept, so it is only once that stage has been reached that the commission should be able to consider publishing a report of the mediation under section 9A. Amendment 76 will remove a stray reference to limited liability partnerships. Other references to limited liability partnerships were removed from the bill at stage 2 on the basis that such partnerships are simply a species of incorporated practice. Therefore, there is no need to refer to them separately from incorporated practices. Amendment 79 is a technical amendment. Section 34 contains various definitions that generally apply only to part 1. Sections 35 to 35E are in part 2, so there is a wider problem with the use of a range of expressions in sections 35 to 35E that are defined in section 34. Amendment 79 will resolve the difficulty by applying the section 34 definitions.  Section 38A will insert new provisions into section 54 of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980, which, as amended, will deal with appeals to the Court of Session in professional misconduct cases against individual solicitors; in cases of breach by an incorporated practice of any provisions of the 1980 act or of a professional rule regulating such practices; and in cases in which a disciplinary proceeding follows the conviction of an individual solicitor or incorporated practice of certain offences. Such appeals would therefore always involve an individual solicitor or incorporated practice and not a firm of solicitors. Therefore, the reference to "a firm of solicitors" in line 26 on page 42 should be removed, which is what amendment 152 will do. Amendment 153 is a minor amendment that will ensure that proposed new section 45(4A) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 will apply whenever a solicitor is restricted from acting as a principal, and not only when that solicitor has been so restricted by order of the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal under section 53(5) of the 1980 act. For instance, a solicitor might be so restricted as a result of an order of the court. Amendments 171 and 172 will extend slightly the powers of the Scottish ministers to make, by order, incidental, supplemental, consequential, transitional or saving provisions in connection with the bill. The powers will be extended to cover provisions that give full effect to the bill or any aspect of it. That may be useful in connection with the role of the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal. For example, it will enable provision to be made by subordinate legislation to adapt the tribunal's procedures to deal with any major increase in case law that is generated by the new complainer appeals that are provided for by the bill. Sections 36 and 37 of the bill as introduced contained broad powers for the Scottish ministers to modify, by regulations under the affirmative procedure, any enactment, instrument or document for the purpose of giving the council of the Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal or the Court of Session further powers as regards unsatisfactory professional conduct complaints against solicitors and other practitioners. Those were holding provisions, which it was always intended to remove once drafting of the substantive provisions that were required was completed. Those substantive provisions were inserted at stage 2 and, as a result, the broad regulation-making powers were removed, but a reference to them remains in section 49 and should also be removed. Amendment 174 will delete that reference. Amendment 199 is a minor technical amendment. Paragraph 1(2)(a)(ii) of schedule 4  substitutes certain words for the word "or" in section 3A(5)(a) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. However, the word "or" appears more than once in that paragraph, so amendment 199 will specify that it is the first use of the word that is meant. Amendment 202 will resolve a small problem that Bill Aitken pointed out at stage 2. It will clarify that proposed new section 45(4A) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 will apply only to a solicitor who has been restricted from acting as a principal and who immediately before the restriction was a sole solicitor. Those are the circumstances that are mentioned in proposed new section 45(4A). The amendment specifies that that section has no application to the circumstances that are listed in section 45(1) of the 1980 act, namely, those in which a solicitor is struck off or suspended from practice or in which the registration of an incorporated practice is revoked. Section 45(1) of the 1980 act states: "the following provisions of this section apply in these situations", which might conceivably be taken as including proposed new section 45(4A). Amendment 202 will remove any such false impression. Amendments 203 to 205 and 208 to 210 are extremely minor amendments that will simply ensure that the amendments to the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 that insert the word "Court", spell it with a capital letter, as is appropriate. Those are probably my favourite amendments of the day. Amendment 206 is a technical amendment that will bring proposed new section 45(3B)(b) of the 1980 act into line with similar powers to recover documents that are contained in sections 13 and 35A of the bill, by inserting a reference to documents that relate to any trust of which an employee of an incorporated practice is the sole trustee. Amendment 207 is a very minor amendment that will simply remove an extraneous "and" from section 45(5) of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980. Amendments 213 and 214 will remove a restriction on the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal's power to fine in the case of an incorporated practice that has been convicted of an offence, rendering it unsuitable to continue to recognise it as such a practice, or which has breached a provision of the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 or professional rules that regulate such practices. The relevant restriction on the power to fine is intended to avoid double jeopardy and will apply only where, in relation to the subject matter of the tribunal's inquiry, the offending practitioner has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty and sentenced to at least two years'  imprisonment. Clearly, the restriction can never be applicable to incorporated practices, which cannot be imprisoned, so the references to incorporated practices should therefore be removed from the restriction on the power to fine. Paragraph 1(6N) of schedule 4 will insert a new subsection into section 53 of the 1980 act, which will provide that a restriction on the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal's power to fine does not apply in relation to any element of a decision to which proposed new section 53(2)(bb) in the 1980 act applies. Proposed new section 53(2)(bb) will confer on the tribunal a power to award compensation to complainers in professional misconduct cases. As the power relates purely to compensation, it has no relevance to the imposition of a fine in any event and does not need to be excluded from the restriction on the power to fine. Amendment 219 will therefore remove that exclusion. Amendment 220 makes a consequential grammatical change to paragraph 1(6N) of schedule 4. Amendment 222 repeals subsections (2A) and (2B) of section 20 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. Those subsections confer on the council of the Law Society of Scotland the power to order a rebate of fees and outlays against a conveyancing or executry practitioner or to order that a practitioner undertake rectification work where that practitioner is found to have provided an inadequate professional service. Following the enactment of the bill, all service complaints will be dealt with by the Scottish legal complaints commission, not by the council of the Law Society. It is therefore appropriate to repeal those powers. I move amendment 20.  Amendment 20 agreed to.

I am grateful for David Davidson's kindness. Amendment 9 would remove the reference to any provision on rules made by the commission under section 23(1) as to a person's eligibility to make complaints. We appreciate Mr Davidson's concern in that regard and can assure him that the intention of the provision is directed only at the provision in paragraph 1(a)(ii) of schedule 3, under which rules may determine "the eligibility of persons to make ... complaints on behalf of other persons (whether living or not)". There is no intention to give the commission power to set other eligibility criteria that are not on the face of the bill. Having given that assurance, I  hope that Mr Davidson will withdraw amendment 9. In our view, amendment 11 is unnecessary. It reflects an unfounded concern that the provisions of section 2A might have the effect of causing the professional bodies to lose some of their responsibility for the professional conduct of their members. Accordingly, it seeks to limit the working of section 2A to service complaints and to exclude conduct complaints. Section 2A will not preclude the findings or orders of another scheme being used as the basis for a conduct complaint. It is designed to avoid overlap by providing that, when appropriate, the investigation of a complaint that relates to activities that are covered by a specified regulatory scheme is first carried out under that scheme. That does not preclude the Law Society of Scotland prosecuting if it feels that the public interest demands that further sanctions are necessary. For example, if the Financial Ombudsman Service investigates a complaint and finds that a Scottish solicitor has been responsible for serious financial malpractice, it will be possible for the Law Society to prosecute that solicitor for professional misconduct before the Scottish Solicitors Discipline Tribunal on the basis of the previous finding and any other relevant evidence adduced. If the charges are upheld, the tribunal will be able to impose its own disciplinary sanction to protect the public, such as suspending or debarring the solicitor. Amendments 12 to 14 are also unnecessary, because the bill already provides that "any person" may make a conduct complaint, so the issue of eligibility simply does not arise in relation to conduct complaints. It would be nonsense to require the commission to determine formally that a conduct complaint had been made by "any person", who was already, therefore, eligible. As regards service complaints, there is no eligibility issue when the complaint is made by one of the public office holders or bodies that are listed in section 2(1A)(b) of the bill. The only eligibility issue on service complaints is whether the person "appears to the Commission to have been directly affected by the suggested inadequate professional services". In our view, to make that decision the subject of a formal determination would be unduly bureaucratic. When there is any doubt about whether the person has been affected directly by the alleged inadequate professional services, we would expect the commission to investigate the complaint to get to the truth of the matter. If that investigation makes it clear that the complainer has not been affected directly by the services in question, the commission will be able to dismiss the complaint without further ado. Indeed, it would  not be competent for it to continue to deal with an ineligible complaint. With regard to amendments 15, 16, 19, 21, 36 and 37, section 34 of the bill already defines the term "complainer" as "the person who makes the complaint and, where the complaint is made by the person on behalf of another person, includes that other person". That means that those six amendments are superfluous, so we urge Mr Davidson not to move them.

The Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990, which covers the position of conveyancing and executry practitioners, lists conviction of a criminal offence that renders such a practitioner "no longer a fit and proper person" separately from "professional misconduct". Therefore, it is not beyond doubt that a complaint that a conveyancing or executry practitioner is "no longer a fit and proper person"  to offer conveyancing or executry services as a result of being convicted of a criminal offence would be treated as a conduct complaint. As a result, it is advisable for the bill to refer separately to the position of conveyancing and executry practitioners, as that will ensure, for the avoidance of doubt, that the new complaints handling system will definitely cover such matters. As no corresponding provision in the Solicitors (Scotland) Act 1980 raises the same question, we ask Mr Davidson to withdraw amendment 8.

The Scottish Executive and Transport Scotland are represented on the north east safety camera partnership, which aims to reduce speed-related accidents in Moray and Grampian. Transport Scotland investigates accidents on trunk roads in the area and implements route accident reduction plans. For instance, a study was commenced on the A96 early in 2005, with the final phase due for completion in 2007. The Scottish Executive works closely with a number of road safety organisations in the area, including the police and the local authorities, on road safety related issues including safety awareness.

The member raised specific points about dealing with driving offences, taking away people's keys and so on, but those are clearly reserved matters. I am sure that representations are already being made at Westminster—people keep these matters under review. A great deal can be done at a Scottish level in the way of education, enforcement and practical measures, including engineering as it relates to road safety. I assure the member that all those issues are taken seriously and that the Executive continues to have an active dialogue in Moray and Grampian, in which I know that Moray Council is also involved. We are working in partnership with local organisations, community safety organisations and the local authorities in the region to ensure that young people, who are at particularly great risk, understand about driving safely and about the consequences of dangerous driving. People should keep themselves safe, but there is also enforcement should people drive dangerously. I in no way understate the seriousness of the matter that Richard Lochhead raises, and I can assure him that it is continuously kept under review.

Figures for 2005-06 show that the number of drug and drink driving offences in Fife rose by nearly 13 per cent, an increase of 85 offences. At the Scottish level, the total number of offences increased by 2 per cent. Last year's rise in Fife, however, came after a 20 per cent fall the year before. Driving while under the influence of drink or drugs is totally unacceptable behaviour, and it will not be tolerated. We have a strong package of measures in place to tackle it, based around a combination of education, deterrence and rigorous enforcement.

Iain Smith is right. Any needless death caused by a drink-related incident is much to be regretted, and it is a challenge to understand why on earth anyone would want to get behind the wheel of a car when they have alcohol in their bloodstream. We also face the challenge of getting the message across that drink driving is unacceptable. People need to be confronted with and understand the possible consequences of such action. It is shocking that one in seven road deaths is alcohol related. We recognise the challenge that the figures represent. Huge strides forward, both in understanding and in conviction rates, have been made, but we have to continue. A drink driving campaign began on Monday this week to emphasise the consequences of drink driving. That must continue throughout the festive season and beyond to make drink driving unacceptable and to make people understand just how serious such actions can be for individual families.

My understanding is that both offences fall within the same charge. A driver has  a clear responsibility not to drive when they have been drinking or are under the influence of drugs—the charge remains the same, and the consequences can be as serious in either case. Perhaps in the past people have been less aware of and have not thought so seriously about drug driving. It is understandable that the two offences have been brought together, and we have to confront people with their responsibility not to go on to the roads in a state that makes their car a lethal weapon. We must maintain the current figures, interrogate them and challenge people's behaviour through education and the courts.

As I understand it, the police already have equipment to test for drugs. I will get more information on that and see that Mr Maxwell gets a detailed response about exactly what is available to police forces.

The festive season certainly provides the opportunity to raise the matter again. The danger is that we might begin to think that we have cracked this one, and we have to move against any complacency. We often hear people saying that we have made drink driving unacceptable so we can move on to other issues. I am not sure that, unless we are entirely vigilant, there will not be drifting. The festive season is a critical time, when people move from place to place in an atmosphere of celebration, but the message is as strong throughout the rest of the year. It is critical to educate people and make them understand the direct consequences for them if they disregard the law. People must confront their responsibility for their behaviour if it brings grief and tragedy into other people's lives.

I congratulate Karen Whitefield on the work that she has put into examining how we can best protect vulnerable retail staff from having to work on Christmas day and new year's day. The bill seeks to prevent large shops from opening for retail sales on those days. In doing so, it aims to protect retail staff from being required or pressurised to work; to enhance work-life balance for hard-working people; and to protect the special nature of those holidays in the Scottish calendar. The ban would cover shops with a floor area that is used for retail sales or display of more than 280m 2 , which is slightly larger than a tennis court. There would be exemptions for cafes, restaurants, pubs and takeaways, registered pharmacies—for the purpose of dispensing prescriptions—shops within transport hubs and shops that sell mainly vehicle fuels. The exemptions would take account of matters such as the need to travel and the  demand for hospitality services on the two days. Small grocers would not be covered and could still be open for essential supplies. Breach of the ban would be a criminal offence. Enforcement would be for the police and the courts, with a maximum fine of £50,000. I see good reasons to support the proposals, which are carefully constructed. Many retail staff already work long hours at that time of year and many already have to work at weekends, when children and other family members are at home. The two traditional holidays are precious times that are set aside for spending with families and friends, rather than the boss. Scotland has liberal trading hours and we are convinced that there is no need to have department stores and supermarkets open on these two days, as well as on all the others. In considering the bill, the Scottish Executive acknowledges the increased cross-party support for action in relation to Christmas day. We also acknowledge the unresolved debate about new year's day and that members from all parties wish to explore that matter further.

As I said, there is an unresolved debate about new year's day, and such issues can be explored further if the bill gets to stage 2. We want that process of exploration to take place and to be engaged in it with the objective of securing the best possible legislation for Scotland by balancing the various legitimate interests. We recognise that, at this stage, engagement in that process would be incompatible with a declaration of our position on the issues that are to be explored, so the Executive expects that amendments to be lodged at stage 2 that would give the Parliament an opportunity to express its views on Christmas day and new year's day separately. We also recognise that such amendments might come from back benchers, the Executive or both.

I thank Margo MacDonald for that helpful intervention. I was trying to say to Mr Monteith that his question would not be sufficient reason to kill the bill at this stage. We intend to form an ad hoc ministerial group, involving ministers from all portfolios that have a direct interest; we also intend that the group should engage with the member in charge of the bill and representatives of various political parties prior to stage 2. On that basis, ministers are prepared to vote for the bill at stage 1. I understand the concerns that have been expressed about the so-called domino effect. I am not aware of any large shops that open on Christmas day at the moment. Some, but not many, open on new year's day. However, to legislate now would let employers and employees know where they stand. Without the bill, employers may feel under pressure to open in future to compete with others who do not observe the holidays. The next step may be that employees feel pressurised to work. They may not all be contractually obliged to do so, but it is not always easy to stand up for one's rights in such circumstances. A voluntary code has been suggested as a possible way forward, but I acknowledge that it is an uncertain solution, as it might not attract widespread support or stand the test of time. The consultation on the bill suggests that most people with an opinion would prefer legislation now. It is clear that people have strong views on the debate. There are particular issues with Christmas day and new year's day. It is a temptation to make everything entirely black and white, and there is a desire to do so. Those broader issues could be explored at stage 2, but I have no doubt that they will also be explored in this debate. The committee acknowledged that there were some weaknesses in both sides' evidence on the impact on enterprise and tourism and it is important that those matters are explored further. I have outlined the Executive's position on taking the bill beyond stage 1 and I hope that members will reflect on those points when we come to the vote.

I will read the charge sheet first then let Jim Mather in. This is a serious charge. I suggest that Jim Mather has more faces than a town hall clock. Was he tailoring his comments to his audience? Did he not know what his group's position would be or was he incapable of influencing his group's position? We do not know because, despite the significant position he holds as an SNP front-bencher, he chose not to contribute at all to this important debate. He will not cover that up by referring to the amendment's opposition to business improvement districts.

It is obvious that there are tensions in members' positions on the third-party right of appeal. Jim Mather was unable to explain his position in relation to what he said to people in the business community, who believed that he was opposed to the third-party right of appeal. He is hung by his own comments. We understand the critical issue of resources. Planners, members and I have not spent all this time producing legislation not to will the means for its delivery. The system is more efficient, so we will test it. Will it make a difference or not? We had a productive meeting with COSLA this week, and  we know how critical it is that we give priority to understanding the real challenges of resourcing, to liberating planners from the grind so that they want to come into the profession and to having a system that delivers real change in our communities. Christine May asked about planning guidance. I will write to her to provide more detail on that, but I assure her that archaeological sites have nothing to fear. The culture change is a challenge, but we must all engage with it. I hope that, in supporting the bill, members will support the need to look at the planning system for what it can deliver and the need to ensure that everyone who is involved in it makes a difference so that the system works.

One of the things that I have learned in this job is that planners are human. Therefore, their energy and enthusiasm will ensure that the human dimension of planning and the crucial role of communities are recognised. I take Susan Deacon's point that there is also a challenge for stakeholders. Some of them have engaged with the process as the bill has gone through Parliament, but others were content to stand on the sidelines and shout. It is crucial that everyone who has an interest in the matter engages with the process. Sarah Boyack is correct to say that there has already been a significant amount of engagement in the Parliament and through the committee process. It sometimes felt as if everybody and their granny was at the committee when we considered the bill. There is no doubt that people engaged seriously with the process. I acknowledge the role of Sarah Boyack, who ensured that she voiced her concerns on behalf of her constituents. Sarah Boyack's amendment 156 would require ministers to report to Parliament on the implementation of the legislation, particularly in respect of actions taken by ministers and planning authorities. The Communities Committee discussed the issue in detail at stage 2. It was recognised across the committee that an important principle is involved and that it is essential to keep a careful eye on the implementation of legislation to ensure that a gap does not open up between what has been claimed and what is delivered. However, it became clear in that discussion that a single snapshot report was not the best way to address  the issue and that such a provision would be too prescriptive. We already have examples of fixed dates that were set for reporting back to the Parliament on an issue proving to be inappropriately timed. For example, we reported back on the right to buy before we got to the stage at which the changes that had been implemented in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 could be followed through. It is, of course, essential that ministers maintain an open and constructive dialogue with the Parliament on the implementation of policy and legislation in general. Parliament has a clear role in scrutinising implementation. In the case of planning, we fully intend to keep the Communities Committee, the Parliament and all interested parties up to date with progress on the many aspects of planning modernisation. There will be an extensive programme of secondary legislation, and we have responded to concerns raised by the Subordinate Legislation Committee in that regard by putting in place the safeguards that it wanted. Members will appreciate that implementation of the programme will take a number of years. However, I am happy to put on record our commitment to ensuring that, if the bill is passed, Parliament is kept properly and fully informed of progress made in implementation. I have already written to the Communities Committee to give an indicative outline timetable for implementation. As I said, much of this will come back to Parliament in the form of secondary legislation. There will also be on-going monitoring reports on the national planning framework. Many other planning documents, such as Scottish planning policies, will be discussed with the committee. We have had productive engagement in that regard. We are also happy to discuss further with the Communities Committee how best to ensure that Parliament is kept properly informed and engaged. We already have a good record in engaging—

I want to make this point, because it is crucial. In not supporting amendment 156, we are committed to engaging with all those who have an interest in the matter. The bill is the product of such engagement. Our officials are to be congratulated on the way in which they have engaged up to now. I would rather build on that approach and encourage and develop an on-going dialogue in which we continue to monitor and debate the transformation process with all interested parties through to the end. At the heart  of the bill is the fact that we want the legislation to work, so we will ensure that there is close monitoring and reporting as we progress. I identify absolutely with the views that Sarah Boyack expressed when she clarified the purpose of amendment 156, but I urge her not to be prescriptive about the timescale and to ensure that the continuing dialogue is sustained. I urge her not to press amendment 156, but to recognise that the policy position that underpins it is one that the planners will take forward.

As Karen Whitefield said, the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill was amended at stage 2 to place a duty on Scottish ministers and planning authorities to perform their functions in a manner that would encourage equal opportunities. We cannot dismiss the significance of that step, or the challenge that it presents. We acknowledge that providing equality of opportunity might mean treating some sectors of society differently from others. We have to understand that Gypsy Travellers have particular needs. I acknowledge the commitment of Cathy Peattie and members of the Equal Opportunities Committee, who have highlighted issues relating to Gypsy Travellers. Our overarching equality duty must address their needs as much it addresses as the needs of any other group. I acknowledge the challenge that that will present to planning. However, I do not agree that the situation for Gypsy Travellers is no better than it was when the Equal Opportunities Committee first considered the issue. Work is going on. An awful lot more remains to be done, but we would end up with a counsel of despair if we did not accept that some progress had been made. The package of planning reforms that we are implementing will provide greater opportunities for individuals and communities to engage in a more open and accessible planning system. As we discussed at stage 2, we have to understand that it can be difficult for some groups in the community to engage, and, clearly, that is true for  Gypsy Travellers. It will be a challenge for those who develop participation strategies to understand that community engagement is not simply about setting up a meeting in a village hall on a Friday night and then complaining when nobody turns up. Some people have a life and would not necessarily want to go to a meeting at that time. Gypsy Travellers face particular barriers, and that has to be understood in any participation strategy. We will have to engage with those groups in developing an appropriate strategy. Guidance to planning authorities on housing makes it clear that local development plans should make provision for Gypsy Traveller sites where a need is demonstrated in the local housing strategy. That strategy will be critical in understanding how to meet the needs of Gypsy Travellers. I chaired a strategic group on Gypsy Travellers and we identified several action points that will have to be addressed. Some of those action points were on housing issues. Our significant investment in site provision has given us the opportunity to take a more imaginative and creative view of the housing needs of Gypsy Travellers. I have no doubt that, if we were to falter in that work, members of the Equal Opportunities Committee and other members across the chamber would pursue the issue with us. Karen Gillon raised an issue that she has highlighted before. In planning policy and advice, we acknowledge the need to make appropriate provision to minimise the impact on disabled people and to give them access to services such as toilet facilities in shopping centres. The whole thrust of the planning package will ensure that, if such services and facilities are not being provided, that will be acknowledged quickly so that future development plans and proposals address those practical issues. That will be critical. The planning system cannot be responsible for absolutely everything, but it will create a context in which such specific needs can be addressed. I hope that Cathy Peattie will not press amendment 152. The issues in the amendment are clearly in line with the Executive's equal opportunities commitments to engage with Gypsy Travellers and to understand, through that engagement, how their needs are expressed at the local level so that those needs can be met.

Amendment 92 will enable regulations to be made under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 to govern procedures for inquiries, hearings and reviews under that act. In particular, the amendment is intended to enable comprehensive regulations to be made governing the handling by Scottish ministers of appeals and called-in applications. At present, the procedures for inquiries, hearings and written submissions are governed by different rules and regulations, reflecting the fact that only one type of procedure is normally used in any one case. Through regulations made under the bill's provisions, we intend that ministers should decide the most appropriate procedure for each appeal or call-in, depending on the nature of the material that needs to be examined and the complexity of the issues raised. Oral procedure—whether for a formal inquiry or a more informal hearing process—will normally be reserved for the complex elements of a case in which issues cannot be resolved by consideration of a party's written submissions. In many cases, the procedure will involve a combination of inquiry, hearing and written submissions. It therefore makes sense to have comprehensive regulations that cover all the options. Those who are involved with appeals—whether planning authorities, appellants or the community—will thus have a single reference document setting out their rights in the process and the obligations that they are required to meet. I therefore ask members to support the amendment.  I move amendment 92.  Amendment 92 agreed to.

In section 29, we have included powers to make regulations to provide that a fee or charge may be remitted or refunded by a planning authority. Amendment 18 seeks to clarify the circumstances in which that can take place. It is our intention that when, in the opinion of Scottish ministers or someone who has been appointed by them—which, in practice, will mean the inquiry reporters unit—a planning authority has either behaved unreasonably or caused  unreasonable delay, part or all of the fee or charge that was paid by the applicant should be refunded. We hope that that will act as an incentive to planning authorities and provide some recompense to people who are inconvenienced by such events. I ask members to accept amendment 18. Amendment 148 seeks to amend the grant-making powers in the bill so that ministers shall have due regard to the independence and impartiality of the bodies that provide planning advice and assistance. The same amendment was lodged at stage 2, when it was debated by the committee and defeated. We recognise the importance of communities having access to independent, impartial advice—that is the basis on which we fund planning aid for Scotland. However, we know that there may be circumstances in which ministers would wish to fund organisations that would not necessarily be independent or impartial. For example, the recent Executive-funded Friends of the Earth project provided advice and advocacy support to community groups and individuals to get involved in the planning process, which included support and advice on specific applications and public local inquiries. Although there are no plans to fund a similar project at the moment, agreement to amendment 148 could restrict ministers' ability to assist such advocacy projects in the future. The grant provision in the bill is intended to provide the flexibility that we require to fund a range of activities related to the support and improvement of the planning service, such as training for planners, e-planning and mediation; it is not just about providing direct support for communities. It is important to retain that flexibility and I am concerned that agreement to amendment 148 could lead to a situation in which we could not fund activities such as training or advocacy through the planning system. I therefore recommend that members reject amendment 148. I move amendment 18.

Amendments 146 and 147 are similar to an amendment that Dave Petrie lodged at stage 2, and seek to give planning authorities powers to control high hedges. I repeat what I said at stage 2: I do not want to minimise the significance of the nuisance that high hedges often cause. I recognise and am appalled by the capacity of people in our communities to grow such hedges and cause distress to people who live near them. We must take the issue seriously. The powers that the proposals would introduce are similar to the powers to control high-hedge  nuisance that are contained in the English Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003. At stage 2, I emphasised that problems relating to high hedges are a nuisance issue rather than a land use planning issue. The inclusion of high hedges in the English Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 clearly emphasises that. However, the degree to which Opposition members have been exercised by the form of antisocial behaviour that we are discussing is bizarre, as they were often hostile—or at best ambivalent—to measures that we proposed to deal with the culture of antisocial behaviour in our communities. The Executive continues to support the principle of a statutory remedy of last resort for disputes about high hedges, but we want separate legislation, such as Scott Barrie's proposed member's bill, rather than the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill to deal with the matter. It is incumbent on all members to be honest and to acknowledge that the challenge for all of us is not to identify the problem but to delineate the solutions. Scott Barrie has proposed a member's bill, but parliamentary procedures do not prevent any other member from proposing legislation. Members who are exercised by the matter could have made their own proposals. I contend that that has not happened because, although the problem is a challenge, identifying the solutions is much more difficult. That is the nub of the issue, although it does not mean that there are no solutions. We should welcome the consultation paper on Scott Barrie's proposed bill. Christine Grahame's amendment 147 characterises the challenge that we face. She talked about a planning officer just coming along. We want an efficient system, the best use of resources and enforcement rather than a cycle in which a high hedge is assessed, cut down and another assessment is required when the hedge grows again. A difficult problem is involved, but we know what it is. Scott Barrie's consultation paper is an opportunity for all of us to consider how such matters should be addressed. Therefore, I recommend that members reject amendments 146 and 147.

It is safe to come back now, Mr Mather.

Section 23A is an important section because it addresses the concern in local communities that, if conditions are not enforced and there are no consequences, a vicious downward spiral is created and people have less and less faith in the system, no matter what conditions are applied. There has been consensus on the desire to address enforcement, which is why we established our position on fixed-penalty notices. Provision for ministers to set higher fines for fixed-penalty notices is already provided for in proposed new sections 136A(11) and 145A(11). At stage 2, I made clear our intention that the level of fine would reflect previous contraventions of planning controls. Indeed, we propose to go further than Mr Harvie and consider not only previous fixed penalties, but other enforcement action, such as prosecution for breach of an enforcement notice. Members will recall from the stage 1 debate that we do not want businesses simply to write in fixed-penalty notices as an add-on cost and that such fines are not a replacement for prosecution, which will remain an option. Amendments 136 to 139 are therefore unnecessary, and I urge members to reject them. Amendment 154 would, in effect, enable planning authorities to refuse planning permission on the ground that the developer had in the past been the subject of a fixed-penalty notice for a breach of a planning enforcement notice. We do not believe that such a measure would be appropriate, justifiable or even legally enforceable, and we are keen that the issue be addressed in guidance. It would not be appropriate to create a situation in which a person's entitlement to develop his or her property is determined not on the merits of the application but on other, unrelated matters. We acknowledge members' concerns about developers who conduct themselves inappropriately, but I urge members to reject amendment 154. Amendment 161, which Sylvia Jackson has lodged on behalf of the Subordinate Legislation Committee's, would ensure that the regulations issued under proposed new sections 136A and 145A to set the levels for fixed-penalty notices would be subject to the affirmative procedure. It is  our intention to introduce a scale of fixed penalties that reflects a developer's previous track record on complying with planning controls. I recognise that members have been concerned about the lack of detail on those matters in the bill, but it is more effective for such detail to be included in secondary legislation, to allow for amendment at a later date. However, we accept that there is much interest in the content of the regulations and, as a result, I would be happy to bring them forward through the affirmative procedure. Therefore, I recommend that members accept amendment 161.

This debate is serious and important and anyone who is under the illusion that this idea has simply popped up at the last minute—as I think I heard someone say on the radio this morning—has not engaged in the kind of discussions and conversations that I have had, particularly on the issues that Jackie Baillie, Sarah Boyack and Pauline McNeill have raised. Everyone in the debate has acknowledged the huge challenges that we face and the major concerns that have been raised. It has been argued that the system does not strike the right balance between the applicant and the community that is affected by the application and that, therefore, some mechanism should be available at the end of the process. However, I contend that the bill, which has been shaped by the Communities Committee, brings together a strong package that strikes the balance that we are all seeking between the rights of applicants, developers and those who want to create the infrastructure that we want in our communities, and the rights of those communities. Dennis Canavan says that, with the bill, we are standing with big business; I am standing with the Scottish Trades Union Congress on this matter and I am happy to do so. We want all developers and planning authorities to recognise that their actions impact on local people. The bill is designed to help them to face up to that reality and to engage consistently across Scotland. That is why our proposals focus on securing meaningful community engagement at the front end of the process both in development planning and in early engagement in applications, with rigorous enforcement of any decisions that are taken. That view was reinforced at stage 2. We believe that planning authorities should focus their available resources on where they will make a difference. Indeed, as we said time and again yesterday, we recognise that our democratically elected local authorities must take responsibility for ensuring that their decisions are taken openly and accountably and in the interests of the areas that they represent. All the amendments in this group should be considered in that light. We believe that the proposals in amendment 123, for a community right of notification, and in amendments 129 to 133, for a third-party right of appeal, would significantly disrupt that critical balance for no real benefit. Our view is that the introduction of additional procedures and complexity at the end of the process would not improve the quality of decision making but would add to the delay and uncertainty that we want to tackle. In addition, it would undermine the democratic role of local  authorities and would fail to give communities social and environmental justice. As we have said before, it would reward strong communities and punish weak ones. Amendment 123, in the name of my colleague Jackie Baillie, proposes the introduction of a community right of notification procedure, which some people support as a compromise to ease the debate on appeal rights. However, the proposal presents difficulties. First, it would introduce more formal procedures and more delay into the planning system. Under the system that we propose in the bill, the key controversial cases will be notified to ministers. For those cases, the community right of notification procedure would not be relevant and would not give community bodies any meaningful extra input into the system. The proposed procedure would make a difference in cases in which a community disagreed with the local authority's judgment that an application need not be notified. In those circumstances, no one can tell me that we would not be opening up the opportunity for a huge range of applications to be notified on the ground that communities thought that notification was deserved. There would be no one to mediate or to make a judgment on such matters at local level. The procedure would come in when a local authority was not to be trusted on the notification responsibilities with which it had been charged and it would mean that the role of elected local authorities in taking reasoned judgments on behalf of their communities would be significantly undermined. All the evidence suggests that local authorities are almost overcautious and that they notify when they think that a proposed development qualifies for notification. Secondly, the proposed procedure would reduce the incentive for communities, developers or local authorities to engage seriously in the early stage of the process. We know that some bodies are not keen on such engagement. Under amendment 123, a community body, without having to prove that it represented a significant body of opinion, could simply take the decision out of the local authority's hands and allow the minister to judge whether the decision should be made at the centre. Our aim is to reduce the procedural complexity and delay that plague the current system, and to challenge people to engage at an early stage. Amendment 123 does not achieve either of those aims, nor does it assist the process of modernisation of the system, so I urge Jackie Baillie to seek to withdraw it. Amendments 130, 131 and 132, in the name of Sandra White, together with amendment 129, in the name of Patrick Harvie, seek to introduce into the planning system a form of third-party right of appeal. Amendment 133, in the name of Dennis  Canavan, seeks to introduce a slightly more open form of third-party right of appeal. Those amendments are unnecessary and unwelcome. Dennis Canavan almost hit the nail on the head when he said that we do not want to provide a charter that would allow every nimby in the country to get support, but the problem is how we define what a nimby is. From where I am sitting, it sometimes seems that people's attitude is, "I am not a nimby, but everyone who disagrees with me is." We must confront that challenge when we address the planning process. It is understandable that at both stage 1 and stage 2 the Communities Committee rejected the arguments in favour of third-party right of appeal. The Executive has carefully considered the arguments for and against its introduction. Although we recognise the depth of feeling that exists, we do not think that TPRA is the way forward. I am baffled by the sudden appearance of amendments from Rosemary Byrne at such a late stage. She has popped up at the last minute to discuss an issue that the rest of us have engaged with fully. She wants to leave appeal rights exactly as they are, which is absurd. No one agrees that that is desirable. We have always said that a crucial part of restoring trust in the planning system is to ensure that, as far as possible, appeals are limited to reviews of the original decision so that applicants cannot introduce material that should have been available to the planning authority and the local community. We want to prevent people from abusing the first-party right of appeal but, for some bizarre reason, Rosemary Byrne wants to stop us. On amendment 85, people can already make their case to us about why they think that an application should be called in by ministers. We have already taken into account the issues that amendment 85 seeks to address. It would simply duplicate and complicate existing provisions. With the leave of the Presiding Officer, I want to make an important point about amendments 124 and 127, in the name of Euan Robson. We understand that some members want to enhance some of the ministerial notification requirements by including them in the bill. That is the intention behind amendments 124 and 127. However, they would oblige ministers to call in all planning applications that involved development proposals that were contrary to the development plan or in which the planning authority had some interest. I know that that is not the intention of Euan Robson and other members who have an interest in the issue. Decision making would be centralised not just for a small number of contentious development plans but for a host of minor and inoffensive proposals. That would cut across  everything that members said yesterday about the role of local authorities and local democracy. Many more applications would be called in by ministers. However, we acknowledge Euan Robson's concerns and understand why some people are worried about the way in which some planning applications are handled. We have already made clear our commitment to enhancing the scrutiny of local authority interest developments and departures from development plans. Planning authorities must carry out a range of developments in the exercise of their duties. In addition, they own significant amounts of land, which might sometimes be needed for new development. It is essential that councils respect the formal process and the inherent fairness of the planning system and that they treat any proposal in which they have an interest openly and in the same way that they would treat any other proposal. On 13 September, I said to the Communities Committee: "planning authorities will be required to notify other applications, including certain local authority interest cases".—[ Official Report , Communities Committee , 13 September 2006; c 3928.] I confirm that planning authorities' requirement to notify will go beyond the existing categories of notifiable applications. As I said at the time, that requirement will be backed up by the full force of the law. Development plans are central to shaping future development in all our areas, so it is reasonable and, indeed, essential to expect that planning decisions will be taken in accordance with those plans. However, sometimes departures from them are necessary and it is vital that they are scrutinised carefully. Our policy and proposals are clear. When a local authority intends to permit an application in which it has an interest, but that application either constitutes a significant departure from the development plan or faces a substantial body of objections, the authority must first notify Scottish ministers, who will consider whether to call it in. I believe that what we are suggesting will meet the demands of Euan Robson and will avoid the dangers that the amendments unintentionally present. We are committed to scrutiny in those circumstances, which is far more proportionate than the suggestion that ministers should call in every application that met the proposed criteria. I urge Euan Robson not to move amendments 124 and 127. In summary, it is fundamental to the success of the planning modernisation package that we retain the focus on ensuring that local authorities, local communities and applicants work together from  the outset to achieve sustainable outcomes. We do not want to let anyone off the hook in the early stages of the process. The challenge of meeting the participation standards is written into the process. Developers will not get away with ticking a box. I urge members to recognise that the balance of the package of measures that the bill offers, which has been shaped by the committee, will give comfort and support to local communities in shaping their environments and to local authorities in exercising their crucial role. It will also provide the opportunity for the planning system to deliver the economic development and transformation of our communities that we all wish to see.

Amendments 23 to 26 and 29 to 31 relate to planning legislation that commenced earlier in the year, to apply planning acts to the Crown. In bringing planning controls to bear on the Crown, new provisions were needed to accommodate the Crown's responsibilities. In  particular, a new procedure was introduced for developing departments in certain circumstances to apply directly to the Scottish ministers for planning permission, for example, if the relevant Government department had certified that the development was of national importance and was required urgently. The amendments will apply several of the provisions in the bill to cases in which applications are made directly to the Scottish ministers. The provisions in question relate to the making of regulations or a development order as to the form and content of planning applications, the variations of planning applications, pre-application consultation with local communities and related provisions on declining to determine applications. It is unlikely that we would apply the provisions on pre-application consultation to such urgent applications, as the point of the latter is to reduce the time in reaching a decision when a project of national importance is required urgently. However, we would prefer to retain a level of flexibility at this juncture. The provisions for developments of national importance that are required urgently should not be confused with the procedures for national developments, which will be introduced as part of the new planning hierarchy under the bill. Although there may be some overlap in the nature of the developments in question, the procedures address different issues. The provisions on national developments are about ensuring that developments of national and strategic importance are addressed in the statutory plans that will lead the planning system and that applications for such developments are brought to the attention of ministers and may be expedited if necessary. The urgent applications procedure is to deal with circumstances that may arise when a development of national importance is required urgently. I reassure members who were not involved in the discussions on urgent Crown applications to ministers that the consideration of urgent applications will still involve the relevant planning authority and local communities. I ask members to support amendments 23 to 26 and 29 to 31. I move amendment 23.  Amendment 23 agreed to.

I hope to be helpful. Amendments 118 and 119 are contingent on amendment 120. However, amendment 120 is fundamentally flawed in that it is based on the mistaken premise that section 7 relates to variation of planning permission previously granted, when in fact it relates to variation of planning applications under consideration by the planning authority or the Scottish ministers. On that basis, I do not propose to examine the other problems with the detail of amendment 120 and simply recommend that it, and its associated amendments, be rejected.

I hope that this group of amendments is non-controversial, given that they were lodged in response to issues that members raised at stage 2. The current bill provisions for the hierarchy of developments enable Scottish ministers to direct that a development in a particular class in one category may be treated as if it were in another. That will have the effect that a local development could be treated as if it were a major development and vice versa. The original intention was that the bill would include an element of flexibility in the way in which particular developments could be handled, possibly in exceptional circumstances. Following interest from the Communities Committee at stage 2 about the way in which the provision would be used in practice, we looked afresh at the proposal. We consider that there are instances that would justify ministers directing that certain local developments should attract the enhanced scrutiny that is associated with major developments, possibly because of their scale, rural nature, or the mix of proposed uses.  However, we do not envisage that there will be circumstances in which a major development should be treated as if it were a local development. That would remove the pre-application consultation and the additional scrutiny that is normally required for significant proposals, which would not be consistent with the approach that we have taken elsewhere in the reform package. For that reason, the provisions of amendments 6 and 7 combine to ensure that ministers may direct only that local developments may be treated as if they are major developments, and not the other way round. Following stage 1, the Communities Committee requested that certain regulations that are associated with the bill should follow the affirmative procedure. Although we sought to restrict the use of that procedure to the more significant strands of secondary legislation, we accept that there will be widespread interest in the way in which classes of development will be categorised under the modernised planning system as either major or local developments. Although there will be full consultation on the draft regulations that are associated with the hierarchy of developments, amendment 8 will amend section 4 to ensure that the regulations will be made under the affirmative procedure and will attract full parliamentary scrutiny, as recommended by the committee. I ask members to support amendments 6, 7 and 8. I move amendment 6.

I have nothing further to add.  Amendment 6 agreed to.  Amendments 7 and 8 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

I will do my best. For someone who represents Glasgow Pollok, I probably know more than is healthy about marine fish farming—I certainly know more than I did before the bill was introduced. I recognise the important issues that have been flagged up and the concerns that have been identified. We must be clear about the issues that we are addressing. We are striking a balance. Everyone agreed that fish farms should come into the planning system. At one stage there was an assumption that those fish farms that were already in the system and had been granted consent would have deemed consent and would move into the planning system en bloc. That has proved not to be the case, because of our European responsibilities and other anxieties. The review body will deal not with every planning application for a fish farm but with those fish farms that would otherwise have been assumed to have deemed consent. New fish farms will, of course, be subject to local authority accountability and responsibility. We know that over time there have been huge changes in marine fish farming. The regulatory framework that existed pre-1999 generated some  anxieties, but I understand that the industry has moved forward and that regulation is more rigorous.

I want to finish making my point first. As in all such matters, it is critical that we strike a balance. Not only must fish farms be subject to a regulatory framework, that framework must be proportionate. There is pressure—not just from the industry but from local communities that want it to thrive—for us to ensure that the right balance is struck. We are bringing fish farming into planning authorities' area of responsibility. However, those fish farms that would have been deemed to have consent must be reviewed, because of our European responsibilities. That is what the review body is about—it is not about watering down local authorities' responsibility. I urge members to recognise that the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill and the broader responsibilities of the Environmental and Rural Affairs Department will ensure that the regulatory framework is appropriate and responsive to the needs of local communities and to the industry. We do not wish having fish farmers seek planning permission to sterilise any part of our communities, wherever they may be; we want a thriving industry that meets the needs of the local economy, however that economy is expressed. I will now give way to Richard Lochhead.

I have finished.  Amendment 53 agreed to.  Amendments 113 and 112 not moved.

Amendments 54 to 66 ensure that a material change in the use of equipment that has been placed or assembled for the purposes of fish farming will be treated as development under the second part of section 26(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. That will be irrespective of whether the change includes any new or modified equipment. The primary aim of the amendments is therefore to ensure that where there might be the potential for significant impact on the environment, the planning authority may require a new application for planning permission, and an environmental assessment can be undertaken if necessary. Amendments 53, 67, 68, 70 and 91 will provide for the extension of the statutory planning system to existing marine fish farms. The meaning of the term "development" under section 26(1) of the 1997 act will be amended by amendment 53 to include the operation of an existing fish farm. Amendment 68 provides the mechanism to set the date when planning law will apply to existing farms. It also provides that the principal matter to be taken into account when granting planning permission is whether there will be any impact on European sites and the environment generally. It provides for a power to grant planning permission for a single development or by order for a class of development with provision to attach planning conditions to such permissions.  Scottish ministers will also be able to make regulations to seek an application and to determine its form, the documents that must accompany it, the consultation arrangements that should be in place for it and any other matters concerning the procedure for such an application. The regulations would be subject to the negative resolution procedure. Bringing fish farming under planning control is, as all members will be aware, a long-standing commitment. As statutory planning control does not currently extend into the sea, primary legislation is required. The Parliament provided for certain powers in the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003. The provisions in that act are sufficient to extend planning control to future marine fish farms and to extend modifications to existing fish farms to the 3-mile limit. The bill as it stands will extend planning controls for future fish farms to the 12-mile limit and amendments in this group will bring existing fish farms into the planning system. The review of all existing farms will consider primarily any impact that they have on European sites and the environmental impact of each farm. Under the current scheme, fish farmers are generally granted permission for 15 years, after which they need to seek a renewal of the permission. Ministers support the growth of an aquaculture industry in salmon, other fin fish and shellfish. We want an industry that is sustainable, diverse, competitive and economically viable and of which its people can be justifiably proud. Therefore, if planning permission is granted to new or existing fin fish or shellfish farms, the permission will be permanent. The provision of permanent permissions will help with long-term investor confidence and support a fragile industry. We have been working towards a workable and robust planning system for fish farming that provides long-term certainty for developers while ensuring that environmental concerns and enforcement issues are given appropriate weight. The provisions in the WEWS act and the bill—as amended by amendments 53 and 68 and consequential amendments 67, 70 and 91—will enable us to achieve those objectives. I ask members to support all the amendments in this group. I move amendment 53.

I will deal with the broad issues before dealing with as many of the critical points around the amendments as I have time to cover. I recognise that, in parts of Scotland, there are concerns about the increased concentration of HMOs and the effect on the environment, amenity and neighbourhoods. Our view, which has been formed through discussions with local authorities and others, is that the tools that are necessary to deal with the issues are, for the most part, already available to planning authorities and we do not need amendments to the bill. However, I acknowledge that there are issues for the planning system and we are extremely aware of those. Indeed, we convened a meeting of interested MSPs, local authorities and officials to talk about the way forward. Perhaps the reason why the amendments do not fit the bill and why we have not yet come up with a solution is because the issue is complex and involves balancing a range of factors including amenity, mixed communities, students' needs, affordable accommodation and HMO licensing. Pauline McNeill has been concerned about this matter for a long time and she is right to say that she attempted to deal with it in amendments to the Housing (Scotland) Bill and was told that the forthcoming planning legislation was the appropriate place to deal with it. The amendments that she and Andrew Arbuckle have lodged have provoked concerns. Indeed, as I was coming into the chamber this afternoon, Sylvia Jackson handed me a petition that expressed her constituents' concerns about the availability of affordable accommodation for students. We know that the problem is difficult, but I contend that the individual amendments do not address the problem in the correct way. It is inappropriate to set out in primary legislation the specific topics that are to be covered in development plans. That is a matter for individual  planning authorities to consider in the light of, for example, local circumstances and the Executive's planning guidance. It would not make sense to require planning authorities across Scotland to put resources into preparing policies on issues that do not arise in their area. From talking to MSPs, I know that this is a big and concerning issue in some areas but not in others. Therefore, we need flexibility and balance. As I said, there are issues about the ability of certain of the amendments to deliver the policy aims that have been identified. I do not have time to go through all of them.

The member will know that I am something of an advocate of the registration of private landlords and believe in the importance of them taking their responsibility seriously. HMO licensing, the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 and, in particular, private landlord registration play a critical role. I know that the City of Edinburgh Council has been proactive in ensuring that landlords have appropriate information about what they can do. The information that is provided by landlord registration allows us not only to develop further our guidance in this area but to make contact with landlords and work with them on a broad range of issues. We know that this issue is of concern to people and I recognise the concerns that lie behind the amendments. However, I do not accept the scaremongering and hostility that have motivated some people. Planning has a role to play in dealing with a number of the issues around increasing concentrations of HMOs in certain areas, but we must also acknowledge its role in ensuring that there is adequate provision to meet the full range of housing needs, which includes HMOs. We must also recognise the importance of getting the various bits of the system—licensing, registration and the planning system—to work together in a joint endeavour to deliver appropriate accommodation that does not impact inappropriately on local communities. The planning guidance that we intend to publish on HMOs will cover local development plan policies, the interface with the HMO licensing regime, development management and planning enforcement. However, I do not believe that we should require every planning authority to produce a policy on an issue that might not be relevant in  their area. We should not require planning permission for every HMO regardless of the circumstances, extend planning controls to the internal arrangements of flats or houses, or extend planning enforcement powers to revoke licences that were granted under other legislation. I assure everyone in the chamber that, in publishing the planning guidance, we will address the points that have been raised and the concerns that prompted them. There will be further opportunities for MSPs and those who have lobbied them to ensure that the guidance meets both the needs of people who live in HMOs and the need for mixed, sustainable communities.

I just did not say what the quality of it would be.

I share Patrick Harvie's joy at being here at stage 3—still having a pulse in my body is probably a bonus. I welcome the opportunity to contribute to a discussion that encapsulates, to some extent, clear threads that ran right through stage 2 deliberations on the bill: the balance between local decision making and central decision making, the authority of decisions and the stage at which decisions are made. I recognise the significance of the points that have been made, particularly by Iain Smith. It was stressed at stages 1 and 2 that the quick establishment of effective joint working arrangements between planning authorities is critical to the success of our proposed strategic development plans. Amendments 98 to 107 are all based on the principle that there should be greater discretion for planning authorities to decide whether to form a strategic development planning authority and when to prepare a plan. Although we accept that co-operation is always better than compulsion, we argue that our approach is appropriate. Amendment 98 and consequential amendments 100 to 106 would allow authorities to decide whether to form a strategic development planning authority, and they would remove the ability to place a clear and immediate requirement on a group of authorities to work together to prepare a plan and to direct, if necessary, that employees of a particular authority be assigned to manage and prepare the plan. We consider that removal of those provisions would increase the likelihood of disagreement and delay. We want the debate between authorities to focus on where the boundaries will lie and on what key issues face each area, not to falter on deciding who should be involved. At the other end of the scale, an amendment that was lodged at stage 2 by Jackie Baillie sought to put in place a statutory requirement for the authorities to form a joint committee for strategic development planning. Although that amendment was withdrawn, it signals that there are two very different perspectives on the matter. I strongly believe that our proposals achieve the right balance between prescription and discretion, and I consider that they offer the best opportunity to get plans in place quickly and effectively. Amendment 99 and consequential amendment 107 seek to remove the provision for ministers to require a group of authorities to prepare a strategic development plan at a specific time. Given the new requirement to prepare strategic development plans on a five-yearly basis, we do not think that the provision will be used often, but it remains a useful backstop should a national issue  arise that requires a quick review of the plan. Amendments 99 and 107 are also unhelpful. I am aware that section 2 of the bill has raised a number of concerns in a number of areas—particularly, but not exclusively, in Fife—about which authorities will be involved in the new strategic development planning authorities, what the boundaries will be and how the joint working arrangements will operate. Some of those concerns are founded on a feeling, which has been expressed in Parliament, that the city-region approach is not the best way to deal with land-use planning or service provision in general. There are also concerns about the impact on outlying areas. The bill is not about taking away powers from specific authorities or areas: in fact, we believe that the proposals offer some authority areas, such as Fife, significant benefits through their being able to influence planning in the wider regions of which they are part. It cannot be right for decisions that affect Fife to be taken by authorities in Edinburgh or Dundee. What is needed, however, is collaboration to address common problems with the interconnection of areas: areas must engage collaboratively with their neighbours and not be dominated by them. Our approach is designed to avoid any one authority dominating the situation. It is a matter of ensuring that there is a formal forum for authorities in the wider regions to collaborate on shaping the overall planning strategy through recognition of the critical and supportive relationship in both directions between the cities and the neighbouring towns and countryside. We are aware of the tensions between the power of cities and the feelings of people in what have been described as outlying areas. Those tensions can also be felt in the cities.

We have emphasised that all those involved have to take account of all the points that are made across the board, and that there must be parity and respect, as has been identified. We acknowledge that the primary relationship on planning matters must be between communities and the council that represents them, so our guidance will require community engagement in preparation of plans and full engagement in, and endorsement of, the plans by the constituent member authorities of each joint board. I therefore believe that the new strategic development planning approach will ensure that the plans look more effectively beyond local  authority boundaries and that the new requirements for plans to contribute to sustainable development will require that all issues be examined and all impacts be assessed in order to deliver benefits throughout each area. The bill does not define what the groups of authorities should be for any strategic development plan—that will be a matter for secondary legislation. I confirm, as I stated at stage 2, that we are fully committed to further detailed discussion with authorities on draft designation orders. I stress that ministers will listen to the range of views before deciding what the groups should be. It is then for those groups to determine the boundaries of the plans. In some cases, authorities may want to be included as a whole, but in others they may consider that only part of the area should be included. That decision will, in the first instance, be for the group of authorities. I stress that the bill does not prevent any of those boundary options from being developed. I give the assurance that the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill will not be used as an opportunity to drive forward changes to other organisational structures, such as local enterprise companies and health boards, or as an opportunity for wider discussions about public service reform. The bill is about putting in place effective land-use planning arrangements that reflect reality. I reassure members about the purpose of strategic development plans and our desire to see the establishment of effective working arrangements. In that regard, I see Iain Smith's amendments in particular as important reminders of the care that we must exercise to secure transparency, accountability and the necessary balance. However, I believe, for the reasons that I have outlined, that his amendments, although they were lodged with the best of intentions, are not necessary. I therefore invite Iain Smith to withdraw amendment 98 and not to move the remainder of his amendments. Amendment 47 is a repeat of Donald Gorrie's amendment at stage 2. It seeks to require ministers to consult authorities before designating the new strategic development planning authorities, and to give Parliament the final say in deciding which authorities are and are not included. As I have said, we shall ensure that authorities and others have every opportunity to make known their views on the draft designation orders for the new strategic development planning authorities. We believe that it is right for Scottish ministers to lead the process and to have the opportunity to listen to all views before they decide on the final groupings. I therefore recommend that members reject amendment 47.

I welcome the opportunity to sum up this very important debate, which reminds us of one of the critical issues that we discuss and have to address. I will reply to some of the points that have been raised—I will not be able to deal with them all, but I am happy to pursue those that I do not cover at a later stage—before I make my own comments. We will not support Christine Grahame's amendment. The figures she used are not accurate. The figure for the year she identified is 425 refuge places. As we have indicated, there has been support for more than 600 new or improved places. We acknowledge that there is an issue with refuge numbers. There is also a challenge for mainstream services to deliver for women. Increasingly, women do not particularly want to go into refuges, because attitudes have changed. Women need refuge places, but refuges are not the only way in which we can support them.

I can get back to Christine Grahame on the detail of how the statistics are managed. I agree that there is a challenge for all those who are working to support women who are experiencing violence to understand the particular issues of safety and security that they and their families require to be addressed. Christine Grahame asked how we analyse the figures from responses to adverts and so on. We interrogate the data. The national group on violence against women is considering what further data we need to improve service provision. We will report on that work in detail. We also have an important job to do in relation to qualitative research, through talking to women. I do not know whether anyone else gets the ASSIST bulletin weekly, but interesting qualitative research can come out of that kind of work, where women talk about their needs, how they express them and how they feel about the services that are provided to them. Significant funding goes to women through the violence against women fund. We have to challenge the attitudes of mainstream organisations in relation to supporting women. The fact that the numbers are increasing is concerning. We are certainly not complacent about that and we need to interrogate the figures further. There is an issue about greater understanding that support is available and that there is support for women other than simply those who have bruises. Significant work has been done on psychological abuse. Women of an older generation to whom I have spoken have told me that their generation had nowhere to go. It is understandable that the problem is more visible, because we talk about it more and there is a greater understanding of it. I assure members that there is no complacency about that. Christine Grahame's amendment refers to the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. I agree that it is essential that we continue to review all the legislation that we put in place. Legislation is the starting point, not the end point. We work hard to keep people informed about the protections that legislation provides, but we are more than happy to monitor that and I am sure that the committees of the Parliament would wish to do so, too.

The remarkable thing about violence against women is that it is no respecter of place, class or sobriety. With regard to alcohol being the cause of violence against women, it is remarkable that we are expected to believe that men can manage to contain themselves when they are in the pub but cannot contain themselves when they go home. Very often, alcohol is used as an explanation when, in fact, it is not. Abuse can be perpetrated by men who are entirely sober as well. We have to challenge our young men who are, perhaps, moving towards behaviour that involves being oppressive and violent towards young women. I recognise the significance of the points that Carolyn Leckie made about the justice system. My only concern was the implication in the amendment that nothing has been done. In fact, significant work has been done around the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Act 2005. Obviously, we have to keep monitoring that. We recognise how terrible it is that a survivor of male violence can have that perpetrated further on them by the legal system. I expect Carolyn Leckie to acknowledge that there has been movement. We know about the rape review, as a result of which there were 50 recommendations. The implementation of those recommendations is under way but the major reforms will take up to three years to put in place. The First Minister has referred the law of rape and sexual offences to the Scottish Law Commission, which gives us an opportunity to change the legal framework. I hope that Carolyn Leckie will not underestimate the importance of that, just as I do not underestimate the significance of the points that she has made. I also acknowledge what Maureen Macmillan said about the progress that has been made and how difficult it was, particularly in the early days, to achieve it. She also highlighted how much of an achievement it has been to make violence against women a political issue at all. We talk about the fact that we will support women with mobile phone numbers that will not appear on a telephone bill. That seems to be as good an example as I can think of of how horrendous the problem that we are dealing with is. There are women who are so terrified of the man they are living with that they have to ensure that the mobile phone number that will give them protection and safety is not visible to that man. To Shiona Baird, I say that we are supportive of Zero Tolerance's respect campaign and pleased at the number of local authorities that are taking up the pack and training. We are working with  Zero Tolerance, Scottish Women's Aid and the violence against women partnership to do vital work in schools. In fact, we fund a number of projects, including the Eighteen and Under project in Dundee, which she talked about. The issue of boys seeing violence and, in turn, becoming violent was something of a theme this afternoon. We have to be clear that one of the lessons that we learn from talking to young people is how helpless, frustrated and angry boys feel when they are unable to protect their mothers and how those feelings continue into adulthood. I do not think that we should diminish that experience by implying that it makes them become violent in later life. I do not think that the evidence suggests that that is the case. Carolyn Leckie said that our motion marks a shift in our approach because it talks about "male violence". I do not know about anybody else, but that does not signal a shift in my position and I do not think that it signals a shift in the Executive's position. It is important to identify the problem if we are going to eradicate it. If we do not understand that the overwhelming pattern of domestic abuse and violence involves males perpetrating violence on females, we will never get rid of it. We recognise that there is a consensus in this Parliament, but we are also saying difficult and challenging things about the nature of our society. Certain things have to be challenged if we are to have a society of which we can be proud. I want to finish on a positive note. We want to celebrate how far we have come and acknowledge the remarkable successes of the volunteers Maureen Macmillan and others have highlighted. They saw a problem, identified the need, understood what caused that need, determined that that need would be met and not only delivered support and care to women through the practical delivery of refuge spaces and so on but rose to the challenge of making that a political element in our society. My upbringing made me a socialist, but it was an understanding of male violence that made me a feminist. I saw that it did not matter how clever or smart a woman was or whether she had the vote, because if she could be oppressed by male violence she would be denied her human rights. We must celebrate the survivors of domestic abuse and male violence who made it a political issue. I celebrate the work of Scottish Women's Aid, Rape Crisis Scotland and the national domestic abuse helpline volunteers. We imagine them working in a call centre, but in fact they sit in their own homes and bring the pain and suffering of other women into their homes, giving them comfort whenever it is required. All those organisations support women, understanding and  focusing on delivery. They are to be commended for that. Government and agencies at every level, too, must understand how they should support women and how women experience violence from men. Sometimes, we may think it odd to talk about male violence against women, but the police, the health service and teachers all understand that the violence is hugely—overwhelmingly—perpetrated by men against women. It even passes the soap opera test: there is no longer a soap opera—whether "Coronation Street" or "Eastenders"—that has not addressed the issue of violence against women. We recognise it for the challenge that it is to a decent society. We in the Parliament are clear that we need to change the justice system and the way in which support and protection for women are delivered. We also have to challenge the attitudes that underpin violence against women, which are to do with the roles of women and men in society. The Parliament and the Executive have—and have played—a critical role in that. Today we celebrate the volunteers who saw the problem and demanded change. The progress that we recognise has been made over the past 30 years has been theirs, and we congratulate them on it.

Both a theoretical debate and a real debate are taking place. I know which side I am on; I want to focus on the needs of tenants. At the time of stock transfer in Glasgow, Kenny Gibson—who used to be an MSP for the Glasgow region and was previously a councillor there—said that, despite people's reservations about stock transfer, he did not have it in his heart to tell his constituents to vote against their own interests. Tommy Sheridan had it in his heart to urge people to do that, but they disregarded him. We must think about the choices that people in communities now face. I say to people in Inverclyde and Highland that there may be an opportunity for some to give a theoretical bloody nose to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in a theoretical debate, but that after that theoretical bloody nose has been given the caravan will move on and people will remain with the challenge of houses with very high rent and poor levels of investment. That is unacceptable. We are giving people a choice, with no downside. Sometimes there is a downside, but in this circumstance there is not. As Tommy Sheridan said, in my constituency of Glasgow Pollok people got a better offer and voted for it. They are now living in communities that have been transformed by that better offer. They are living in mixed communities because, as Linda Fabiani said, housing associations generate surpluses, ideas, imagination and creativity in local communities and are able to make a difference. Debt write-off is significant expenditure. I know that as a general rule Thursday mornings tend to be quite expensive for the SNP, but is it committed to the write-off of £2 billion of debt? Where would the money to fund that come from? The chancellor has said that he will write off the debt, but that it is in the interests of the public purse to ensure that that debt does not regenerate. We know that we have residually high rents in the social rented sector not because rents are attached to the value of the property but because there are other pressures on budgets. I remember the debate in the 1980s about jobs versus rent levels and the consequence of that. It is important for housing to be able to focus on housing decisions. That is on offer to people in local communities. Much has been said about the GHA. First, there will not be 63 organisations. There are already substantial housing associations in Glasgow, so the figure of 63 is a myth. Secondly, the issue is not money alone. There is £1.6 billion-worth of  investment that is going into Glasgow, including support for owner-occupiers. When Frank McAveety was a councillor in Glasgow, we could only dream about such sums; the idea that people would invest in housing in that way was a fantasy. I say to the SNP that Alex Neil's notion that the answer to the problems in Glasgow is £700 million suggests to me that he is asking the wrong question. I do not accept that the SNP believes that there is a £700 million funding gap. All that that claim does is undermine commitment to second-stage transfer. I have to laugh at Sandra White. She is not in favour of stock transfer, but she argues that when it has happened we must have second-stage transfer. Given that she opposed the initial proposal as privatisation, it is bizarre and illogical for her to say that she is now disappointed because stock transfer is not local enough. That is irrational in the extreme. I will finish by making an important point to people in Inverclyde and Highland. There is a stock transfer proposal and policy, but the strength of it is that it is locally expressed. That is exactly the point that Patrick Harvie made. The Inverclyde plan is designed to meet the needs of people in Inverclyde. It provides for 1,000 new homes and a doubling of the budget for adaptations to allow older people to stay in their homes, and takes account of the need of older people, in particular, for security. In Highland, where the challenges are different, the emphasis is on energy efficiency. The plan is very much in tune with the Highlands' commitment to community liberation and community buyout; it is exactly in line with the culture of people in the Highlands. Plans should be developed and created locally, with tenants not as dupes but as people who understand the hard choices that need to be made and who take the lead in saying that this is the opportunity for them to make a difference in their communities. I ask people in Inverclyde and Highland not to listen to the pernicious lies that they are told about privatisation. They should look at the investment that is promised, make a judgment on the basis of need in Highland and Inverclyde, and disregard the theoretical opportunity for some to make a headline in the short term. Those people will not live with the consequences, but tenants certainly will.

I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in the debate. We all know about the importance of housing and the challenges that the issue presents. We need to help young people to meet their aspirations to own their homes—such aspirations are especially challenging for first-time buyers in areas of economic prosperity—but it is crucial that we offer people a range of housing options at different times in their lives. We recognise that being able to rent one's home is a legitimate option and that it is important that we provide good housing and sustain high-quality homes in strong communities. The SSP motion suggests that we have been labouring under a number of illusions. It is clear that we are all in need of re-education. I invite Frances Curran to come with me to explain to local people in Darnley that, far from having their area transformed—from a place that no one wanted to live in and that people wanted to get away from—into a highly desirable area, they have been the victims of Rachman landlords. Perhaps she could tell the tenants of Dormanside in my constituency that, rather than taking control of their housing, they have been duped and conned.

Perhaps the member would like to visit housing associations throughout Scotland to explain to them that they are really organisations that pursue profit and only imagine that they are supporting citizens advice bureaux in their work and creating apprenticeships for young people in their areas. Are housing associations deluding themselves in believing that houses are about more than bricks and mortar, which they have demonstrated by supporting local employment and training initiatives? Is it a figment of their imagination that they have been involved in business start-ups in their communities? I say to the SSP that we know that people in local communities are transforming things. The SSP would have us believe that, far from being agents of change, housing associations are agents of misery and despair. Perhaps SSP members might like to drop in at Robert Owen  House to explain that the Co-operative movement, with its democratic accountability and membership strength, is a figment of our collective imagination. They could call in at the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and the councils for voluntary service and tell social eoncomy organisations throughout Scotland that they are living in a world in which the dollar is king, that we are all capitalists now and that there are no such things as the social economy and social enterprise.

Frances Curran might like to come with me to a housing association in Lochaber and explain to a mother there with a severely disabled daughter that it is a figment of her imagination that she and her daughter live in a house that they designed to meet her daughter's needs. The fact is that if the SSP took that journey with open eyes and an open mind, it would establish something simple: the charge that housing stock transfer is privatisation is arrant nonsense. However, that charge is also a pernicious and calculated tactic. I was brought up in a private rented home, and my parents' generation understood the challenges of that kind of housing, which was a million miles away from the social rented sector in my community that is being invested in now. Anti-stock transfer campaigners deliberately invoke the folk memory of the hatred of poor private housing and the importance of what council housing represented when they spread fears that the community ownership programme is somehow privatisation. I regard it as unforgivable to create the fear that leads people in Inverclyde or Highland to feel uncertain about a yes vote that will give them certainty for the future, regardless of what is going on elsewhere. I regret that, to judge by the Scottish National Party amendment, those within the SNP who understand the role of housing associations and the strength that they bring to communities seem to have lost out. The amendment calls for an end to wholesale stock transfer, but the reality is that that is a distinction without a difference. If the issue is size, I point out that the transfers in Argyll and Bute and the Western Isles, which were whole stock transfers, were equivalent to partial stock transfers that happened in other parts of the country. Local authorities are able to decide, as some have done, to go for the option of partial stock transfer as their approach to the community ownership programme. It is necessary to lift the burden of debt to secure investment. People are entitled to certainty, which is what a yes vote allows. The SNP knows the powerful difference that housing associations can  make in communities. It knows that tenant-led housing organisations' focus on the needs of tenants, housing and local communities can make a difference, but we are led to believe that staff and tenants in Inverclyde and elsewhere are being duped. Perhaps members would like to go down to Inverclyde and tell them that. The staff to whom I spoke there are up for the opportunity that huge investment will provide and the difference that it will make to their work with tenants. Tenants understand that. They cannot wait for their central heating and windows until Frances Curran manages to get herself into an influential position and persuades Gordon Brown to write off the debt. In government, sometimes we have to make compromises. Sometimes, there is a trade-off between cost and benefit. I have supported policies that were not my perfect position, but the community ownership programme poses no such dilemma. It is not a compromise but a package that builds on the proven strength of the housing movement—tenants, staff and communities—and reinforces that good work with real investment, which will liberate communities' capacity to flourish. Tenants and staff have nothing to lose and everything to gain from stock transfer. The SNP can have a theoretical debate about debt write-off, but we are making a huge financial commitment to some of our poorest communities and if we direct the finances with staff and tenants in the lead, we will have nothing to fear. I understand the anxieties of staff at a time of change, but what a poverty of ambition Unison displays in saying, "If you don't know, vote no." I say to tenants that, if they do not know, they should go and ask those who have the information, listen to tenants who lead the campaigns and recognise what a yes vote will mean for their communities. No one has anything to fear from stock transfer as part of a huge programme of investment in local communities, and people deserve to understand the opportunities that exist for them in voting on plans that have been created within local communities and which will be delivered in those communities by those who will benefit from them most. I move amendment S2M-5104.4, to leave out from the first "calls on" to end and insert: "commends the initiatives by the Scottish Executive to increase the quantity of affordable housing in Scotland through its increased investment programme, which will deliver over 16,500 new affordable homes for rent and nearly 5,000 for low-cost home ownership by 2008, and through its Homestake low-cost home ownership scheme and its use of the planning system to increase supply; supports the principle of housing transfer to community ownership to improve the quality of existing housing where this has the support of the tenants; agrees that transfer has the potential to deliver a substantial package of benefits for tenants, including increased investment in their homes, rent guarantees and a much greater say in how their homes are  managed, and recognises that transfer is indeed now delivering substantial new investment for tenants, as confirmed by Audit Scotland."

We are developing proposals for a national voluntary accreditation scheme for residential property managers. The aim will be to encourage owners of houses with common parts to appoint property managers by giving them confidence that scheme members will meet high standards.

I would be delighted to meet Paul Martin, given his expertise in rooting into what happens in local communities and formulating the policy challenges for the Executive. I am sure that what he has to say will be informative and will help us to shape policy on a matter that is important for local communities. The accreditation scheme is voluntary on the advice of the housing improvement task force. We felt that people would be able to engage with it and that it would give them confidence. The maintenance of open spaces is important. We have addressed the matter through the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Tenements (Scotland) Act 2004, but Paul Martin may wish to note that we are currently consulting on draft Scottish planning policy 11 on sport, recreation and open space. In particular, we are considering how planning conditions can be attached to new developments to address the maintenance of open space. He might want to respond to that consultation by 3 November, but I am more than happy to meet him to discuss the issues further.

I am aware of the issues that Kenneth Macintosh raises. I recognise that they are not specific to Paul Martin's constituency and that we have probably all experienced them in our communities. Some of them are to do with people not treating their responsibilities as obligations, which needs to be addressed at an earlier stage through planning consents. There have been discussions with Hugh Henry, the Deputy Minister for Justice, on the points that Kenneth Macintosh makes on the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003, but I am more than happy to pursue them further if we can help to resolve the concerns, particularly those of people in retirement complexes, who might find the additional stress of dealing with maintenance issues unacceptable.

The duty to promote equality of opportunity between women and men, as introduced by the Equality Act 2006, is expected to come into force in Scotland in April 2007. As a public authority, the Executive, along with its agencies, is subject to that duty. Key parts of the new duty are ensuring that all new key policies and activities are assessed for their impact on gender equality and making arrangements to review key existing policies. We believe that effective equality impact assessment is key to equality mainstreaming and to the delivery of the gender duty and the other public sector equality duties. The Executive has been developing an equality impact assessment tool and guidance, which will be made available to all Executive officials to enable them to assess the impact of their policies across a number of equality strands, including gender.

It is key that we ensure that there is discussion throughout the Executive rather than just within departments. I know that members of the Equal Opportunities Committee will challenge the Minister for Communities, Malcolm Chisholm, when he discusses the budget with them in due course and talks about the practicalities of how that can be delivered.  Underlying our desire to get the budgets right is our desire to get the policy right. Today we mark the second anniversary of the establishment of the domestic abuse court and the assist service, which has liberated people to use their talents to support women who are dealing with domestic abuse through the justice system, so that they get justice and are not victimised further. We should recognise the need to put in place the budgets to match our policy commitment. We will talk about assessment tools and all the rest of it and will ensure that Executive officials talk to each other, but our commitment and energy to deliver equality for women will drive the budget—it will not be the other way round.

The Scottish Executive is providing more than £3 million per annum to the network of 56 CVSs throughout Scotland. That represents a 13 per cent increase on the previous three-year funding package.

I welcome the member's recognition of the significant support that we give CVSs. I said that the increase on the previous three-year funding package was 13 per cent, but members may wish to know that there has been a 30 per cent funding increase since 2001. That did not happen by accident; it was an active political choice to fund the CVSs, because we recognise the important services that they and the broader voluntary sector can provide locally. I am aware of the issues in North Lanarkshire. The CVS network is independent of the Government. We are keen for the services that CVSs provide locally to continue and we have funded North Lanarkshire appropriately. How it is organised is a matter for the CVS network to decide locally.

Since the central heating  programme started in 2001, 5,250 central heating systems have been installed in Mid Scotland and Fife, as at the end of September.

Far be it from me to be involved in anything that involves MSPs being plagued by anything. We acknowledged the need to go to tender for the new contract. It is essential that every penny that we spend is directed at ensuring best value, so that as many people as possible benefit from a significant programme. I remind members that in the 18 months from the beginning of October to 31 March 2008, £62.5 million of public money will be committed to ensuring that central heating is installed in people's homes. That is a remarkable amount of money, and we should not simply say, "Yes, we're spending that money, but let's talk about the difficulties with the programme." There needs to be a transition period and we are determined that it should be as seamless as possible. We acknowledge that that will involve challenges, particularly given the popularity of the programme. Scottish Gas is charged with a commitment to customer care, as was the Eaga Partnership, and installers are continually reminded that although the central heating system is free for the person who receives it, it is not free for the public purse, so everything should be done to ensure that people receive systems in an entirely acceptable way. Of course, we are happy to respond to specific problems that might emerge as the process continues.

First, I think that everyone recognises that the investment of £290 million of public money in central heating systems is not a problem, however members might try to characterise it as such. As a consequence of that huge public investment there have—understandably—been difficulties in individual cases. I have pursued such cases in the past and will be happy to do so again. However, there have  not been, as the member said, difficulties "in too many cases". There are challenges. I alluded to the fact that some installers have taken a poorer view of customer care than they would have done if the person had been paying for the system themselves. That is entirely unacceptable. Our contract with Scottish Gas emphasises the importance of customer care and responsibility. Installers of central heating systems should be insured against problems, so we must be careful, because it would not be appropriate for the public purse to pick up the cost of problems simply because it is funding the central heating programme. I am mindful of the challenges involved, and installers are challenged not to regard the programme differently. I will take up individual cases as they are raised with me. We should not allow anyone to talk down hugely significant public investment in addressing fuel poverty, which is making a difference and will continue to do so.

I am conscious of the issue that Cathie Craigie has flagged up and would be happy to discuss it in more detail if she feels that there will be particular consequences in her area. One of the important by-products of the central heating programme is that it has exposed the need to skill up our workforce to do such jobs. If anything, we may have been part of a job creation scheme in the field of central heating installation, which is to be welcomed. I know that some challenges are faced in implementing the scheme in rural areas. My understanding is that Scottish Gas is content to continue to use installers who have the necessary expertise. It is logical for them to do that, especially in the light of our desire to make the transition between providers as seamless as possible. If there are specific concerns about the transition and how it might impact on jobs locally, I would be more than happy to discuss them with members such as Cathie Craigie.

The Executive has committed to producing a renewable heat strategy for Scotland by the end of 2007. However, we are already taking action on several fronts. Communities Scotland is encouraging the use of sustainable design principles in all housing developments. For example, 100 homes in Aviemore will have heating and hot water provided by a new biomass energy centre. The Scottish Building Standards Agency is developing an online guide to sustainability in home improvements, which will include advice on energy generation and on the collection of rainwater for use in the garden. SBSA is also proposing a revision of Scottish building regulations to encourage the use of low and zero-carbon technologies in new dwellings.

Members will know about our planning modernisation proposals and I hope that they will find it in their hearts to support them. They are designed to liberate the planning system from the grind that many planners experience between communities and developers. We are liberating planning so that it can address such questions, use modern technologies, consider the way in which communities want their buildings to be more effective, and give planners the time to do all that. Obviously I am not able to comment on individual cases. The member will know that Scottish planning policy 6 deals with renewables and microrenewables and she will know that I do not have to persuade the planners within the Executive or elsewhere to work in that way. We are working on planning proposals that will liberate their intelligence and capacity to ensure that the imaginative ways in which people and communities want to address renewable heat and so on will be progressed.

We know that people who are persuaded by an argument are more likely to be committed to a course of action than those who are forced to it. A balance has to be struck between voluntary commitment and mandatory action. We have struck that balance through the Scottish Building Standards Agency's on-going work to encourage people to use sustainable design, and through the good advice that is given by Communities Scotland. We will continue to keep under review whether sufficient has been done, whether people have engaged with the issue fully and whether mandatory approaches might be necessary. However, as I said, we are mindful of the fact that engaging and persuading people is far more likely to be effective. Certainly, the Scottish Building Standards Agency's sustainability guide to home improvements seeks to capture the energy that people have shown for working in this area.

I pay tribute to Cathie Craigie's persistence and commitment in pursuing the issues. I have known Cathie since we entered the Parliament in 1999. From the beginning, she has been an advocate for deaf people and has worked tirelessly with organisations that represent deaf people to secure change. I congratulate her on securing the debate and on being an important part of the process by which the Scottish Executive has sought to address the issues that deaf people have highlighted to us. I am pleased to speak in this debate to mark learn to sign week 2006, which provides an opportunity to highlight and commend the work of the British Deaf Association and the Scottish Deaf Association to raise awareness of the barriers and  discrimination that deaf people face, to address those issues and to improve linguistic access for deaf people in Scotland through the no need to shout ... just learn to sign! campaign. That primary schools in particular are embracing the campaign is welcome. Our children can teach us much about the importance of learning to work with people throughout our communities. Their desire to learn should be an inspiration to us all. I am glad to be able to lend the Executive's support to this important campaign, which challenges us all. We know that communication is vital to full participation in society, whether at the office or going to the shops. The Executive has long recognised that deaf people in Scotland do not have the same opportunities as hearing people. To address that, we undertook a number of years ago to examine the issues around British Sign Language, particularly interpreting, which makes such a practical difference to people's lives. We have done that in partnership with organisations that represent deaf people. I am pleased to say that as part of our work to support British Sign Language in Scotland, we have recently agreed funding for the Scottish Deaf Association to support continuation of its BSL cultural development in Scotland project, which will promote deaf culture throughout Scotland and establish for the first time a focal point of cultural resources for the deaf community; increase the number of qualified deaf BSL teachers and assessors by providing training, assessment and support for them; provide sign language classes and deaf equality training in order to help remove the communication barriers that exist between the deaf and hearing communities that currently cause the isolation and exclusion of deaf people that have been highlighted in the debate; enable the SDA to organise cultural events open to all to encourage a greater understanding of deaf culture, and provide the opportunity for meaningful interactions. In addition to that support, the Executive is delivering a range of measures to improve linguistic access for deaf, deafblind and hard of hearing people. I will mention some of those. There is an important recognition and acknowledgement by the Executive and by organisations that represent deaf people that we are in this for the long term. In the long term, we wish to make a real change. I was privileged to be at the launch of the graduate diploma at Heriot-Watt University and to hear Professor Carol Padden from America speak at that event. It was a great event because it was so enthusiastic. There was such energy there and a recognition of the important work that was being done.  We are committed to doubling the number of BSL/English interpreters and are funding a number of projects to help us deliver that commitment, including £360,000 over four years to the Scottish Association of Sign Language Interpreters to work in partnership with Heriot-Watt University to develop and deliver a graduate diploma in teaching British Sign Language tutors. We are continuing to work with our BSL and linguistic access working group, of which the Scottish Deaf Association is a critical member, to discuss the issues at the heart of linguistic access in Scotland and to help develop the Executive's approach to increasing linguistic access for deaf people. In an exciting development, we are in the process of appointing a BSL and linguistic access project manager to work in the Executive for 11 months, to support our BSL and linguistic access working group. The project manager will work with the group, the wider deaf community and colleagues throughout the Executive to develop a road map for improving linguistic access in Scotland. To respond to Cathie Craigie's point about languages funding, since 2001, the Scottish Executive Education Department has provided education authorities with approximately £4 million a year to support languages learning and teaching. We have always been clear that that money can be used to support the teaching of any foreign languages—it is up to the local authorities to decide which, based on the staff they have available and the needs of their pupils. However, in offering the languages funding for 2006-07, we specifically asked education authorities to work towards providing a diverse range of languages for young people in schools so that they have the opportunity to try lesser known or community languages, such as Urdu. While the original aim of the funding was to support the teaching of foreign languages, there may be cases in which authorities could use it to support the teaching of BSL. That would be an interesting development. To help us learn more about the needs of BSL users, we commissioned research on access to public services in Scotland using British Sign Language. The research highlighted the difficulties that deaf BSL users experience in accessing public services. In particular, the research found that BSL users were almost never able to access public services directly in BSL; that the lack of available interpreters sometimes led to the use of people who were not fully qualified, which could lead to poor quality relay of information and concerns about confidentiality; and that deaf people considered that there was a lack of deaf awareness among public service employees. To inform our next steps, we are working with our BSL and linguistic access working group to consider that research along with the SASLI  training strategy group's report "Creating Linguistic Access for Deaf and Deafblind People: A Strategy for Scotland", which has been instrumental in helping us to develop the Executive's approach to increasing interpreter numbers. As an employer, the Scottish Executive is delighted to support the learn to sign initiative and will provide taster sessions for staff. Indeed, I was talking today to staff who have taken up that opportunity. We will also encourage staff to look beyond the taster sessions to undertake longer courses and we hope that the initiative will make a lasting contribution to the Executive and its staff. We recognise that there is still a long way to go and that there is a need for further action to enable deaf people to have equal linguistic access in Scotland. We are committed to working with the deaf community to ensure that we make real improvements to deaf people's lives. Learn to sign week is an important element in creating positive change. I encourage people to take part in it and to take up the opportunities that are available to learn to sign. We have worked closely with the Scottish Deaf Association and others on developing action and we aim to continue that critical partnership. We are driven and determined to continue the work. I congratulate Cathie Craigie on securing the debate and look forward to the important work that will continue in the Executive and elsewhere to ensure equal access for people from within the deaf community.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

Since 2001, the central heating programme has installed 1,600 systems in the FK postcode area as part of a total Scottish figure of over 51,000 installations. In the interests of brevity and, if the member is content, I shall write to her with the detailed breakdown of the number of installations in each year since 2001 and place a copy of that information in the Scottish Parliament information centre. As regards the new managing agency contract, performance will be monitored independently with monthly reports to Communities Scotland. The contract also sets improved standards for the level of service provided to applicants.

We should welcome the central heating programme as a good news story; £62.5 million is being spent from October 2006 to March 2008. It is a good example of the partnership working between a Labour Government and a Labour-led Scottish Executive that is committed to addressing fuel poverty. There have been challenges as the programme has progressed. Written into the contract with Scottish Gas is an expectation of improvement in customer care. We are mindful of that and have drilled into its importance with the support of members from across the chamber who have raised the challenges experienced by vulnerable people. The purpose of the programme is to protect vulnerable people. That is the challenge to Scottish Gas, and I am confident that our targets will be met. We are looking at targeting those with greater needs but, by definition, the whole group at whom the initiative is aimed is vulnerable. We must be careful that we do not prioritise inappropriately, as we recognise that the group as a whole is in great need.

It is entirely reasonable that we should seek to get the best benefit from the huge investment that has been made in the programme. There was not no money from March this year. A target was given to Eaga Group for 6,000 central heating systems to be installed, and the new managing agent is charged with the responsibility of installing an equivalent number in the next period. There has been no break, although we recognise that there is a backlog. We reckon that, when we go into the assessment, that will reduce by 30 per cent. We are on target to meet the overall target that we have set for the year. There have been some challenges in the interim, and we are addressing those. We want to ensure that we get the maximum benefit from this significant investment for the people who need it most.

The contract that we have with Scottish Gas is to deliver our highly popular, hugely invested-in programme. We know what the challenges are around that, and those are issues that Stewart Stevenson can address with Scottish Gas. The core business between Scottish Gas and the Executive is the central heating programme, not addressing the other issues that exist. It is critical that Scottish Gas takes on the responsibility of delivering that huge benefit to people throughout Scotland.

Let me make it clear that the purpose of the programme is to improve the central heating infrastructure of people's homes; it is not intended to be a substitute for measures to assist people in crisis with specific heating needs. Those problems are not addressed through the programme. It is a general programme, and members across the Parliament agreed that it should be a general programme rather than a  targeted one, given the needs of the people whom we are talking about. We have charged the managing agent to consider the particular issues of people with health needs to determine whether there are ways in which the programme can be accelerated. However, as I have said, there are challenges in that, given the nature of the group that we are discussing. We recognised that the transition would cause some problems, but we will meet our overall target as we have met it in the past. Indeed, in the past year, we overreached our target by 1,000 installations, with 14,000 systems installed. That is clearly a good news story despite the challenges that individual constituents face.

There is an inspection regime. People in my constituency have raised with me their experiences of central heating installations, which have not been what we would expect. We have to challenge that. The fact that the programme is free to the person who receives the system does not mean that it is free. It is an active political decision by the Executive to deliver funds to the programme, and those who install the systems should show those customers the same respect that they would show anyone else. The fact is that the programme has given a boost not only to elderly people, but to the people who run businesses installing central heating. They should take this opportunity with both hands and prove that they can carry out quality work. I am glad that many have done so; however, I feel that individuals should not have to suffer the disappointment that Cathie Craigie has described. The critical point is that this is a good programme for individuals and the challenge for those who get the opportunity to carry out such work is to prove that they can deliver work of the highest quality.

In line with the recommendations of the housing improvement task force, the Law Society of Scotland convened a working party with the Scottish Consumer Council and Homes for Scotland to consider the preparation of a voluntary code of practice to address a range of issues around the purchase of new-build housing and to develop a standard missive for use in such purchases. I understand that talks are suspended while Homes for Scotland undertakes wider consultation with its members. Justice Department officials have asked the Law Society for a full report on progress to date. We will consider that carefully before deciding on next steps.

First, I recognise the work that Helen Eadie has done in highlighting the issue over a long period of time, including during the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. We need to reflect on the difficulties of the issue and the importance of getting it resolved correctly. I cannot therefore concur with the comments that she made that the delays relate to wilful procrastination or whatever. Difficult issues are involved and the Executive is keen to address them in a way that enables people to unite around the actions that are taken. That does not mean that it is not necessary for us to address over time the substance of the issue in the same way that we have addressed the critical issues of home ownership, the responsibilities of homeowners, the rights of people in making a home purchase and the broader issues of the quality the homes that are built and the way in which they are built. Some of those issues will, of course, be addressed through the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. I do not accept that there have been false dawns, although I hope that what Helen Eadie said concentrates minds and encourages people to come to a conclusion in order to take the matter forward.

The order already prevents households with children or pregnant women from being placed outwith the relevant local authority areas unless an exceptional circumstance applies. In addition, we have given guidance on the issue in the code of guidance. We know, however, that the practice causes problems. It is primarily an issue for the few local authorities that are involved to resolve through working together. We are considering amending the order to prevent the routine out-of-area placement of other groups of vulnerable people unless an exceptional circumstance applies, as defined in the order. We intend to consult all local authorities before making any changes to the order.

The member obviously has specific concerns about how the actions of one local authority, in carrying out its duties and responsibilities regarding homeless persons, are impacting on his constituency. He must first—as I am sure that he will have done—contact Glasgow City Council about the matter. I am in regular contact with the council about how that practice is affecting it. We recognise the needs of homeless people, who themselves require fit support: they  ought not to be dumped and we ought not to make assumptions about how they behave when they are living in certain places. However, it is critical that homeless people are housed where they can be supported. Glasgow City Council and neighbouring authorities have a protocol in place to ensure communication; however, we are happy to consult local authorities further to see how we can prevent the practice from being abused. I remind Charlie Gordon that the guidance that we have already issued states: "As a general rule a local authority should always rehouse a homeless household within its own area, particularly where temporary accommodation is being provided." That is in the interests of the homeless person from that local authority area, but it is also in the interests of a council such as Glasgow City Council in trying to carry out its responsibilities to the homeless people to whom it has a duty of care.

The information contained in the independent research report was a snapshot from 2004. The research has been used to inform discussions, including those on any requirements for monitoring, on the review of national planning policy on open space. Any proposals for the monitoring of open space will be contained in the draft Scottish planning policy 11, which will be published soon for consultation.

Our proposals in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, which is currently going through Parliament, offer a huge opportunity for consistency through a plan-led system and a rigorous and thorough debate about what we want our local communities and the open space within them to be like. I hope that, on that basis, the Greens will welcome the proposals in the planning policy. It is clear that many local authorities take their responsibilities in this regard seriously. In my community land is being reclaimed for recreation and for open space. There is a clear recognition of the importance of sports and recreation for the well-being of our young people. The review of Scottish planning policy 11 gives us the opportunity to take that further and to encourage local authorities to plan ahead.

The information requested is not held by the Scottish Executive.

The Executive position on the OFT paper is that our planning policy looks to enhance the viability and vitality of town centres and makes a clear commitment to their enhancement and protection. We also recognise that it is not for the planning system to restrict competition, preserve existing commercial rights or prevent innovation. We are currently considering responses to the consultation draft of SPP 8, on town centres. We recognise the importance of our town centres. We also recognise the discussion around the way in which retail development should be permitted. We will take account of those considerations as we take forward these matters.

We are clear that our commitment to second-stage transfer is absolute and the setting up of a ministerial progress group is a reflection of our commitment and of the importance that we attach to that process. We continue to work closely with GHA to find a way through the process of delivering second-stage transfer. In addition, I have regularly been meeting other key partners—including Glasgow City Council and the local housing organisations—to ensure that they are fully involved in progressing second-stage transfer.

We have invested £1.6 billion in Glasgow for its housing stock transfer. Whatever the issue, it is not one of a financial black hole. Stock transfer is a huge opportunity for the people of Glasgow, and it is one that people accepted. Indeed, the challenge for all of us who are involved in the process is to ensure that the financial commitment that we have made translates into the very best deal possible for GHA tenants. All the members of the ministerial progress group on second-stage transfers and all those whom I have met in Glasgow and who are involved in the issue are determined that the needs of tenants should be at the centre of all of this. We will work on the financial issues to ensure that second-stage transfer is delivered. I am clear that there is a commitment to second-stage transfer. There is an issue about the way in which the process is taken forward, but the issue is not one of finance. Obviously, we are developing the pilots. We are keen to see them progress quickly. Once we have learned the lessons that are to be learned from the pilots, we can go forward with further transfers. We do not have an exact timetable around the pilots.

We do not have an exact timetable because we are determined to get the pilots right. That will ensure that the process goes forward as speedily as possible.

Absolutely. In our dialogue with the GHA, Glasgow City Council and those who have given a lifetime commitment to making housing work at the local level, we are keen to ensure that second-stage transfer is taken forward. Huge amounts of investment should not lead to paralysis; investment is not a barrier. Stock transfer is a huge challenge, but I am sure that the GHA is up to the challenge. The Executive is also up to the challenge of supporting the GHA in taking forward this work.

Is that a polite way of telling me that I should speak at a speed at which people can actually understand me? I will take it as such. I thank the many members who have spoken in the debate, and I add my thanks to those that have already been given to the Communities Committee for all its hard work in considering the bill. I understand from my previous position on the committee just how much work it takes to get a report to this stage. I recognise the serious manner in which everyone has engaged in scrutiny of the bill, supported by the committee clerks, other officials and SPICe. I put on record my thanks to my own officials, who have worked tirelessly to be available and open in their explanations of the bill's proposals. We should recognise the significant role of the Communities Committee in the passage of the bill—to which John Home Robertson referred—and the way in which that role has developed as the legislation has developed. We should not allow anyone to pretend that the debate has not been taken seriously at the pre-legislative stage and at stage 1, and I have already mentioned the hard work of others. I say this as someone who has run a marathon, but being the minister who was scrutinised by the committee for six and a half hours over two days certainly did not feel like the process was being taken less than seriously. We should celebrate the fact that we have a rigorous process in place in our committee structure and our committees' critical role in making legislation. I have another confession: I love planning. I did not expect to love it. Unlike David Petrie, if I was not here, I would not be standing in front of an S2 maths class; I would be standing in front of an S2 English class. That focused my mind on how wonderful this is. There is a genuine understanding that planning and planning decisions can change lives. As a  young person, I decided that when I went into full-time work I wanted to do something purposeful, which is why I chose to go into education. At no stage did it occur to me to go into planning. We must recapture an understanding of what planning can do and of the role that planners can play in making changes that make a difference to people's lives. I hear what members have said about the issues around secondary legislation. We are considering the committee's recommendations on affirmative powers, and we will consider each specific request carefully. We are considering the committee's recommendation to produce an indicative timetable for the key stages of implementation. That is already in hand, and it will be with the committee before stage 3. One of the critical issues in the debate is the importance of the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill in restoring public trust in planning. It is essential that we have honesty and maturity in the system. I say gently to Patrick Harvie that he perhaps ought to have been a little more honest about the amendment that he lodged. Everything that he highlighted in that amendment can be dealt with as the bill progresses through the Parliament. His decision to lodge his amendment was more about positioning himself politically than about engaging with the politics of the planning process and the bill. It has been reported to me that Jim Mather, the SNP's business spokesperson, was unequivocal when he was speaking to businesspeople today about his party's opposition to the third-party right of appeal and his support for the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. Far be it from me to suggest that he might have been tailoring his comments to his audience, but it would be helpful to get clarity from the SNP on exactly what its group's position is. The SNP must confront the fact that its spokesperson for business said something to the business community that did not exactly reflect the position of his party. I want to address a number of other issues that have been flagged up. Patrick Harvie said that people are cynical about the process. We will not be able to challenge that attitude if we feed it by telling people that the bill is motivated entirely by cynicism and represents a capitulation to the business community.

I do not accept Patrick Harvie's characterisation of what has happened. We must confront the fact that if we tell people constantly that the motors behind the bill are wrong, we can hardly be surprised if they feel that they are being misled. No one who has read the bill objectively could say that it is a business persons charter; it is ludicrous to make that charge. There are difficult challenges for us in the planning debate. How do we balance the needs of the economy against the rights of communities? How do we address the question of environmental justice? How do we avoid a situation in which we reward the strongest and those who are able to organise themselves against those who are unable to do so? I accept that not everybody in a community is a nimby and that not everybody in the development industry is a cowboy, but the nimbys and cowboys are there. We have to challenge both groups and ensure that the planning process does not help them to avoid progress but allows it to be supported. If we are in favour of affordable housing, we must confront the fact that some people do not want it and will campaign against it. Developers might moan and groan about the regulation and slowness of the process, but if they confronted the people in their industry who made people cynical and exploited them, they would have to say that of course there is a place for robust scrutiny. We also have to be honest and say that there are tensions within communities. I hear a lot about the rights of communities but, as the planning minister, I know that communities sometimes speak with more than one voice. We have to challenge what people want and we need a planning system for the things that nobody wants but everybody needs. Whatever our aspirations for transport, the economy, affordable housing and renewables, we need a planning system that will support our policy. On the third-party right of appeal, Patrick Harvie said that he does not want lots more appeals, but I do not know how he would stop that. He ignores the importance of effective enforcement in dealing with problems in the process. We seem to have forgotten that we have argued for reducing the development industry's rights of appeal. There seems to be an assumption that if a developer appeals to the centre, the centre will always roll over and agree with them. That is not the case, so there should not be that presumption. I have never understood why those people in favour of the third-party right of appeal think that it is more democratic and better to have decisions made at the centre. I am a bit of a megalomaniac  and I like making decisions, but how many more decisions do people want me to make? Why is there an assumption that a decision that I make at the centre will be more reflective of local interest than decisions taken in communities? That does not fit with the Greens' go-local policy.

Yes, but we have systems to deal with that. The centre is capable of making decisions and we have to have robust structures that ensure accountability. Participation is a thread running through the Scottish Executive; it is critical. We have ensured that there is participation in housing, among other things. That is not a tick-box exercise, nor should it be. We should also reflect on the fact that people can carry two things in their head at the one time. They can say that their frustration is because decisions that are made at a local level can be overturned and that it is because a decision that is made at a local level cannot be overturned. There is an issue about local democracy, local accountability and the specific accountability of local authorities themselves. We do not want to second-guess those local authorities in every case. There is a balance to be struck that entails ensuring that local authorities are accountable for the way in which they do their business. On resources, I say to local government that councils have had an increase in the resources that they receive but that the resources that are going to planning have not risen proportionately. That is a challenge for them. We need to get more planners.

The issue of getting more planners is a serious one. We have to talk to the profession and engage with young people to find out what might make them more likely to choose that profession. We also have to make it a more attractive business to come into. It should not be the grind that it sometimes can be, with planners  being the fall guys in the middle of the process. Having a development plan-led system, in which there is more certainty and there is a hierarchy, will help to drive out some bits of the job that are difficult and will allow more space for the more creative element. On the planning gain supplement, the Executive has already made a submission to Westminster on the matter. We are clear that planning is devolved but that a planning gain supplement would not be. Whatever, happens, it is critical that the two systems work together and that we do not lose that local connection between developers and local communities. The national planning framework is quite straightforward: it is a framework, and it is a spatial expression of our political priorities. I say to our friends in the Green party that, even if we sat in permanent session for the next 20 years and, at the end of that process, the Parliament agreed that we were in favour of motorways going into the national planning framework, I would not expect the Green party to agree with that position. We will never get a consensus about some of those hard issues. Ultimately, ministers are accountable to the Parliament in that regard. The significant thread that runs through what people are saying this afternoon appears to be that the parliamentary process and the local government process, both of which involve democratic accountability, are not the places where these issues must ultimately be scrutinised. People are saying that if a decision that is made using those processes is not the one that was sought, an independent process that is somehow separate from the political process should be used. That does not make sense.

I think that I have done extremely well on that so far and I would like to make some progress. The issue of whether there should be a 40-day period or a 60-day period is not about us wanting to ride roughshod over the Parliament. In fact, it is to do with the openness of government. We are saying that there is more to this than our simply expressing our political priorities and that we want to engage with the Parliament, communities and stakeholders. I have made that clear throughout stage 1. Clearly, the bill already contains robust proposals for dealing with the matter. I hope that we can reflect further on the specific issue of the timescale that has been highlighted. I recognise that people take seriously the issue of local authority interest, as do we. We will reflect on what has been said on the matter. I contend, again, that robust proposals are already in the bill.  However, we are clear that we are happy to go into further dialogue on the issue. I recognise the importance of strategic development plans and that there should be a more effective way of planning for our larger cities. I recognise the concerns about where some of the strategic development plan boundaries will lie—for example, in Fife—and can say that we are considering options in that regard. Ultimately, we do not want to impose boundaries and will work with authorities to find practical solutions that reflect the realities on the ground. On that point, I say to Iain Smith that one cannot carry the two things in one's head at the same time. One cannot, on the one hand, condemn Fife Council's decisions and call for an independent inquiry into what it has done and, on the other hand, say that we can never impose things on local authorities in relation to strategic development plans. Crofting is an issue that is dear to my heart. Rob Gibson talked about the significance of common grazing and I say to him that I have dear memories of my own family serving long and weary on those committees. I recognise that there is a crossover and that some people have argued that the Crofters Commission should be a statutory consultee. I am happy to consider that further, but I emphasise that the point is a good example of the importance of local development plans reflecting local priorities while being set in a national context. That is why the drive of the bill is to acknowledge that local involvement and understanding are critical. Members will be aware that planning is recognised as a key means of delivering social, economic and environmental sustainability. We have put a new statutory duty on planning authorities to exercise development planning functions with the objective of contributing to sustainable development. That is in line with Scottish ministers' commitments under the sustainable development strategy. I live for the day when we will all have an absolute understanding of what sustainable development is, as the process moves forward. I have already made the point about the importance of secondary legislation. I hear what has been said about HMOs, good neighbour agreements and business improvement districts. In response to David McLetchie's point, I confirm that local authorities will be required to provide lists of existing service provision levels so that potential BID members can assess what extra services they might wish to be delivered. The concerns of the Federation of Small Businesses have been addressed through the dual voting system, which requires a majority of individual businesses to be in favour of the BID proposal as  well as a majority of the total rateable value of those businesses. Both majorities have to be in place before a BID proposal can proceed. A further consultation on the detail of the BID proposals will be issued shortly.

I am more than happy to take that on board. It is critical that we talk about these matters throughout the Executive, throughout the Parliament and in our communities. Mike Rumbles said that it would be useful if we thought about the issues. He makes the assumption that we have not thought about them. The issues have been wrestled with by us, the committee, stakeholders and others. Ultimately, our judgment is that a third-party right of appeal—that is the issue that Mike Rumbles highlighted—would slow down and extend the system without necessarily improving it. I want a faster system and I want to get rid of the institutional lag that is built into it. If a third-party right of appeal would do what is claimed for it, we would take it seriously, even if it would slow down the system, but I do not accept that it would do what is claimed. We have to consider how we can invest our time and energy in participation, development plans and real enforcement, to deal not just with the developer who is at it but to tell all the others who are thinking about being at it that they had better not bother. A number of members said that we do not have an either/or choice. I agree. Instead, the choice is between what will make a difference and what will not. We need to concentrate on the things that will make a difference in our communities, challenge people to have proper community engagement and challenge developers to bring forward proposals that have proper endorsement. We are wrestling with the challenge of engagement and the other issues. As I said, we have to concentrate on the things that will make a difference rather than things that would make us feel better about the process without actually making the difference that we intend. I urge members to support the general principles of the bill and I assure them that I will engage with anyone who wants to engage on proposals at stages 2 and 3. In that way, we will ensure that we have a bill that is fit for purpose for our communities and our economy and a Scotland where we can deliver all our aspirations through the planning system.

I am sure that the member would agree that good neighbour agreements are about communities and developers being willing to work together. They are not a substitute for enforcement. Does she welcome the bill's emphasis on enforcement?

Will the member confirm that Jim Mather said at the property conference this morning that it was the SNP's position to support the bill and to oppose the third-party right of appeal?

Is it not the case that a third-party right of appeal would involve more decisions for ministers? Those who advocate it have to recognise that more decisions would be made at the centre.

rose—

We received representations during March that more time to register was needed. In response, we postponed the registration deadline to 30 April. We have also received representations from some landlords that they have experienced difficulties in using the online registration system. We have taken action to correct all reported errors, and to date more than 47,000 landlords have their details on the system. The system is functioning well and applicants should have confidence in using it.

We have already acknowledged that there have been challenges in the system. We are grateful to local authorities and we acknowledge the pressure on them. Resources have gone towards making the system work as effectively as possible. We expect local authorities to be reasonable. I am absolutely confident—I note how Mr Gallie phrased his question—that good private landlords have nothing to fear. They want to be part of the solution to the problem caused by some private landlords in local communities; they do not want to  be part of the problem. Landlords can be part of the solution, alongside local authorities, by highlighting where there are challenges and difficulties and by encouraging people to register and by reinforcing the importance of registration. That will secure a better reputation for the sector. Our communities will be the better for it.

The bill will make the planning system fit for purpose by introducing a clearer sense of priority and by allowing different types of application to be addressed in different ways. That more balanced approach will enable planning authorities to improve their performance across the full range of applications, including those that affect small businesses.

I acknowledge the importance of town centres. We must be alert to the fact that town centres across Scotland have different needs and face different challenges. We have a planning policy for town centres in national planning policy guideline 8, on retailing, which we are currently refreshing. We have made a commitment to support town centres. With a development-plan-led system we allow people to prepare and think ahead about how they want their community to look. The approach ensures that local people and agencies are engaged in the planning system at an early stage. I do not know about the partnership that Marilyn Livingstone described, but I am more than happy to talk to her about it, so that I can learn from local initiatives. I reassure her that small businesses will benefit as much as other groups from the more streamlined planning system and the increased, earlier engagement that the bill envisages.

I will not share with members my family folklore about the Singing Kettle. I just do not want to go there. It is a privilege for me to wind up the debate, and I welcome the opportunity to highlight the good work of credit unions throughout Scotland. I congratulate Christine May on securing the debate and all members on their speeches, which were worthy of the work that has been done by credit unions and of their significance in our  communities. It is a great privilege for me to have responsibility as a minister for the area of credit unions. I pay credit to Jackie Baillie who, in the early days of the Parliament, as Minister for Social Justice, drove the credit union agenda and argued for their significance. I also thank those in the credit union movement who have helped shape the policy. It is not something from Government; it has been developed with credit unions and the credit union movement, and it is their work that has allowed us to reach this stage. I should declare an interest: I love the co-operative movement and the credit union movement. They bring together social commitment, energy and the passion of voluntary activity with the hard-headed, businesslike approach that is required and which has brought great success. The great test of the co-operative movement is its capacity to give practical delivery to ideas, not saying that ideas are woolly and unachievable but going into communities and showing that things can be done—not imposed on communities, but coming from them. I recently had the privilege of visiting the Newarthill Credit Union. It is located in a new building on the main road, built with not one coin of public money but every bit with private and collective endeavour. That speaks to all that is good about the co-operative movement. Charlie Gordon spoke about co-operation and mutual options and the challenge for our approach to enterprise and the economy. That is precisely why the Executive supported the co-operative development agency and located it inside Scottish Enterprise. The agency is involved in social matters, but it is also about shaping what we define as economic and what works for the economy. That is why I believe there is such strength in it. I wish to address some points made by individual members before getting into my own contribution to the debate, as I know that people will want them to be responded to. On the Bankruptcy and Diligence etc (Scotland) Bill, we are very much alive to the issues around protected trust deeds. I have already spoken to Allan Wilson, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, about the matter. I know that he is working with and speaking to the credit union movement about it. We are conscious of the significance of the points that have been raised by Jackie Baillie and others. We are happy to continue that dialogue to a resolution. On the issue of supporting small credit unions in extending their facilities, and touching on the points made by John Swinney about starting up credit unions, in the moneys that have been allocated for the next two years, £100,000 a year  has been specifically identified for that very practical work. I am keen to speak to credit union and other representatives about how such support can be developed. We know that credit unions have the ideas, and we will need to support them in willing the means for their practical delivery. I acknowledge that the credibility of credit unions is an issue. In my constituency, there is no doubt about the visibility of the local credit union. It was opened in a shopping centre, it looks like a bank and people are using it in increasing numbers. That is a message for us in supporting the credit union movement. The financial problems that people face can be both a cause and a consequence of poverty, as members have highlighted. Not only might someone be struggling on a lower income, they will have to pay more for the credit that they need. That is simply unjust. We recognise that and it underpins the work that we are trying to do. When we launched the financial inclusion action plan, 11 per cent of people in Scotland did not have a bank account—with all the consequences of that—and 37 per cent of Scottish households had no savings. That forced them to borrow as the only way they could budget for everyday things such as a washing machine, or even shoes for the kids, but in doing so they had to pay more. A third of low-income families were behind with bills and debt repayments, and they had to deal with all the consequences of that. We know that those individuals and families can benefit from the services that a credit union offers. Those services are not offered only in communities, but where they are, they give local people confidence and understanding. I agree that credit unions are not just for the poor; they are for us all. That sense of mutual support is significant. As part of our action plan, we have worked to support credit unions and to help them to grow. Our capacity fund, which was launched in 2003, has rewarded 24 successful applicants with a total of £700,000 to help projects throughout the country. As has been recognised, last year we secured from the European Commission the critical decision that public bodies in Scotland could fund credit unions to provide some basic financial services to their members. That allows credit unions to work with people who are financially excluded. That pioneering and hard-won decision paved the way for making available to credit unions a suite of new services from April this year. Some of those services have been highlighted: they include savings accounts, budgeting accounts, insurance products and flexible credit. Coping with the unexpected is a challenge for people who are on a low income and, through that  suite of products, credit unions can help such people with managing on a tight budget. Under a credit union budgeting account, a credit union will pay bills on a saver's behalf, which will help people to break the debt cycles that can lead to such damaging financial despair for struggling families. As well as traditional fixed loan rates, credit unions will be able to offer flexible credit that is linked to the borrower's ability to repay. That may require a loan guarantee fund and offers the opportunity for credit unions to change how they do business. As well as opportunities, a flexible credit union facility presents challenges and risks for credit unions and opens up fresh approaches to how services might be developed. I think that I mentioned that £400,000 a year will be provided for products and that £100,000 a year will be provided for small grants to cover expenses and I have talked about the challenges ahead.

The Government may have a role, but our reaction would be shaped by what the credit union movement does. I agree that a broader issue is financial education and challenging institutions that offer extortionately expensive credit—we are working with the UK Government on that. Financial education is needed in our schools to let our young people know about the sensible choice. One feature of the credit union movement is that it links savings with borrowings and helps people to get a grip on their money. Christine Grahame's point that people should understand the credit union movement is well made. I would love Scotland to be the same as Ireland, where credit unions are seen on the high street and are the norm. There is a job to be done, which we can discuss further. Several members referred to the risk of the exposure of credit unions to bad debt. One way in which the service of general economic interest funding can be used is to develop loan guarantee schemes to protect credit unions when a loan is not repaid. The SGEI approval scheme enables the Executive to approve Scottish credit unions, which will then be eligible to receive public funding for promoting financial inclusion through providing one of the four products. That opens up the  opportunity for credit unions to seek funding for those products not only from the Scottish Executive but from Communities Scotland, local authorities, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. In the past few years, we have made substantial progress on tackling poverty and on tackling financial exclusion and understanding how it is experienced and how we can work with others to challenge it. However, many challenges still face families and individuals who are on low incomes, particularly in the management of their finances. Credit unions play a key role in pursuing and achieving our aim. They have achieved a lot and are going from strength to strength. That means that we are on target to increase credit union membership. There is scope for us to do even more. I am pleased that we have begun to receive applications for approval to offer SGEI products and I look forward to receiving more. I encourage all credit unions—large and small—to review their policies and products and to think about how they can deliver modern services that meet all their members' needs. I know that the movement will respond to that challenge and that, as in the past, it will engage with every level of government on shaping the policy that will determine how we address the key challenges of financial exclusion, which the poorest and most vulnerable in our communities experience so sorely.  Meeting closed at 18:00.

The primary obligation on private landlords under the 2004 act is to register with the local authority. There is detailed guidance on the landlord registration website and on the Executive's better renting Scotland website. We have also provided local authorities with information leaflets for landlords.

Absolutely. We recognise the fact that there have been teething problems with the system, and we share the frustration of those who have encountered problems. However, I make it clear that some of those who are attacking the process are doing so in order to attack the principle that Karen Gillon has identified—the right of communities to contact landlords and ask that they take responsibility for what their tenants are doing in their properties. Through the registration process, we can identify where the landlords are and have a positive dialogue with them. I reassure good landlords that they have nothing to fear from the registration process. We are determined that our communities should not be prey to landlords who see being a landlord not as a business but as a means of making money, and who have no regard for the communities in which their properties sit.

Let me make it clear that 45,000 landlords have already managed to register and that nearly 60 per cent of properties are now registered. We recognise the fact that registration has been a challenge for some people, but those who are most frustrated are those who do not want to be held accountable for their properties. I pay tribute to Cathie Craigie, who persistently drove the issue through the Communities Committee not because it was an academic issue, but because the direct experience of her constituents and mine was that bad landlords not only did not see themselves as responsible for bearing business costs—the registration scheme is such a cost—but did not see being a landlord as a business at all. Such landlords not only ignored communities when they complained, but were actively hostile to them. We will work with those who want to serve those communities and make them safe, and we will deal with those who do not. We do not want to send out the message that the scheme can be destroyed by attacks on the registration process; we must be united around the principle of the scheme. As I have said, good landlords have nothing to fear from it and communities will receive a great deal of benefit from it.

I, too, thank Donald Gorrie for lodging his motion and ensuring that this subject has been debated today. Margo MacDonald has touched a raw nerve with me: I think that I am the only minister in the Scottish Executive who regularly does her ministerial papers at the swimming pool at Tollcross in Glasgow at half past five in the morning. We want to acknowledge the role of parents in supporting their families in swimming, and I bow to no one in my admiration of volunteers. I speak as the mother of a fiendishly sporty daughter. She is only 10, but we have already come across fabulous work done by volunteers. I say to Margo MacDonald that we cannot explain the desire to volunteer, or say that somehow the state should do that work, but we should certainly celebrate the desire to volunteer. I also say that, in my family, the impact of the Olympic and Commonwealth games bids has been felt. At local athletics clubs and swim meets, we see the enthusiasm that has been generated. I do not think that the results of the bids are all bad. Margo spoke about valuing volunteers and about how local authority swimming pools would be  different from those run by arm's-length organisations. Here is a huge opportunity for social enterprises in the social economy, and for trusts that have to be businesslike but can nevertheless have social goals. Although this evening's debate is important, I issue a note of caution to Donald Gorrie. I acknowledge the seriousness with which he lodged his motion, but there is a danger that we will offer a counsel of despair. In my job, I have the privilege of going around the voluntary sector. Recently, I went to S2S, which was a social enterprise trade fair in Perth, was at the launch of the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator and attended a local voluntary organisation event in East Dunbartonshire. The voluntary sector faces challenges, but being at those events was not a miserable experience; it felt wonderful and exciting to be at them because people recognised the opportunities that were available. There is always the argument about whether the glass is half empty or half full, but I contend that it is simply not true to say that nothing has changed in seven years. I am not given to bestowing warm words on anyone, so I hope that Donald Gorrie will acknowledge the sincerity with which I say that we understand that the voluntary sector faces huge challenges on funding. However, progress has been made, which we can develop further. There are interesting debates to be had about the role of the voluntary sector, and I do not think that opinions divide across party lines—there are disagreements within parties about where the role of voluntary organisations fits in. I do not regard the purpose of the voluntary sector to be simply to fill in the gap in local authorities' services. Sometimes voluntary organisations can provide better services than councils can. However, the voluntary sector should not only deliver services; it has a crucial role to play in shaping Government policy and priorities. Compliance and the challenge of regulation have been mentioned. There is often consensus among members about the need for compliance with regulation. We must be thorough about the consequences of the action that we take and how it impacts on the voluntary sector. That is why it is so important that we continue to have dialogue on that. Donald Gorrie said that we should not have top-down initiatives but, at some point, all of us will have argued for ring fencing of the money that is provided to local authorities to ensure that the voluntary sector gets a share of it. In his motion, Donald Gorrie welcomes useful funding initiatives, acknowledges that imaginative new approaches to grant distribution have been adopted and notes that progress has been made towards more effective targeting of funding for  community enterprises and the social economy. I welcome that recognition of the achievements that have already been made. The approach of the Big Lottery Fund is commended, which we, too, welcome. Through the funders forum, we are keen to ensure that funding is tackled coherently and that we collaborate on planning and delivery. The motion is right to call for joint working across funding agencies. I can confirm that that is already happening in the development of policy and best practice. As I have said, a funders forum has been established, which will bring together Government, local authorities, wider public sector bodies, lottery distributors and grant-making trusts so that they can take a strategic overview of the funding environment; give them the space to debate approaches to funding; and serve as a crucial arena for discussion of many of the issues that have been raised. More generally, we have provided the voluntary sector in Scotland with the highest level of funding that it has ever received. In 2005-06, the Executive, its agencies and the non-departmental public bodies distributed £523 million to organisations in Scotland. That figure, which represents an enormous £119 million increase on the sum for 2004-05, illustrates clearly our commitment to and support for the voluntary sector. If it is said quickly, £523 million does not sound that much, but it should be recognised as a significant commitment to the sector. That is not to say that we do not need to address the challenges that people face in accessing that funding. It is clear that, in funding the voluntary sector, the Executive must support infrastructure and pilots. The challenge is to ensure that we work with other agencies and delivery organisations on how they treat voluntary organisations. Donald Gorrie mentioned the idea of bringing together groups at national level and at local level. We have the compact; the challenge is to make it real by achieving mutual respect both locally and nationally. The motion advocates the provision of support to voluntary organisations that operate in the areas of youth work, caring and advice, and refers to the need to offer continued support to successful organisations in the form of core headquarters funding. Our children and young people unified voluntary sector fund provides core headquarters funding for many national organisations that work in the fields that Donald Gorrie mentioned. From its total annual budget of £7.2 million, it also provides time-limited grants towards project and capital costs. We provide 32 headquarters grants and two project grants to national youth organisations, which in 2006-07 will total almost £1.5 million. On top of that, we give £1.2 million per annum to  voluntary sector family support organisations and a wide range of other bodies, including some that work to improve children's health and to support families who suffer from the effects of drug misuse. In addition, we have invested £18 million in the futurebuilders programme through Communities Scotland. We recognise that we must address sustainability. Local social economy partnerships are being established across Scotland with a remit to strengthen local support for social economy organisations. Key partners are being signed up, notably local authorities, enterprise companies and the CVS network. In total, 23 social economy partnerships either have been established or are under development. Those partnerships are critical to taking forward that work. At the social enterprise trade fair, it was clear that the combination of being businesslike and having social goals is a powerful one. Social enterprises do not want to be stuck with grant dependency, as some characterise the situation, but want to be given the opportunity to develop their business. We have to help them to do that. The strong message that is coming from the voluntary sector is that they are not simply coming cap in hand for more money. On lessening the burdens on voluntary organisations, we are working towards streamlining our funding procedures. We have introduced a common grant application pack that will be of help to voluntary organisations. We have reviewed our grant conditions, in consultation with the voluntary sector, to ensure that the material that organisations have to submit is consistent, irrespective of the funding source in the Executive. We have started work on a pilot lead funder initiative—in effect a one-stop shop in the Executive—the aim of which is to achieve an evenness and consistency of approach. We understand the powerful nature of giving out that message. We are also looking to develop good-practice guidance on funding for use by Executive divisions. We would encourage others to do the same. The motion expresses concern about the provision of funding for three-year periods and claims that there is an overemphasis on the funding of innovative projects rather than organisations with good track records. I absolutely recognise that position, but would say to the chamber that there has been progress and movement. The Executive has in hand robust plans for moving forward on funding issues that will allow the voluntary sector to forge ahead with increased confidence and capacity. We have published "A Vision for the Voluntary Sector: the Next Phase of our Relationship", which concludes by saying that Executive funding should focus on  organisations that can deliver outcomes and improvements in the lives of people and communities in Scotland. That vision has been welcomed by the voluntary sector; indeed, it was shaped by the sector, working alongside the Executive There is a challenge for the Executive and other funders, but there is also a challenge for the voluntary sector. It has to demonstrate not only its financial expertise but an ability to think longer term and to identify the ways in which it can generate income. That is a test of the sector's professionalism, robustness and ambition. I accept that there is an issue that has to be addressed to do with three-year funding and innovation. However, I do not want members to think that the Executive does not provide longer-term funding. I could give the chamber a significantly long list of voluntary sector organisations that have been supported for more than five years. It is important that we acknowledge the critical role that those organisations play. However, organisations should not expect funding in perpetuity as a given. No matter how high the level of funding that is made available to the voluntary sector, it will always be finite. We have to look at how we get organisations to support the work that we recognise is important. It is important not to lose sight of the fact that the Executive is not always, and should not always be, the source of funding for organisations in Scotland. Organisations should always attempt to widen their net of funders. We would like to see buy-in at the local level from local authorities, health boards, enterprise companies and other public agencies. By definition, if they are engaged at the local level, they understand better than the Executive does how best to support work at the local level. An important point was made in the debate on the role of local government, its core business and the way in which it treats and values the voluntary sector. I do not want to see local government driving out services into the voluntary sector but not valuing that sector or funding it appropriately. The issue is to do with the compact and mutual respect. There are big issues to be considered about the challenges that we face. What is the core business of Government at the United Kingdom, Scotland and local levels? Where does the voluntary sector fit in? We would have a range of views on the matter. Should the voluntary sector do what it does because the Government cannot do it, or because—as I think—the sector can do it better? To what extent can the state intervene to shape and regulate the sector without destroying it? I think that we all share that concern. How can we  make a real compact between Government and the sector locally and ensure that there is mutual respect, despite the fact that one party funds and the other party delivers services? How do we strike the right balance in funding between supporting and sustaining organisations that do good work and creating opportunities? Pilots might be a problem, but the best projects in my community started as pilots, when people had the imagination and the opportunity to test their ideas. No one was going to offer such projects long-term investment, but the situation changed because the pilots were effective. We must also consider how we ensure that the added value that the voluntary sector brings and the way in which things are done in small organisations are not destroyed by our professionalising the sector as we support it. The point about big charities and small organisations is important. The test for using and supporting the voluntary sector requires us to consider the added value that the sector offers. Should conditions be placed on activity that simply pick out good work and deliver services as a substitute for local government delivery? There are big questions for us all. We take seriously what the sector tells us about funding. We will continue to work within the Executive and with other delivery organisations to make it as easy as possible for people who have imagination and want to volunteer and deliver something for their communities to pursue their ideas untrammelled by red tape.  The bigger question about where the voluntary sector sits in our view of how services are delivered locally requires a great deal more work. Although some people celebrate the voluntary sector, others regard the sector's work as privatisation. Whatever the weaknesses of the Parliament and the limitations of the Executive might be, it is clear that we have engaged with the voluntary sector in shaping and delivering on priorities. There is respect for the sector, but a great deal remains to be done. I am sure that members of all parties will take the opportunity not just to do the nitty-gritty hard stuff around funding but to consider the bigger picture about where the voluntary sector sits. Those are not warm words that do nothing; a great deal of action is going on, which we can take forward together.  Meeting closed at 18.01.

We called in that planning application on 7 April.

I think that the member will be aware of the Executive's position on granting a  limited right of appeal. We are clear about our commitment to engage with communities at an early stage through the development plan. We have a strong interest in the role of local government in providing democratic accountability, especially in cases such as that to which the member refers, which is an example of a local authority interest case, in which we recognise that a fine balance needs to be struck. We are proud of our package of proposals on planning and I assure Robin Harper that, through engagement with the Communities Committee and with other members, we will ensure that we have a planning process that not only satisfies the needs of local communities, but allows the progression of those developments that are necessary if we are to have vibrant and healthy communities.

There are currently five pathfinder urban regeneration companies in Scotland. After the Executive's consultation on URCs, Raploch, Craigmillar and Clydebank were designated in June 2004 and all are making good progress against the outcomes and objectives that are set out in their business plans. Two new pathfinder URCs were announced in north Ayrshire and Inverclyde as part of the launch of the Executive's regeneration policy statement entitled "People and Place".

The key features of urban regeneration companies are their willingness to focus on geographical areas; to work with the public and private sectors and communities to identify challenges; and to work together towards solutions. That approach is relevant to any service. Of course, very significant funding follows the creation of an urban regeneration company, which ensures that all the money that goes into a community is used rationally with the community's commitment and involvement and to its benefit.

The timetable for housing improvement was set out in the stage 2 Glasgow housing transfer document, "Your Home Your Choice—Your Guide to Glasgow's Housing Transfer Proposal", which made the following investment commitments: for homes with a long-term life, central heating would be provided within 4 years of the transfer, external fabric improvements would be made within 6 years, and internal improvements would be made within 10.5 years. GHA is on track to deliver those investment commitments throughout its core stock and, in addition, has brought forward by five years the delivery of almost 16,000 kitchen and bathroom improvements as a direct response to tenants' wishes.

I welcome Frank McAveety's comments on GHA's positive role in transforming Glasgow's housing. It is worth mentioning in passing that, although some people suggest that Glasgow's housing faces more than just a  challenge, the proposed spend on housing in Glasgow for this year is £152 million. Money is available and GHA has the energy to ensure delivery. Glasgow has an important and proud record of community ownership and GHA understands how powerful a weapon it is to work with communities and tenants to control and determine the shape of their housing. We have set up a ministerial group, which I chair and which involves a significant number of people from throughout Glasgow, to ensure that the challenges of managing the second stage of the transfer are worked through. The group underlines our commitment to the second stage; it is not a sign that there is a difficulty.

In line with the Scottish compact implementation strategy commitments, in 2004, the Scottish Executive commissioned GEN Consulting to establish the baseline for Scottish compact implementation throughout the voluntary and public sector. Follow-up monitoring will be undertaken later this year.

Yes. Our vision, to which the voluntary sector is signed up, is that we will work closely with the sector. It is important that local authorities and other agencies that work with the voluntary sector are aware of the need for mutual respect. If funding issues exist, it is important to address them. That is why we are developing our work in the strategic funding review and why we are committed to three-year rolling funding. I accept that problems for particular voluntary sector organisations should be taken seriously. If we are to respect and value the sector, people cannot be unable to plan because their funding is uncertain. If Donald Gorrie thinks that it would be useful for me to be aware of specific cases, I am more than happy to speak to him about them.

The Planning etc (Scotland) Bill contains a range of measures that will enhance community participation in the planning system. Current planning law does not include third-party rights of appeal. We do not propose to change that.

I recognise that point, but it has become clear to the Executive, after investigating the matter that no matter how much one might try to provide a limited third-party right of appeal, such rights of appeal would not address the key issues that people want to be solved. In addition, it is difficult to see how a third-party right of appeal could be limited in the way Mike Rumbles has described. The concern is that such a move would extend the system without improving its quality. The bill will introduce a range of measures to ensure that there is involvement in development plans at an early stage. I am sure that Mike Rumbles will particularly welcome the enhanced neighbour notification scheme, which will apply not only to planning proposals but to development plans. We recognise that neighbour involvement is critical, but that does not necessarily mean that we need to go in the direction of the third-party right of appeal that Mike Rumbles identified. The bill includes positive measures that recognise the critical need to involve people in the process, including—this is a new element—in the development plan. I will be before the committee for six hours next week to deal with those matters. The member will be able to learn from that dialogue about some of the issues that we are identifying in more detail.

We recognise the position that Sandra White is coming from, but we have sought to limit first-party right of appeal with legal constraints by, for example, limiting such appeals to local tribunals. We recognise people's frustration about that issue, but I contend that people feel greater frustration about the system's limited capacity to enforce the will of the planning authority at the end of the process. In my judgment, we should put our time and energy into dealing with those who ignore planning authority decisions and deter others from doing the same. There is a great deal of consensus on the importance of having a rigorous enforcement system.

The Executive's equality strategy commits us to working with Scotland's lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender communities to ensure that the Executive's policies and practices take account of their needs. We intend to build on the work that we have already undertaken and to establish a forum that will help us to develop an action plan for challenging prejudice.

The Scottish Executive is committed to education and to challenging attitudes, prejudice and discrimination. I am sure that the forum will have a perspective on the measures that we can take in relation to the issues that Patrick Harvie raises. In education, in health and across its whole range of responsibilities, the Executive is committed to taking every opportunity to create a culture in which prejudice and discrimination are unacceptable.

The Executive will not review its policy on council housing debt write-off.

Her Majesty's Treasury has made it very clear that it will provide the resources to deal with residual local authority housing debt only following a housing stock transfer. It is evident that that policy will not change. The same arrangement applies throughout the United Kingdom. We have discussed and continue to discuss with local authorities that have chosen to retain their stock other opportunities for meeting  the Scottish housing quality standard, through prudential borrowing and working together. The community ownership strategy recognised that writing off debt would lead to a step change. The aim was not only to release further investment in housing, but to ensure that that investment stuck. We know that at least some of the debt for which tenants were forced to continue paying in places such as Glasgow was down to bad housing investment decisions, some of which were made in part because authorities were not involved closely enough in talks with the people who would live in the houses. That is why I attach such importance to community ownership. We recognise the challenges that all local authorities face in meeting the housing quality standard and are committed to working with them on that issue.

Officials from the Scottish Executive liaise regularly with officials from Fife Council to discuss planning issues. However, there are no firm arrangements for any meetings in the immediate future.

I am sure that Mr Brocklebank appreciates that it would be totally inappropriate for me to comment on matters covered by the structure plan of Fife Council or any other local authority. The council is charged with the responsibility of delivering a structural plan. As Mr  Brocklebank will be aware, that structure plan will shortly be submitted to the Executive for approval. The process is a rigorous one.

I do not "get round" to things; I deal with matters as they reach my desk in a serious and rigorous manner. As I have already indicated, it is not appropriate for me to comment on matters that are dealt with in a structure plan before it is submitted to the Executive for approval. We recognise the role of local authorities and we understand the challenges of developing affordable housing throughout Scotland, which is another area of responsibility. Although I cannot comment on the specifics of the Fife structure plan, the member will know that the Executive takes the process extremely seriously and will follow it with rigour.

The Scottish community and householder renewables initiative, established in 2002, promotes the development of new community and household renewable energy projects in Scotland and has supported a number of community housing projects. In addition, the Executive is developing a pilot study to explore what role renewables technologies can play in keeping down fuel costs with a view to including those technologies in the central heating programme.

Yes. We are producing a planning advice note on micro-renewables, which is to be published in April. An interim review of the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative will consider how it can be taken forward. We will ensure that our energy-efficiency strategy is fully informed by that work. Education and interest must be built on at an individual level to let people know the kinds of things that they can do, but we must also consider constantly how we can make a difference in our range of responsibilities. I will be particularly interested to discuss with Dr Jackson the role that she sees for Communities Scotland and others in driving micro-renewables into public and social housing. I am more than happy to meet her to discuss that.

The proposals in the current Planning etc (Scotland) Bill will revitalise development planning in Scotland, and the new planning advice note on affordable housing that we published last year is beginning to have an impact. To build on that, the Minister for Communities intends to chair a joint housing and planning forum to establish what more can be done at local level to improve delivery in the areas  of greatest need. The Minister for Communities has also commissioned a short research project to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the various options, including a separate use class for affordable housing.

If I were not aware of the challenging issues around affordable housing in East Lothian, it would be because I have not been listening to John Home Robertson lately—he has been more than persistent in pursuing those matters. We recognise the different housing challenges in areas such as the one that the member represents and in others throughout Scotland. I am confident not just that the current planning system and planning advice note allow for affordable housing to be identified, but that the matter will be further explored through the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill. The bill provides greater opportunities to acknowledge the challenge of meeting the housing needs of those who want affordable housing but do not currently have it. I am sure that as the bill progresses, the matter will be illuminated further.

If a proposal requires planning permission, Scottish ministers play their usual role within the planning system. Whether a proposal requires planning permission will depend on the particular circumstances of the case.

I am blessed with many things, but a requirement that Mr Cairns be answerable to me is not one of them. He is accountable to Westminster for his answers. However, the position on this issue is clear: defence is a reserved matter, and planning is devolved. As I said, if a proposal requires planning permission, the Executive might become involved in the decision-making process.

International women's day is an important event in our calendar and is as important today as it has ever been. It is a time to renew our solidarity on women's equality and our commitment to women's rights. It is also a time to celebrate the achievement of women worldwide and to mark out matters on which progress and change are still needed. We intend to support the Scottish National Party's amendment. It is possible to have a debate of substance in which members of all parties to an extent agree. This year—2006—marks an important centenary: the founding in 1906 of the Scottish Women's Suffragette Federation by Dr Elsie Maud Inglis. One hundred years later, it is fair to say that much has changed, but it is equally fair to say that we still have a long way to go to achieve full equality between women and men in Scotland. I pay tribute to Elsie Inglis and other Scottish suffragists and suffragettes and I mark this international women's day as one for celebration and acknowledgement of their achievements—and other women's achievements—in fighting for full participative rights in our democratic processes. I started by paying tribute to a local heroine, but this is international women's day, and it is the international context that brings a stark reality to the scale of women's inequality. I know that many members are familiar with the statistics. Women constitute half the world's population, but perform nearly two thirds of its work, receive just one tenth of the world's income and own less than 1 per cent of the world's property. Research from organisations that work internationally also tells us that women remain more at risk of illiteracy—for every 100 men, only 88 women worldwide are considered literate. Only 16 per cent of parliamentary seats worldwide are held by women. The experience or threat of violence impacts on women's lives everywhere. It cuts across borders and impacts on all women regardless of social class, age, race or culture. Women are routinely beaten, raped, mutilated and killed with impunity across the world—in their homes and in their communities, in peacetime and in times of war. In fact, it is estimated that among women aged between 15 and 44, violence causes more deaths  and disability than cancer, malaria, traffic accidents or war. It is clear that women around the world do not get a fair deal. Although their contribution is immense, it is not reflected in status, reward or their position in society. Globally, nationally and locally, women are still a long way short of equality, so the need to pursue that agenda is as important as ever. It is well worth restating the work that we have to do to achieve gender equality, because when we talk about pursuing the gender equality agenda, we often encounter the belief that it has been dealt with and is no longer an issue. However, the issue of women's equality is as important here in Scotland as it is anywhere else. In Scotland, one in five women experiences domestic abuse from a male partner in their lifetime. Women earn on average 12 per cent less than men and occupy the lowest-paid jobs in the lowest-paid occupations. We have a good record in the Scottish Parliament, but women constitute only 15 per cent of Westminster MPs and 22 per cent of local councillors. Moreover, women are massively underrepresented in board rooms and decision-making bodies and continue to experience discrimination in employment and access to services. As a result, although this might well be a day for celebration, we do not yet have gender equality. This is not an issue for the past; it is an issue of the past, the present and the future. It is no less important than other equality issues and continues to demand attention from every one of us. We continue to have a great deal to engage with and we should not underestimate how difficult it will be to overcome the legacy of centuries of discrimination, ingrained sexism and patriarchy that we have inherited. Parliament's shape and conduct has been influenced by the fact that nearly 40 per cent of MSPs are women. That places us among the world's leaders with regard to women's representation. We have well-established structures for delivering on equality and Parliament and the Executive have from the outset afforded high priority to equality work. We should remember that that level of representation did not come about by accident. If I may, I again pay tribute to the women in my party and the trade union movement, who led the charge in meeting the aspirations of women and women's organisations throughout Scotland. I also point out that major pieces of Scottish legislation, such as the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006 and the Local Governance (Scotland) Act 2004 have contained equality provisions, and that other policies are shifting as the mainstreaming equality agenda advances across policy areas.  I do not have time today to do justice to all the work that is being done, but I will highlight some areas in which we have seen real movement—the first being equal pay, which we must nevertheless continue to address. The legislation on this is crystal clear: women are entitled to equal pay not only for carrying out work that is similar to or the same as the work that men carry out, but also for carrying out work that is of equal value. However, as the SNP amendment points out, despite 30 years of legislation, there is still a 12 per cent pay gap between men and women. Although that gap is continuing to decrease in Scotland, the fact that it still exists is unacceptable.

Although pensions are Westminster's responsibility, I point out that inequality in respect of women's pensions is a reflection of their inequality in the workplace and of the child care responsibilities that they have had to take on throughout their lives. That inequality exists across the board. A key element in addressing women's poverty is tackling low and unequal pay. We know that segregation in jobs and occupations places women in the lowest-paid jobs and that the lack of value that is attached to these jobs serves to keep the pay depressed and women poorly paid. Women make up the greatest proportion of part-time workers, so we must remember that, at 34 per cent, the pay gap for part-time workers is even starker. Pay might be structured in such a way as to disadvantage women, and skills training and promotional opportunities might not always be equally available to women. Moreover, gender stereotyping limits opportunities, and discrimination continues the inequality, so it is right that the issue remains high on the agenda. It is right that the Equality Act 2006 legislated for gender duty and a new commission for equality and human rights, which will transform our engagement with the equality agenda across Scotland, and it is right that the recent report and recommendations of the United Kingdom women and work commission focused on those issues. After all, they must be addressed if women are to be properly valued and paid. The Executive is therefore in the process of establishing an interdepartmental working group to address occupational segregation. It is not just that women are in low-paid jobs but that the jobs are low paid  because women do them. We must break that cycle. Legislation has been critical in the improvement of women's lives. The advent of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 and equal pay legislation were vital in signalling that it was no longer acceptable to discriminate against women. The new public sector duty to promote equality of opportunity between men and women and to have due regard to the need to eliminate unlawful discrimination will also bring significant changes to the ways in which our public bodies conduct their businesses not only as employers but in terms of policy making and service delivery. We also need a shift in practice and behaviour. Although legislation in the matter is the responsibility of the UK Government, the Scottish Executive has a crucial role to play in encouraging good practice and equal opportunities, and particularly in encouraging the observance of equal opportunities requirements. That is why we continue to work closely with a range of partners, including the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Scottish Trades Union Congress, to close the pay gap, and that is why we announced last November that the Scottish Executive would continue to fund the close the gap initiative for two more years. Equal pay is not the only issue with which we are engaging. We accept that lack of child care can be a major barrier to women's participation in the labour market and to their accessing higher and further education. Our child care strategy is designed to provide affordable, accessible and good-quality child care that meets the needs of children and parents. Just under £73 million was made available to implement the child care strategy over the period 2004-06. A national child care information website has been established and there are child care information services in each local authority area in Scotland. In addition, we have the working for families fund, which is designed to enable parents in deprived areas or groups to access education, training or employment, where lack of child care provision is a barrier to their doing so. The sum of £20 million was allocated for the period 2004-06 to the 10 local authorities that have the highest concentrations of children in workless households, and a further £30 million has been made available for the period between 2006 and 2008. As well as funding the availability of child care, the fund supports parents' moves towards work by providing them with a key worker who can co-ordinate child care support and give assistance in accessing financial support and information on education and training. The fund does not target only lone parents, the vast majority of whom are women; it addresses everyone's needs. A good  example of how that has benefited women can be seen in the Rosemount transitions project in Royston, Glasgow, which supports women who have caring responsibilities to make the transition from unemployment to sustainable work. I would like briefly to mention health, because today is not just international women's day. It is also no smoking day, so I take this opportunity to talk about women's health in that context. It is right that we make the connection between health, poverty and deprivation, and it is right that we try to understand how those issues can have particular impacts on women. We know that smoking rates among young girls have remained stubbornly high while smoking rates among young men have fallen. We recognise that our smoke-free public places legislation is the most significant public health legislation for a generation and is helping the process of denormalising smoking in Scottish society. It is, however, also important that we bring a women's perspective to that initiative. If we look at pay, occupational segregation, child care and health—to name just a few—it is clear that, despite the good progress that is being made, we cannot be complacent. That is why we provide funding to a wide range of women's organisations, such as Women onto Work, which offers 12-week pre-vocational courses for women who want to return to work. We also fund women @ work, which has been providing learning opportunities for women across the Scottish Highlands since 1997. My predecessor, Margaret Curran, commissioned an expert group to take a strategic look at the women's agenda in Scotland. A small group of experienced women, under the chairmanship of Professor Joan Stringer, undertook that task and reported in December 2003. It was in the context of that group that we established the Scottish Women's Convention to help us to develop the women's agenda in Scotland. I know that the convention held an important conference earlier today, and I welcome members of the convention and other guests to the chamber today. We set up the convention because we want it to help us to shape public policy by working with us and engaging with us to ensure that the views of women from throughout Scotland are heard. I hope that women from throughout Scotland will continue to engage positively with the convention and to make that organisation their own. The strategic group provided us with a cohesive strategic framework for developing the women's agenda in Scotland, and I am able to announce today that ministers have recently approved the first update on the Executive's action on the strategic group's recommendations, which should  be published on the Executive's website imminently. It is right that we should highlight achievements on international women's day, but we must also remember that inequalities persist, and that inequality is perhaps most marked when we consider the prevalence of men's violence against women. Whether we are referring to domestic abuse, rape and sexual assault or commercial sexual exploitation, the range of abuses that are suffered by women and the level of their occurrence in Scotland continue to be sources of major concern. Our work in that regard is crucial; it is extremely important that we continue the work that we are already doing. We have successful partnerships with women's organisations and with local authorities. That has enabled us to implement the national strategy, to improve services and to raise awareness. Our award-winning advertising campaign has helped to shift public attitudes and to create a climate in which there is no excuse for domestic abuse. Last year we announced that the Executive would introduce a new violence against women fund that would run from April 2006 until March 2008.

I am acutely aware that it is important that everyone who is involved in dealing with domestic abuse and violence against women play their part—I know that the Minister for Justice is keen that there should be close co-operation when such matters are pursued. A sheriff who sits on the national group on violence against women makes a telling contribution to the development of our work in that field, but we accept that progress has still to be made. The new fund will replace the two previous funding streams—the domestic abuse service development fund and the violence against women service development fund. Its focus will be on providing support for local projects by delivering front-line services or by building capacity in local partnerships in order to strengthen local responses to violence against women.  We received 110 applications from around Scotland, which related to a range of activities from across the tackling violence against women agenda. I am very pleased to announce that we will be funding—either in full or in part—86 projects. It might be worth noting that one of those projects, which is based in Glasgow, will address the needs of women who are trafficked. The fund will assist a mixture of new projects and continuing work and it will play a significant role in ensuring that we continue to challenge all forms of violence against women, wherever and whenever they occur. We want to build consistent, effective and high-quality responses to support women and children who experience violence. We also want to ensure that women in all their diversity access the best possible opportunities, make a full contribution to society and the economy and experience real improvement in their lives. The celebration of international women's day by the Executive and Parliament will end this evening with a reception in Parliament's garden lobby, at which Malcolm Chisholm will announce the name of the artist who has won the commission to make a sculpture to mark the contribution that women from the past and the present have made to advancing democracy and improving the position of women in Scotland. As I said at the start of my speech, 2006 is the Scottish Women's Suffragette Federation's centenary year: I hope that the sculpture will be a fitting tribute to the legacy of those women, from which we have all benefited. I hope that we will celebrate international women's day collectively and that we will pledge to work together to achieve equality for women in Scotland and to work with women throughout the world. Today's debate has provided us with another great opportunity to discuss gender equality issues, but those issues are important not only on 8 March; we must commit to addressing them every day, in every community and in every workplace throughout Scotland.

First, I do not agree with the comment that the member made on the number of open space audits. The fact is that at least half the local authorities have started an open space audit or are completing one. At national level, through the planning advice note process and our review of national planning policy guideline 11, "Sport, Recreation and Open Space", we are very keen to understand exactly what open space means to local communities and how communities and authorities can develop standards and strategies. I recognise the importance of informal play and formal play. I am proud of the Executive's record in investing in our communities and in understanding the need for sport and physical activity. It is important for us also to recognise the importance of maintaining open space. It is therefore to be regretted that, when the Green party had the opportunity to support our proposals to deal with some of the problems in respect of open spaces, including the fact that they are not safe to use if they are frequented by disorderly people who keep other people away. In order to keep young people safe on the streets when they are playing, we have to deal with the people who make our streets unsafe.  The general thrust of the points that Robin Harper and others are making—that we must encourage physical activity and that, in the planning process, we have to recognise the importance of well maintained and safe open space—is, of course, at the heart of the Executive's approach.

The proposals that are set out in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill will result in a more efficient and transparent planning system, with community involvement at its heart.

As the bill goes through Parliament—particularly stage 1, in which the Communities Committee is dealing in detail with the challenges and opportunities that are presented by the bill—there can be no conclusion other than that community engagement is threaded right through the bill, rather than just being a bolt-on to it. On whether the word "consultation" is in the bill, perhaps the bill includes something more explicit and tough. I can give examples of inclusion measures that encapsulate the national planning framework: they are in the bill, in the development plans scheme, in the development plan itself and in development management. We are clear that communities have to be engaged at an early stage, particularly on development plans. It is essential at every stage that communities be kept fully informed and have an opportunity to make their voices heard. I do not accept the characterisation that has been made. I am happy to go through the specifics of the bill in more detail with Mrs Mulligan, but I am confident that, in committee in particular, those challenges will be explored.

Everybody recognises the challenges of the bill, but if people are going to be discouraged from being involved by people constantly telling them that the bill is not an opportunity but a sell-out, cynicism and disengagement will be created that will be difficult to turn round. Those are not "warm words". Close study of the bill will establish that community involvement and community engagement are at the beginning of the process. Any test of an application has to be matched against the quality of community engagement. By putting the development plan at the centre of the planning process, we will allow engagement and involvement at an early stage. I do not accept the notion that there will be a substitution of rights. There are clear rights in the bill. It is unhelpful for people who are opposed to the proposals in the bill to focus simply on one acid test regarding a third party right of appeal. The bill attempts to encapsulate all the challenges and complexities of the planning process. I assure Parliament, as the Executive has done previously, that we are entirely committed to people being able to shape their communities and to there being as much transparency in the process as possible.

Although there are strong feelings on the issue, members have conveyed their views in a way that has allowed the debate to be challenging and interesting. I shall do my best to continue in that vein. I did not see the Channel 4 programme that is referred to in Margaret Mitchell's motion and so cannot comment on its journalistic merits. On the upside, it is good that it has stimulated discussion and debate about places like Cumbernauld town centre and the Parliament building, Scotland's other public building that has been nominated for demolition. I am somewhat uneasy about such programmes, in which places are used to capture and describe a problem. As a consequence, those places come to be seen as being beyond saving. Decline and decay are images that are triggered in people's minds when they think of Cumbernauld; they think that it is a place that must be demolished. That is a reproach and an insult to the individuals and agencies in such communities who work hard to change them. I am somewhat anxious when there is a sneering tone behind what is said. It may be helpful if some of the experts who sneer were to reflect on the fact that when the decisions on these town plans and buildings were made, they were made on the basis of professional advice, so although hindsight is an exact science, it should be remembered that planning decisions were made with the best intentions. Cumbernauld must be seen in that context. Regarding Robin Harper's point about town planning, one feature that has emerged from the discussions on the planning bill is the potential for town planners to make significant changes. The Executive wants to re-invigorate the notion that  town planning is a career in which people can make changes and differences. Cathie Craigie said that she would be coming to my door looking for financial assistance for Cumbernauld. There is no change there—she spends a great deal of her time bending the ears of whichever minister she can get hold of on behalf of her constituents. The Executive has supported significant investment, not just in the shopping centre but in the town centre, in closed circuit television and in housing developments. The Scottish Executive places great emphasis on the quality of the built and natural environments and we believe that investment in good design and public spaces is a sound investment. It can help transform both the perception and the reality of our neighbourhoods, towns and cities and it can help to create a sense of pride and identity. Equally, buildings that are poorly designed or poorly maintained can bring a place down or give it an undeserved reputation. Cumbernauld has a great deal going for it. It is well connected to the rest of Scotland, it has a growing population, unemployment stands at just over 2 per cent and it has a good mix of housing. The picture I have of Cumbernauld is that it is a positive place. I remember that while I was a wee girl growing up in Anderston in Glasgow, one of my school pals got the chance to live in Cumbernauld. We got to go out in the train to see this wonderful, exotic, bright, open and green place with houses that had gardens and underfloor heating. For our generation, Cumbernauld was seen as a place of opportunity. We all understand why Cumbernauld wants that perception to remain. It is not for the Executive to prescribe the form or content of particular developments, be they in Cumbernauld or anywhere else. Members will appreciate that, given my ministerial responsibilities for planning, I am unable to comment on specific proposals. However, the Executive sets the policy framework and provides advice, guidance and support to promote well-planned and well-designed places and buildings. Planning policy recognises the importance of town centres. National planning policy guideline 8, on town centres and retail, which we are in the process of revising, sets out our commitment to the protection and enhancement of town centres. The aim of the policy is to sustain and enhance the vitality, viability and design of town centres, which must be about more than just providing a shopping mall. Current planning policy also discourages exclusive reliance on the private car. The Executive's planning policy statement, "Designing Places", which was published in November 2001, also provides guidance for local  authorities and others. It sets out the Executive's aspirations for design and the role of the planning system in delivering them. It is backed up by a series of design-based planning advice notes, which cover subjects such as open space, housing, road layouts and design statements. We also have in place a policy on architecture that acknowledges the value of good design in development and regeneration. A new statement, that takes account of the Cultural Commission's comments on strengthening the role of the existing policy, will be launched later in the year. I acknowledge the importance of ensuring that those who live in the houses and who use the buildings are part of shaping the plans. Communities Scotland has accepted the importance of such involvement in developing its housing policy and in respect of new build. Such involvement is how we can make intelligent decisions about the kind of buildings that we create. Well-designed towns and cities emerge because deliberate and careful design direction is given to urban growth, conservation and change. Last year, Scottish ministers established a new champion for good design in the built environment in our country in Architecture and Design Scotland. A key function of that new body is to engage with planning and procurement processes and to demand excellence in development at all levels and in all parts of the country. Architecture and Design Scotland takes a proactive role in promoting and advocating good design. Therefore, I encourage North Lanarkshire Council to consult Architecture and Design Scotland on its plans for the town centre of Cumbernauld. I said earlier that I welcome, with certain caveats, the debate and discussion that the "Demolition" programme generated. I particularly welcome the fact that it is not just planners and architects who talk about places and buildings. It is important that communities such as Cumbernauld understand and influence planning decisions. Although the current planning system allows people to become involved in the process, there is a need to ensure that all communities can participate in the planning decisions that affect their lives. That is why the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill, which is currently progressing through the Parliament, will provide better opportunities for people to influence decisions in developing the planning process and in considering individual developments. In order to support the measures in the bill, the Executive will work with stakeholders to prepare a planning advice note on community engagement. The note will provide advice on the new requirements for inclusion, it will give practical guidance on the approaches to community  engagement and it will highlight examples of best practice. There will also be an information campaign on the changes in the planning system to tell people how they can become involved. Those steps to engage people in planning will complement the work that the Executive is doing to ensure that people have a voice in the regeneration of their areas. Communities Scotland, for example, is working with local authorities and others to implement national standards for community engagement. Through the community voices programme, it will provide £9 million over the next three years to give communities a real say in regeneration. I am aware that North Lanarkshire Council organised a meeting with Cumbernauld community forum and the association of community councils in December to discuss the future of the town centre. The meeting was attended by the chief executive and other senior officials, which is a good sign that the council is taking the issue seriously. I understand that there have been meetings since then, including one today. I welcome that approach and encourage the council to continue working with the community on this important issue. Of course we acknowledge the democratic accountability and authority of local councils, too. Democratic provision means that it is not for the centre to decide anything; there is an inner planning process. We have to recognise the key role of local authorities.

I will not comment on something that I am not aware of. I was trying to make the point that any local authority has its own democratic authority that the Scottish Parliament must recognise. We have heard interesting views on the importance of design in the future of Cumbernauld town centre. North Lanarkshire Council has acknowledged that changes to the town centre are required and it has proposed amendments to the Glasgow and Clyde valley structural plan that identify Cumbernauld town centre as a renewal priority. The council has also worked with others to deliver road and lighting improvements, environmental works and the refurbishment of the Tryst sports centre. Construction of the Antonine centre, which is a new retail development that will bring in an estimated 600 jobs and £50 million of  investment, started last week. All that, coupled with investment and support from Communities Scotland and Scottish Enterprise Lanarkshire, will bring benefits to the town centre. It is clear that we and others should take the design of places and buildings seriously, and I have outlined the policies that the Executive has in place to support that. I encourage North Lanarkshire Council and its partners to take account of the policies and to involve local people fully in the town's future. We want to think of Cumbernauld as I had always thought of it: a thriving place of great potential. I am sure that members and people in the Cumbernauld area will work extremely hard for the successful outcome of discussions so that we can have a revitalised town centre.

indicated agreement  .

I have said already that we take seriously the development of the town centre. We have invested in it and we recognise the importance of all the people involved coming together in the best interests of the people of Cumbernauld.  Meeting closed at 17:45.

The Executive is committed to eradicating fuel poverty as far as is reasonably practicable by 2016. We have already installed more than 63,000 central heating systems and insulated more than 220,000 homes, including those of a significant number of households with children. Our warm deal programme is targeted at low-income families in receipt of certain welfare benefits. In addition, we are working to eradicate child poverty by 2020 and have a number of initiatives to help families with children to find routes out of poverty, such as our child care strategy, sure start Scotland and our working for families programme.

Yes. It is important that what we do is based on robust data and that we ensure that when we decide how to invest money in the best way to help families who are in fuel poverty, we do so with a proper understanding of the issues. The data can come in a number of ways through research and so on, but I recognise particularly the role of organisations that work with low-income families and the important dialogue  that we have with that part of the voluntary sector, which helps to shape our actions.

As I have indicated, we are reviewing our central heating programme, which of course is far beyond what is available in other parts of the United Kingdom. It is important that we develop that programme, particularly in relation to fuel poverty. It is clear that what we need to do for children who live in fuel poverty is to support their families out of poverty. That is why our child care strategy, sure start Scotland and our working for families programme are also important. It is important that we recognise the hard work that has been done and the significant investment that has been made. Given that the Scottish National Party's offer to the children of Scotland is independence and not taxing the oil companies, I am sure that those children will recognise the key role of the Executive in supporting them.

We can divide the debate into two parts. First, there were the sensible, practical and thoughtful contributions on the hard issues for the voluntary sector. Secondly, however, there were the contributions that basically said two things at the same time: that we should not be having the debate and that there are lots of hard things to be said in the debate. Christine Grahame ought to try to be a little more consistent. She should not say that we should be debating something else, then say that there are lots of things to debate. The definition of a debate should not hinge on whether there is a motion. Anybody who knows the Scottish Executive will know that it is perfectly capable of having a robust, hard and challenging discussion without a motion at the end of it.

Then we have a responsibility to give it focus. I am grateful that others in the chamber have managed to do that. [ Interruption. ]

I wish to say something on a technical point. The SNP may wish to raise with its representatives in the Parliamentary Bureau whether there should be a subject debate. Today's debate was agreed by the bureau. The Executive members of the bureau did not insist that there should not be a motion. It is a red herring on Christine Grahame's part to raise that point. I want to reflect on some of the hard issues that Christine Grahame could have raised and that we could recognise in relation to challenging—

I wish to make a general point about volunteering. People talk about platitudes and about being patronising and so on, but there is a hard political issue here, and there are dividing lines on it in the chamber. There was a time when I would have argued that volunteering is nothing to do with Government or the state; that the state should provide and it should be a matter for the public sector to deliver for people. However, that view flew in the face of the Executive's experience and our understanding that people volunteer because it is something that they want to do. Not only can volunteers work where the state does not choose to work, but they can go to places that the state cannot reach.

I ask Fiona Hyslop to let me make progress. I had the privilege of visiting the Caladh Trust on Uist, which is a project that provides a service that the state is incapable of providing. Its volunteers did not talk to me about funding, but about the initiatives that the trust has developed. The vast majority of its funding does not come from the state. Many voluntary bodies do not talk simply about funding. When we are talking about volunteering we have to be careful that we go beyond the important and relevant debate about funding and develop it further.

If the member will let me progress, I will take her point. We should recognise the hard questions that have been raised, such as how services are  delivered and what the voluntary sector consists of. However, people should be consistent. They should not say that they welcome the voluntary sector then define social rented housing as privatisation. We have to ask a hard question: to what extent can the state control a sector that develops from human instinct? What level of state intervention should there be? I accept that an interesting and challenging question arises about the balance between funding innovation and funding success. We are wrestling with that, because we realise that the voluntary sector and volunteers can be innovative. We must have a place for that, but we must also have a place for successful projects.

There are now record levels of funding for the voluntary sector, which I am sure Fiona Hyslop will welcome.

I was reflecting on my 30-year journey as a political activist. Some members have not yet made such a journey. Since devolution, we have shown that we understand that Government should track and support innovation rather than impose it from the centre, and thereby support local communities. The centralists in the Parliament may wish to reflect on that. The Executive has embraced that idea and the country has made progress on that journey. A false division can be made between big and small organisations. It is possible to have a volunteering strategy that recognises the success of ProjectScotland and at the same time accepts that we must not drive out small organisations through overwieldy and overburdensome regulation. There has been movement on that issue in relation to Disclosure Scotland and the central registered body in Scotland. The SNP is trying to knock down a straw man, because the Executive has made progress.

As the member has been harassing me to take an intervention, I will respond to that. We recognise the importance of a strategic funding review and we are moving to implementation of that following the publication of the joint action plan. Nobody thinks that we should not move on that, but we have to move at the same pace as all the partners, which include the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the SCVO and the wider public and voluntary sectors. It has not taken six years—we have already made a great deal of progress. As I said, we are moving to change and slim down the grant application process. I am sure that all members accept that we do not want to create an industry that rewards those who know how to fill in application forms rather than those who can support developments. As Cathy Peattie said, volunteering is about much more than the voluntary sector. Research from a variety of sources has shown consistently that about 25 per cent of people who volunteer say that they do so in the public sector. Volunteers work with local councils to make life better for vulnerable people such as children, older people and people with learning disabilities. We have a recognised Executive initiative in community planning to harness volunteers' energy to ensure that decisions about local communities are made by those communities. Mary Scanlon mentioned citizens advice bureaux. We recognise their role and I accept the point that she made about communication systems, but we must put that in the context of the highest-ever funding for the voluntary sector. We should work round the system rather than expecting those who are in need to do so. However, we must recognise that, even though we want to make the disclosure process easier, address the central registered body in Scotland and make more funding available, there will still be hard questions about where the money goes. We must have public accountability in relation to disclosure. We must have confidence in the system so that vulnerable people are not made more vulnerable. We accept that tension and we want to work together to find solutions to it. We should not listen to the SNP members with the half-empty glasses who say that nothing has been done. They sit passively and say that we need to do this and that, but the fact is that the Executive is addressing the hard issues in partnership with the voluntary sector and local communities and a great deal more will be done.  We understand that an active voluntary sector and active volunteers are challenging. Volunteers are not sitting passively waiting for things to happen; instead, throughout Scotland, they are contributing more and more, to the benefit of the people of this country.

The definition in question is contained in the Home Energy Efficiency Scheme Amendment (Scotland) Regulations 2001 (SSI 2001/267). We are considering those regulations in their entirety as we develop our new central heating programmes, and we will carefully consider the wording of the definition in that context.

Yes. We recognise the programme's significance and success, and we have spent more than £200 million on fuel poverty measures in the period in question. However, inflexibilities and technicalities in the programme that could not have been predicted have been thrown up, often through constituents contacting members, and it has been recognised that the aim of lifting people out of fuel poverty has not been met in certain circumstances as a consequence. I assure the member that in developing and reviewing the process, I am particularly mindful of the small issues that can make a difference to individual constituents and that I will take on board any comments that members have on such issues as we progress.

We are still considering how to take the programme forward. We have already indicated that we intend to extend it to cover over-60s who are on pension credit. Of course, we must be mindful of the target of lifting people out of fuel poverty and the costs of any measures that we want to develop, but we recognise the points that have been made, which have also been forcibly made elsewhere. Those points and suggestions about who should be included in the programme will be taken into account as we move towards taking final decisions.

Pre-inquiry meetings are invariably held well in advance of major public local inquiries, and all groups and individuals who have made representations would be invited to those meetings, at which the procedures would be explained and questions would be answered. General guidance on public inquiries is also available on the inquiry reporters unit website or by requesting assistance from the unit's staff. Any announcement about whether a public local inquiry will be held into the Beauly to Denny power line proposal is a matter for the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Nicol Stephen, because the application would be made under the Electricity Act 1989.

The member will be aware that there is currently no specific funding for local authorities to cover the costs of managing applications. However, an opportunity has been afforded to us by the radical proposals in the Planning etc (Scotland) Bill to consider such matters, to address the issue of resources and the experiences of different groups and to carry out an honest appraisal of the costs and how they can be  managed. As we move forward to considering the hierarchy of approaches to proposals, we recognise that we must consider whether fees are commensurate with the work that is involved. We are very keen to be in close dialogue with local authorities and others about how those processes are managed.

As the member is aware, I already said that the proposals will be developed under the Electricity Act 1989 and dealt with by the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. That is the current situation. If there is a proposal to change it, that will be explored as the bill progresses through Parliament.

Regeneration is a key priority for the Executive. We are firmly committed to regenerating the most deprived communities. Our key programme, the community regeneration fund, is providing more than £318 million over the next three years to help to do that. For Scotland, that represents a 5 per cent increase on predecessor programmes over the previous three years. For  Fife, the level of funding has nearly tripled, from just over £2.2 million over the period 2002-05 to £6.6 million over the period 2005-08. Future levels of funding for regeneration and the way in which they are targeted will be considered in the context of the next spending review.

The whole point of our regeneration policy is to focus on deprived communities. The index drives down into small groups, so the areas that Helen Eadie has identified will require and receive support. We understand the specific issues that affect the coalfields. I recently had the pleasure of visiting Coalfields Regeneration Trust initiatives in Helen Eadie's constituency, to which we are giving £3 million over the next two years to address the specific problems that affect coalfield areas. I emphasise that the complex issue of multiple deprivation and the geography of poverty must be addressed, and we are funding that fully.

Key public bodies including the Executive, local authorities, health boards and the police have a specific duty under race relations legislation to ensure access to the information and services that they provide, and must set out their arrangements for compliance in their race equality schemes. Updated race equality schemes were published last month. We have written to local authorities and other public bodies asking them to develop or improve language plans for the communities that they serve. We are also working to double the number of British Sign Language interpreters in Scotland to ensure that BSL users can access public services. We shall in the new year publish research into provision and quality of translation, interpreting and communication support services across Scotland. That research will help development of policy in that area.

The research that will be published early in the new year, which will consider how the support service is delivered throughout Scotland, will inform what we do next. We have emphasised to local authorities and public bodies their responsibility—they must have plans that identify local needs. Although we may later consider the gaps and how the Scottish Executive can provide support, the emphasis at this stage must be on local authorities and local bodies understanding local needs and taking responsibility for delivering services. However, I am keen to keep the issue under review and I am happy to give Marlyn Glen the specific information that she seeks about the quality of the service, and to explore further how imaginative and creative ways of addressing the issue can be taken on.

I congratulate Paul Martin on securing the debate and on the way in which he highlighted clearly the challenges and provided a great deal of food for thought with the creative solutions that he identified. I acknowledge that everyone who participated in the debate approached the subject seriously. Important contributions were made, on which I will reflect. The issue of excess winter deaths is complex and many factors come into play. Although its causes are not fully understood, the Executive is working to address the needs of Scotland's vulnerable older people and other vulnerable groups in a number of ways. I take Paul Martin's point: I am always anxious that when someone says, "Let's do a bit of research", it provides an opportunity to put a brake on action. We have to consider what is happening in relation to excess winter death. It is not simply—or even predominantly—about hypothermia, because other factors come into play. It is about identifying vulnerable people and ensuring that there is support for them. It is important to put the Glasgow figures in the context of Glasgow's ill-health. The issue of excess winter deaths relates more broadly to health inequalities, what we are prepared to do to address them and how money is invested throughout the Executive to do so. Sandra White mentioned the importance of the index of multiple deprivation—poverty of place has an impact. We have to accept the consequences of targeted decisions, and although we have general spend in relation to older people, we also need targeted spend if we are to meet the needs of vulnerable groups. That is a difficult argument and a difficult balance to strike. It is particularly evident that we have to get the balance right in relation to pensioner poverty and fuel poverty.  I was particularly interested in Paul Martin's comment about IT. We have understood the issue of IT in relation to isolated, rural and remote communities and investment has been made in helping people connect to computers and so on. We might need to reflect further on how we deal with people who are isolated in their communities because of their age and we need to be much more imaginative about how we get information to them. We provide information, but do we provide it in a way that allows people to benefit from it? We need to put the issue in the context of our broader policy. When members were talking about the levels of winter-related excess deaths and the cold, I remembered that when I was a child our house was cold except when we were near the fire, but I also remember that older people were part of a community where people round about them were willing to go and find out whether they were okay. I do not think that I am just looking back to a golden age when communities felt safer. Our programme is about community safety and making people feel safer is part of that. Recently I was involved in a housing project in the Gorbals, where the people understood that supporting an older person is not just about managing their care, but about considering the things that make them feel more alive and more involved in the community, such as being taken to church. The broader context of identifying vulnerable people and having a community response is important. I acknowledge the issue of pensioner poverty and poverty more generally. It is certainly my driver in relation to a range of issues, particularly those that are to do with multiple deprivation. The Executive is tackling pensioner poverty in Scotland in partnership with the UK Government. I thought that the Scottish National Party might have congratulated the Chancellor of the Exchequer on his being willing to tax the oil companies to invest in public services. There are almost 190,000, or almost three quarters, fewer pensioners living in absolute poverty and 100,000, or more than one third, fewer living in relative poverty than there were in 1997. The Executive is providing free central heating. I say to John Swinburne that it is open to all—people do not have to be on pension credit to get it—because we accept that there is a balance of spend on that. We are also providing free local off-peak bus travel, which we are extending to make it a national scheme, and free personal and nursing care. We are helping to improve benefits uptake through a range of measures, which include our benefits health checks under the central heating  programme and funding for the Scottish helpline for older people. However, I acknowledge that more has to be done and that we must use the avenues for giving information more imaginatively than we have in the past, and that we must use fora such as the older people's consultative forum. Those measures complement benefits that the UK Government provides, such as pension credit, council tax and housing benefit, the winter fuel payment, free television licences and the £200 council tax refund. Overall, the tax and benefit measures that have been introduced since 1997 are worth an extra £30 per week to Scottish pensioner households, with the poorest 20 per cent getting about £40 a week extra. More pension reforms are planned. We acknowledge the points that Margaret Ewing and other members made. The issue remains one with which we must wrestle. We have to get down to the practicalities of delivering measures. We are all aware that, in many cases, our older citizens struggle to pay their fuel bills, which is why we have invested more than £200 million so far in the central heating programme and the warm deal. I appreciated Patrick Harvie's kind comments on that matter. I am glad that he has caught up with the Christmas cheer, if belatedly. As the Housing (Scotland) Bill made its passage through the Parliament, we debated energy efficiency. We did not agree absolutely on that, but the issue was acknowledged. The Scottish Green Party engaged with the debate at every stage of the bill's consideration, but it is perhaps a little disingenuous of Tommy Sheridan to suggest that the Scottish Socialist Party pressed anyone on the matter, because its members were absent from the debate in committee and in Parliament they piggybacked on an amendment from the Greens. We have put central heating systems into more than 60,000 homes and we have insulated more than 218,000—almost one tenth of Scotland's housing stock. Those programmes represent the biggest investment ever in a home energy efficiency programme in Scotland and they are aimed at Scotland's most vulnerable households, which include people—specifically older people—whose health or general well-being may be at risk from cold and damp housing. The programmes also offer advice. Not only do they make people's homes warm and comfortable, but they help them to save money on fuel bills, too. As Bill Aitken said, we are committed to our target of eradicating fuel poverty as far as is reasonably practicable by 2016. However, that is only one part of our approach. The results on benefits uptake are encouraging, because benefits can make a difference. Paul Martin made an important point on the energy companies. It appears that, currently, they  reward people who are more prosperous and charge more to those who are already in poverty. We are working closely with them to address that and we have been pressing them to introduce special social tariffs for their most vulnerable customers in order to protect them from the impact of recent fuel price increases. We are pleased that all the companies have taken steps in that direction, but we want far more progress, because we realise that recent fuel price increases make it more important than ever for more companies to go further.

I am happy to pursue that point. I highlight to members the home heat helpline, which has been organised by a group of energy companies that want to give information to older and poorer clients so that they do not suffer from the cold of winter. It is also important that agencies across the board work in a joined-up manner, examine what is happening in our communities and address those issues. I am happy to confirm to Sandra White that we are developing an older people strategy. We want to take an integrated approach to all aspects of supporting older people, which is why we are developing a strategy for an aging population. Malcolm Chisholm chairs an external advisory group on which Help the Aged and Scottish Gas are both represented, because we recognise that we cannot sort things out by talking to ourselves. Government needs to understand and to track those who identify need and establish solutions and must work with them to make progress. A strategy that will be launched next year will set out a framework for giving older people access to opportunities to allow them to make a continuing contribution; for ensuring an effective integrated service for older people; for promoting and maintaining health and well-being; and for supporting people to live in accommodation and environments that continue to meet their needs and wishes as they age. I stress that this is not about managing a problem that affects older people, but about supporting people so that they get what they need. In that respect, the most fundamental need must be good health in a safe and warm environment. I take very seriously the challenging points that members have made. As I have said, by developing the central heating programme and  other Executive initiatives, I will continue to ensure that those points are addressed.

I am pleased to be able to make a statement on the Executive's progress in preparing to implement the European Union directive on the energy performance of buildings. The directive will ensure that building standards throughout Europe place a high emphasis on minimising energy consumption and will encourage actions to reduce energy use in buildings throughout Europe without requiring huge additional expenditure, while perceptibly increasing the comfort of users. The measures, which in essence address all energy consumers, are a vital component of the EU's strategy to fulfil its commitments under the Kyoto protocol. I emphasise that we see the directive not as an imposition, but as action that builds on the important reforms and modernisation of the building standards system that we have undertaken over the past five years. We now have a robust yet flexible structure that will ensure that all new buildings meet the standards for safety, energy efficiency and accessibility for all. The duty of verification against those standards has been given to local authorities, and competent professional groups have been given the opportunity to gain recognition by becoming approved certifiers. To ensure a strong professional base to the system, we have established the Scottish Building Standards Agency which, in accordance with our relocation policy, operates successfully from Livingston. The agency works to raise standards and issues technical guidance, and has already begun the process of auditing certifiers and verifiers. I record our recognition and appreciation of the hard work that has gone into not only the agency's establishment—with all the challenges that that presents—but the new system's introduction. The European directive complements the work that we are already doing, and we intend to implement it in the most cost-effective way for Scotland. Energy performance is an area in which we can make real improvements. Saving energy is of benefit to everyone. It means lower fuel costs for building owners and householders, as well as lower national carbon emissions. We intend to encourage flexibility of design in new buildings through the higher standards, and to give clear  advantages to buildings that adopt low-carbon and zero-carbon solutions. In existing buildings, the energy performance certificates will not only give a clear indication to everyone of how the building can perform, but include cost-effective improvement measures that the owner can consider adopting. The directive's implementation will contribute to the overall sustainability of the building stock while encouraging good design. Therefore, the directive will make an important contribution to the delivery of our sustainable development objectives. In the new sustainable development strategy that the Minister for Environment and Rural Development is launching today, we make it clear that Scotland, like other developed countries, is using an unfair and unsustainable share of the world's resources. The actions and commitments in that strategy, which include actions that will reduce our greenhouse gas emissions and improve Scotland's energy efficiency, will help us to limit our use of resources. That will become an important part of the proposed Scottish climate change programme. In Scotland, we have long had standards for energy conservation in new buildings. Those have steadily been improved over the years, with major improvements being made in 1997 and 2002. Implementation of the European directive, taken with the current review of energy standards, provides an opportunity for further improvements in new and existing buildings. Research shows that more than 40 per cent of energy use relates to buildings. The purpose of the directive is to increase public awareness and to encourage a reduction not only in energy use but in CO 2 emissions. However, public support for the directive could be lost if it proves to be expensive to implement. Therefore, we have been working to ensure that we can apply the directive without imposing unnecessary burdens on building owners. The directive requires us to adopt a methodology that expresses the energy performance of buildings as a single figure or indicator. That method will take into account all the aspects that affect energy use in a single calculation procedure, which will usually involve computer software. Examples of energy-affecting aspects include boiler efficiency, heating controls, thermal insulation, renewable energy sources, climate and glazed areas. The effects of items such as household appliances and industrial plant are excluded. The methodology is being developed in line with that which already underpins the standards that we set for new buildings. All buildings, extensions and alterations are already required to meet the  energy standards of the building regulations, which set the highest thermal insulation requirements in the United Kingdom. A review of those energy standards has been under way for the past year, and we intend to consult on a further upgrading early next year. That fulfils one of our partnership agreements to strengthen building standards in order to improve energy conservation and to consult on ways to incorporate renewable energy sources increasingly into new homes and public buildings. In such upgrading, we are fully determined to ensure that Scotland continues to have the highest thermal insulation standards in the United Kingdom. We also intend to focus activity on reducing CO 2 emissions, and on assessment of the building as a totality, considering all the influences on its energy efficiency. The energy performance directive requires that, for new buildings, designers should consider installing building-integrated low-carbon or zero-carbon-producing energy-generating technologies. By that I mean photovoltaics, wind micro-turbines, combined heat and power, community heating and heat pumps. We intend to embody that within the revised energy standards. The most obvious consequence of the directive will be the establishment of a system of energy performance certificates, which must be made available for buildings at construction, sale or rental. Our current intention is that those certificates will be made available to prospective purchasers and tenants by the current owners. The certificates should also be displayed at all times in large public buildings. We intend to phase in the certification requirements over the next three years, as permitted under the energy performance directive. The energy performance directive also includes provisions on boilers and air-conditioning plant. We will comply with those provisions by ensuring that users of boilers are advised how to improve the efficiency of their systems. We are already discussing with the Energy Saving Trust how that can be done most efficiently and economically. For large air-conditioning systems, we will require inspection for possible energy efficiency improvements—again, we are in discussion with professional bodies about how that can best be achieved. Although much has been done, we are still refining the detail of how certain parts of the energy performance directive will be implemented in Scotland. In particular, we are liaising with the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister to finalise a fully functioning methodology for non-domestic buildings. We are also finalising the details of how energy performance certificates will be made available when properties are sold, and how that  can be linked seamlessly to the plans for the single survey. The directive will apply to virtually all buildings that use fuel and power to heat and cool their internal environment, including dwellings, shops, offices, hotels and cinemas. We shall use the exemptions in the directive gradually to expand certification and we will align the exemptions with our building regulations. The certificates that will be required under the directive will provide owners and tenants with clear and accurate assessments of the energy performance of their buildings. A list of cost-effective improvements that will improve energy efficiency will be provided with the certificate. In the cases of new buildings and buildings that are put up for sale or rent, such certificates will permit prospective buyers and tenants to make more informed choices. We believe that that will encourage consideration of energy efficiency as part of the property-transfer system. It is our intention to publish a consultation on the detailed procedures relating to directive implementation when we publish our proposals for the revised energy standards.

That was a lot of questions. I do not accept that the measures are a weaker version of existing schemes. We are trying to raise public awareness and make people think about the efficiency of our buildings. Capturing information on a label such those that are used on household appliances will allow people to understand in a straightforward way what is expected of them. We have accepted that we should, in the interests of public awareness, introduce measures that are simple and straightforward, that change attitudes, that do not encourage people to avoid the process and that tell people what they can do to improve their buildings. Buildings differ around the country. Through the Scottish Building Standards Agency, we have developed a set of standards, the energy element of which is being reviewed. There is an opportunity for people to get engaged in the process. Our work is rooted in an understanding that buildings differ from one another and that there will be opportunities to generate the certificates at various points in buildings' lifetimes. The directive should be seen in the context of the Housing (Scotland) Bill that we passed a couple of weeks ago, which sets down clearly that people have a responsibility to maintain their properties and that we should support them in that. That bill addresses those concerns. Furthermore, through the warm deal, the central heating programme and other Executive initiatives, we have demonstrated our commitment to addressing fuel poverty. The measures that I have announced today should be seen as tools to be used in the context of that work rather than as being something that is entirely separate from it.

On the first question, there is no point in producing a certificate that is not relevant to a significant amount of the buildings throughout the country, but there is no point in having a centralised one-size-fits-all approach that would mean that the system is of no relevance to  people who live in certain kinds of property. The label will identify a building's energy rating and how its energy efficiency can be improved. The label will be particular to each building and the recommendations will be different for different buildings. That is an important part of the approach. Some work has been done on the estimated cost of the certificates—I will provide Mary Scanlon with details later. We are clear that the purpose of the certificates is to raise public awareness, to make people think about energy efficiency and to help them improve their buildings' energy efficiency. Therefore, we do not want something that is not cost effective and that it is in people's interests to avoid. I assure Mary Scanlon that a focus of our work will be the need to make the certificates cost effective. Mary Scanlon was right about the purchaser information packs; we have to ensure that the two elements come together. If our energy efficiency measures—or anything that we do in relation to the environment—are seen as something that gives people a row, or as something that they cannot engage with or do not see the point of, we have a problem. If people see the certificates as a burden, they will find ways to avoid them. We have to see the system as something that not only makes us feel better but as something that has a practical impact on the quality of people's lives in their own homes.

People can get a lot of advice and support from the Scottish Building Standards Agency. However, the first thing that people need to know is what their building is like and what its problems are. We are not giving people marks out of 10 in the sense that a new-build house will get 10 out of 10 and an old stone house will be viewed as a complete failure; we are simply saying that different buildings present different challenges. People should engage with those challenges, which is why we have produced the certificate in this form. If I hold up this sample certificate, the member can see what I mean. I hate to use visual aids. We did not have such glossy visual aids when I was at school; using this one might encourage me to be more bossy than usual. I know that I am repeating myself, but it is important to state that we are trying to measure the energy efficiency of the building so that we can  improve it; we are not trying to say that certain types of building are beyond the pale and nothing can be done about them. We must all do what we can with existing properties and we must ensure that people support the directive and are not afraid of it.

We have to tap into whatever expertise exists. Indeed, Dr Paul Stollard, who heads the Scottish Building Standards Agency, has received a national award for the quality of his work. There is no doubt that there is expertise in Scotland that can be used; we will also build on expertise that exists elsewhere. We are keen to establish a straightforward method for the certificate. We want a methodology that makes sense for buildings, so people can then put that in the context of climate change. It would be unfortunate if the certificate identified buildings in the central belt on which nobody had done any work as being better-quality and more energy efficient buildings than buildings that suffer more challenging climatic conditions and on which work had been done. We place ourselves in context looking at the label, rather than feeding that into the methodology.

The member said "cheap and cheerful" but being happy must keep him going. It does not take the debate forward to see nothing in what is said or done across the Executive, or to characterise the directive as doing absolutely nothing. If people who are committed to the environment, such as the Green party, do not recognise progress, or that people have shifted and are wrestling with the arguments, we have a dialogue of the deaf. What, then, is the point of dialogue at all? I do not recognise the member's characterisation of that NGO's comments. This step has taken three years because we want to get it right—we want to do it properly. If it is "cheap and cheerful" and it works, so be it. The labelling on fridges is cheap and cheerful, but it has transformed how people buy fridges. Cheap and cheerful is all right by me; expensive and complex, which is ignored or avoided, is not the best approach. Of course, we will keep all that under review. Patrick Harvie said that the Executive blocked the introduction of statutory energy efficiency targets, but during debates on the Housing (Scotland) Bill, Parliament accepted that the targets that the Green party sought were inappropriate. The Executive is developing a full energy strategy, and it will be appropriate to proceed with it through the directive. It is nonsense to characterise implementation as being non-progressive. It is hugely significant. The debate on the matter has developed over time. Proper dialogue with people who care about these things—rather than saying that it is all rubbish and does not take us anywhere—will help us to make progress.

Frances Curran is another member whom the festive season has obviously got to. I am not often described as cheerful, but in the present company I am beginning to look at bit more so. I acknowledge the point about capacity, but it is because the Labour Government has developed and invested so much in our infrastructure and in building in communities such as my own that pressure has been put on the construction industry. The central heating programme has resulted in a huge demand for engineers and so on. Our approach to such matters has produced economic and employment benefits, but we recognise that there are issues around that. On boilers, we must balance the impact of what we do against the cost of doing it. Cost must be a consideration—we have to think about other ways we could spend the money. If we advise people and they change their boilers because they are persuaded that doing so will benefit them and their community, that is progress. Through development of the building standards it is possible to create an incentive for installing more energy efficient boilers. There is more than one way of developing that agenda. I repeat: it is because of the Executive's commitments on energy efficiency that such work is being generated. The Executive is not dragging its heels and it views the directive in the context of work that has been going on for some time. In the United Kingdom, we lead the way on energy efficiency.

Derogation would obviously be a matter for the UK Government, but what is proposed is not self-certification. With buildings that are not captured by the single-seller survey or buildings that are not new, for example, people will have to fill in a questionnaire. If the local authority has any doubts about the information that is provided, it will be able to check it. We do not think that the proposals amount to self-certification. On the Scottish Parliament building, a label will have to be put up. However, we are talking about how to make more energy efficient the diversity of buildings throughout Scotland. If we were to consider energy efficiency alone, we would only ever build large cubes; we would not take into account aesthetic considerations or anything else. In any building, energy efficiency has to be balanced against aesthetics. We appreciate the problems that tower blocks created in our cities and I am sure that we would not want to advocate them anywhere else on the ground of energy efficiency. We must balance different factors. When all the sums have been done, we will all be able to judge whether the correct balance has been struck in the Parliament building.

The member asks how certificates will be generated. For many houses, that will be done when the house is being sold or built; that responsibility will need to be met before a completion certificate is issued. For housing association properties, we are working with the associations on developing the methodology and on support for their staff. Obviously, individual  property owners will need to contact their local authorities and, ultimately, the Scottish Building Standards Agency. As Cathie Craigie pointed out, the information needs to be relevant. Our clearly held view is that energy efficiency certification is in the context of our policies on ensuring that people take responsibility for maintenance of their property, and on promoting understanding of how we can improve matters globally by taking local action. That is very much the message behind the housing legislation and the practical approach that I have announced today.

Given the pressure that I am under from the Presiding Officer, I am sure that the member does not expect me to give all those figures off the top of my head, which are likely to be out by a couple of thousand in any case. I will provide the member with that information. We appreciate the scale of the task, which is why we will take three years to introduce the requirements. Despite the concerns that members have flagged up, I hope that there is consensus on the need for action, which must be practicable and deliverable. That is the context in which we are taking the matter forward.

On the member's first point, the Executive has recognised the importance of public sector procurement. The Executive will work on its own buildings as speedily as possible so that we can lead the way on that. It is important that the single seller survey gives  relevant information not just on how much it will cost to get a mortgage on the property but how much it will cost in the wider context. That will be helpful. Of course we will consider any research that is available. Energy efficiency has clear incentives, because it is about being cheap and cheerful. Promoting energy efficiency is about doing good things, but it is also about seeing the benefits inside the home, so that the home is comfortable and is a warmer and healthier place to be.

The grant aid must be put in the context of the investment that we are already putting into housing as part of the housing legislation that Parliament has passed. We want implementation to work: we will ensure that it does. The information will come through in different ways. For example, in properties that are subject to a single seller survey, we expect that the information will be provided through the survey. We will look at what information exists and we will make use of it. Creating huge amounts of expense would not necessarily deliver either the change in attitude or the better homes that we want.

There is on-going discussion with house builders and developers, to which my colleague Allan Wilson has been party. It is important that there should be on-going discussion to bring about good and effective development through our planning legislation. We will work with the developers so that they understand that the credibility of the development industry is dependent both on our using enforcement to ensure that it delivers what it says it will deliver and on the setting of new standards. We should recognise and celebrate that. The Scottish Building Standards Agency is looking closely at ways of encouraging and incentivising people to  take on that shared agenda and to make use of the opportunities that new build provides.

Violence in Scotland is an important matter. However, does the member agree that despite the existence or absence of machismo in the cultures that exist across the world, violence against women is a common thread and that that is the challenge?

As all members are aware, this debate is very important—some might even say that it is symbolic of the Parliament that we have at least an annual debate on violence against women. In highlighting the priority that Parliament places on the issue, the debate is an important symbol for us all. Given our determination to secure change, the debate is, of course, not simply symbolic but practical, so in reflecting on its symbolism, we should be clear that holding it is not a matter of routine. In highlighting brutality against and the misery and exploitation of women in a debate on violence against women, we are not ticking some kind of emotional box, but reflecting on the challenges that lie ahead of Parliament, and society more broadly, in dealing with the issue. We want to focus not only on what happens but on how we must deal with the problem. The figures can be overwhelming: we need to think only of the two women a week who are murdered by a partner or an ex-partner, or to reflect on the global exploitation, trafficking and prostitution of women and the use of rape as a weapon of war. The debate is not a counsel of despair, however. In considering the issue, we should reflect not only on the challenges but on how far we have travelled. In terms of attitudes to domestic abuse in particular, we should reflect on how much further forward we are today then we were even 20 years ago. This issue is not about a domestic, in which the police and the judiciary have no particular role; nowadays, the police and the judiciary are actively and positively engaged. I am pleased that we are again marking the United Nations international day for the elimination of violence against women and the 16 days of activism against gender violence campaign. I am delighted that not only is the Scottish Parliament marking the campaign but that a wide range of organisations and groups continue to show solidarity with women globally who experience violence. I congratulate all the women's groups and organisations, including the Scottish Women's Convention, and all those who over the years have made it their life's work to highlight this important issue. I had the privilege recently to meet people who serve on the domestic abuse helpline. If only  we could bottle their enthusiasm and energy, how much better we would all be for it. Across Scotland, a number of events, activities and meetings have been held to support the campaign. I was pleased to have been invited to East Renfrewshire's walk against violence on Sunday. If there is one thing that all the activity has in common, it is a determination to support the message of this year's campaign, which is: for the health of women, for the health of the world, no more violence. As I said, keeping violence against women on the agenda remains a priority for the Scottish Executive and we are making progress on a number of fronts. We are working to broaden our domestic abuse strategy, which is based around the themes of protection, prevention and provision, in order to address all forms of gender-based violence. I will say a little more on that in a moment. Before I do so, I want to emphasise that, whether through a pilot project such as the domestic abuse court in Glasgow, through increased resources for development of support services for children and young people who experience domestic abuse in their homes, through an on-going commitment to awareness raising, or through specific support service funding, we remain determined to eradicate from Scotland violence against women. There is no single solution, so we will continue our commitment to fund a range of activity that supports the women who experience violence and which challenges the men who perpetrate it. Support for service provision remains crucial. In October, we announced that we would be introducing a new violence against women fund to replace the existing domestic abuse service development fund and the violence against women service development fund. That decision was taken following consultation over the summer of a range of organisations, including the projects that currently receive funding, all multi-agency partnerships and the national group to address violence against women. The consultation showed that, throughout Scotland, even in areas where there is a strong commitment from the health board, local authority and other partners, there remains a need to develop provision of front-line services to support women and their children. We have committed £6 million to that work from 2006 to 2008 and I am delighted that we have received more than 100 applications from a wide range of projects. Over the next month, we will assess them with a view to announcing the successful applications early in the new year. We also want to work to build local capacity through multi-agency partnerships, so that we can strengthen local partners' ability to deliver on the  agenda. That is an area on which I want the national group to focus in the next couple of years—it will be supported by the new violence against women fund. We have decided to keep separate from the new fund the rape crisis specific fund, which is designed to support rape crisis services, which remain underfunded at local level. We must ensure consistent service development, so we have committed funding to every rape crisis centre in Scotland up to 2008. In addition, we will continue our core funding for Rape Crisis Scotland and will work with it to develop it further. That work will include consideration of the need for new centres and specific support, which has been offered by the Justice Department to standardise the way in which information is recorded by the Scottish network of local rape crisis centres. The aim is to improve the accuracy and reliability of statistics on the nature and occurrence of rape and sexual violence, which will in turn assist with development and effective operation of services.

I do not know the specifics of the measures, but I will be more than happy to examine the detail if Stewart Maxwell provides it. It is clear that there needs to be partnership among a range of groups and organisations so that when they see things, they understand what is going on. People need training so that they are tuned in, for example, to what children say or to what women say in a general practice. Many measures come together to support people, but we have to increase confidence that support will not make the situation worse. We need to get all the bits right. I gave the example that two women a week are murdered by their partners or ex-partners: there is a consequence of that. Somebody might take their hand away from the phone because they are not confident that they will be protected by the system if they report violence. We recognise the serious points that have been raised. In talking about how things have changed, I want to take about rape. Cathy Jamieson, the Minister for Justice, has asked the Scottish Law Commission to review the current legislation. We  are examining the prosecution of rape and other sexual offences, and we are examining the effectiveness of the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Act 2002. I mention that specifically because of the recent Amnesty International poll that highlighted all too starkly people's attitude to rape. While the advertising campaign on domestic abuse clearly struck a chord—a chord that is echoed in storylines in soap operas and elsewhere—and there has been progress, it was depressing to read the extent to which women are still blamed for being raped. It is important that we move on those attitudes, because they remain prevalent. Our challenge is to change the culture that allows such views to prevail. We must build on the work and extend the scope of our awareness raising to other forms of violence against women. As I said, that is not a counsel of despair—it builds on the success of what already exists. It is recognised that there is underreporting of a range of incidents, but I am sure that through our commitment to the three Ps we can give people confidence that there is a point in reporting and challenging what happens to them, because when they go into the system they will be supported. I urge members to support the motion. I move, That the Parliament believes that the International Day of Action to Eliminate Violence Against Women and the 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence are vital in continuing to raise awareness of violence against women; supports the work of the Scottish Executive in seeking to challenge violence against women in its commitment to the new Violence Against Women Fund and the Rape Crisis Specific Fund; welcomes the work of the Scottish Law Commission and Crown Office to review the law on rape and its investigation and prosecution to ensure it is effective, fair and robust, and, in particular, supports all efforts to challenge the attitudes which place the blame on the woman and not the perpetrator, thereby allowing gender-based violence including domestic abuse, rape and sexual assault to continue.

Even I could not bear to listen to myself talking about housing for nine minutes, but I shall do my best. I welcome the opportunity to sum up not only the debate, but what has been a long journey. I must say that, at some points during consideration of the bill, the kindest thing that I would have said about it was that it was worthy but dull. It sometimes made me feel that I had lost the will to live. There are times when we do things that are difficult and challenging but not necessarily interesting, but that does not mean that they are unimportant. Among all the other jobs that we have to do, we have to get the nitty-gritty right and do the hard work; we have to identify needs and problems and work with people to reach practicable solutions. I am struck again by the degree to which the Scottish Socialist Party quits the field when it comes to the legislative process. Lodging one small group of amendments that are piggybacked on to another at stage 3 is hardly working to shape legislation that will have a huge impact on local communities. All the headlines in the world will not give us a dry house, a safe place to stay or a caring and safe community in which to live. I recognise that, as the Parliament matures over time, no matter where we disagree, even if it is in committee, the fact that we engage in debate and listen to the people of Scotland about their problems and about what they think the solutions are gives us the opportunity to make a real difference to people's lives. I say this near the beginning of my speech because I know that members will be anxious to know about it. I confirm that Her Majesty has given consent to the bill and its application to the Crown in Scotland. Having informed members of that, I will move on to some of the issues that have been highlighted around the bill. It is recognised that a huge amount of work has been done in Parliament on housing. In the early days, we concentrated on the social rented sector, so it was important to move on to the private sector and recognise that some of the issues in the private sector impact on the broader  community. It was also important to recognise the changing nature of housing tenure, which I mentioned earlier. Twenty-five years ago, 70 per cent of the population lived in rented houses; now, 64 per cent are owner-occupiers and 6 per cent are in the private rented sector. All those sectors have an important role to play, and whatever sector we live in, it is important that properties are properly maintained. As well as the bill's challenge to the mechanisms of buying and selling, there is the challenge of ensuring that people are aware of their responsibility to maintain their properties and that it is wise to know what one is buying before one buys it. It is difficult to legislate for cultural shift, but it is important to try. As members have said, the bill is wide ranging and deals with important aspects of the private rented sector, including tenants' rights and responsibilities and landlords' responsibilities. I cannot overstate the importance of the work that has been done—first, through the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 and, now, through the bill—to confront landlords with their responsibilities towards their tenants and the communities in which they own properties. No good landlord has anything to fear from the bill, and I am sure that our communities will welcome the fact that those who simply rip off people and take their money for their private interests without delivering anything into their communities will be confronted with registration. It has been said that there is an important link to antisocial behaviour. On the single survey, Christine Grahame used probably the most elastic definition ever of the word "support", which was interesting. I recognise that people want legislation that works. There is a general point about legislation and consolidation bills. The Parliament and the Communities Committee, in particular, have an important role in keeping hold of, and keeping attention on, the legislation as matters proceed, and I am happy to be part of that dialogue. We will all be diminished if the legislation that we pass has unfortunate consequences.

I am happy to consider any options and suggestions that might help people to maintain their homes and understand what they are buying. We know what an MOT is, but there  seems to be unease about people getting the equivalent of an MOT for a property before they invest a large quantity of money in it. I recognise that a lot of work on single surveys has still to be done, and it is important that we seek to build confidence about the single survey's purpose. We do not want to reinforce a market in which people often feel ripped off; we want a stable market that can give people confidence. On houses in multiple occupation and the work that Pauline McNeill and others have done, people recognise the challenge of the HMO sector for those who live in it and for communities in which HMOs exist. We have made an important advance today in recognising, once again, that people must deal with the consequences of having unlicensed HMOs. We recognise the role of housing renewal areas in our regeneration policy and the capacity that the policy gives to local authorities to identify areas of importance. Several proposals were made at stages 1 and 2 that did not make it into the bill. I will not reflect long on Helen Eadie's point about developers failing to complete work on time, but she gave a good example of a problem that is experienced throughout our communities and to which there is no easy solution. The Communities Committee and the Scottish Executive are keen to work with those who address such problems, which can be brought into the political domain but do not always need a legislative solution. Such work provides us with an opportunity to reflect on the things that matter to people. The issue of timings has been highlighted. I agree that the Parliament and people who are well versed in such matters must consider timings. Christine Grahame said that it was unfortunate that we could not discuss mobile homes, which was rather ironic as no amendments relating to mobile homes were lodged. All members can lodge amendments, and if Christine Grahame was keen to discuss mobile homes she should have lodged a relevant amendment. The GHA is obviously an important issue for those of us who fought and argued for stock transfer. Stock transfer was not only about transferring stock to a housing corporation; part of the deal that was written into the GHA's work was that it was about devolution and decentralisation. What was done was done not only because it made people feel better, but because of the redistribution of wealth—a huge investment that ought not to be dismissed—that there would be from UK taxpayers to rent payers in Glasgow. That investment will stick better if those who benefit from it can shape where it goes, and that is at the heart of the work of the Executive and the GHA.  We would never give legal advice unless we had confidence in it and had examined it ourselves. It is ironic that some of the people who are engaging in the debate around the GHA and the next stage are the very people who said that GHA stock transfer was privatisation. The two things do not match at all. In relation to community ownership in other places, we should not take a one-size-fits-all approach. In the Western Isles, the issue concerned geographical disparity; in Glasgow, it was about understanding a culture and using tenant-management co-operatives and housing associations. We will work with local authorities and tenants who are engaged at a local level to find what fits them best, rather than prescribing from the centre what community ownership should look like. I recognise the points that were made about homelessness. We will, of course, make an announcement about that at a later stage. Patrick Harvie referred to religious organisations. He will be aware that the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 excludes religious orders from registration in order to restrict that exclusion to situations in which the person is committed to a whole way of life. That is the distinction that is made. We recognise the importance of publicising the bill in order to make it work. We must ensure that people know their rights and responsibilities and that they are aware of the challenges ahead. We can use adverts: I am happy to spearhead that process, by popular acclaim, if people want me to. However, we all have a responsibility, as elected representatives in our local communities, at least to convey to people in our communities the solutions to some of their problems that have been identified in the bill. I commend the bill to Parliament.

Tricia Marwick's amendment 66 draws much from an amendment that she lodged at stage 2. The main difference is that the words "living accommodation" have been replaced by the word "housing", but other minor changes have been made. We had a good discussion of her stage 2 amendment in committee. It addressed the principle that if houses lie empty for no good reason when people need affordable houses, that is a misuse of the nation's resources and such houses should be brought back into use. That was and is a principle with which I agree. That is why we undertook to review the position, to ensure that, five years on from the successful empty homes initiative, local authorities continue to consider bringing empty property back into use and continue to take active steps to encourage that when the local housing need requires such action.  It is reasonable to expect any empty homes initiative to recognise that it addresses housing need; it does not necessarily apply throughout the country. Housing need is expressed in different ways in different parts of the country and houses are empty for different reasons in different parts. An empty property may be granny's Hieland hame or a hard-to-let house in the centre of Glasgow. That is why I am glad that, when we consider the issue, we see the broader context of how we retrieve houses for public use by huge investment in the social rented sector—the £1 billion of debt that was lifted from Glasgow is a good example of that—and by recovering for communities housing that was at one time hard to let and which people now want to be in. We are taking action in the private rented sector. People are abandoning their homes because of mismanagement, poor management or appalling management of houses round about them that are owned by private landlords, who see such properties as an investment and not a business and who see their tenants as a means of earning money rather than people whom they have a responsibility to manage and take care of. The key purpose of private landlord registration is to drive out of the sector people who have no concern for or interest in the people who live in their houses or the people who live round about them. That is one way in which we will retrieve communities and houses. Communities Scotland has been asked to expand on the information that will be covered in local housing authorities' local housing strategies to address the question. Local authorities will be expected to include in their strategies an assessment of where their action on empty homes could contribute usefully to meeting housing need throughout or in any part of their areas. The assessment should cover the private and social rented sectors. When they think that action could make such a contribution, we will expect to see what approaches they plan to use to address the matter. I appreciate that one or two members might have felt that some local authorities were not giving the issue sufficient recognition in their local housing strategies or in the action that they had taken. I do not necessarily accept that view. Some local authorities have very clear strategies and are very effective in securing the reuse of empty houses. I am confident that the revision of local housing strategies will focus efforts and I hope that such changes will reassure members, as they appear to have reassured Shelter, that we have an appropriate and effective way to tackle empty housing in areas where it is a concern. The approach that I have outlined is sufficient for the purpose. Tricia Marwick's amendment is  neither necessary nor desirable. It would commit the Executive and local authorities to undertaking a range of obligations. Even in areas where empty housing is not an issue, new research would have to be commissioned. We listened to and considered the case for empty homes management orders and compulsory leasing during the bill's early stages. We concluded that they would neither meet the objective of providing affordable homes nor provide permanent accommodation for homeless people. At stage 2, we listened to and considered the case for producing a statement on securing the reuse of empty living accommodation. We concluded then that, to be useful, empty housing must be of a suitable type and in a location that is acceptable to a tenant. Through local housing strategies, we have found a way of getting local authorities to address the question where they need to. Tricia Marwick's option would be neither pain free nor cost free. It would involve resources from the centre and costs at local level, and it would not necessarily achieve Tricia Marwick's aims. I urge members to accept that the Executive's plans will meet those aims, and I invite Tricia Marwick to withdraw amendment 66.

I would be unhappy about responding directly to Patrick Harvie's specific question in case I misled him. We are committed to equal opportunities and to ending discrimination. I will attempt to pursue the point that Patrick Harvie has made before I sum up.  Amendment 58 agreed to.  [Amendments 59 and 61 to 63 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.]

Amendment 84 is another amendment that will help to make the private landlord registration system more effective by amending a specific aspect of its operation. The amendment deals with the fit-and-proper-person test, where there are one or more intermediate landlords between the owner and the occupier. Its effect will be that, of the various people who may be in a leasing chain, only the owner and the person who is the immediate landlord of the occupier will be subject to the fit-and-proper-person test: the owner because he or she has ultimate control over and responsibility for the property; and the immediate landlord because he  or she is the person delivering the service to the tenant. Where the immediate landlord uses an agent, the agent will also be subject to the fit-and-proper-person test in the usual way. I move amendment 84.  Amendment 84 agreed to.

The amendments in the group seek to refine the private landlord registration system to make it more effective and, in particular, to make a link between registration and the reletting offence in the repairing standard provisions in the bill. Amendment 58 responds to an amendment made by Patrick Harvie at stage 2. It will adjust the reference to unlawful discrimination, being one of the matters to which the local authority will have regard when it is carrying out the fit-and-proper person test for private landlord registration under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, by removing references in that act to specific forms of discrimination, so that any unlawful discrimination is relevant material that should be considered when applying the test. Therefore, the provision will remain current and effective despite changes in the law on discrimination. Amendment 59 will require the local authority to include in the register of private landlords the fact that a house is subject to a repairing standard enforcement order and to remove that reference when the order is revoked or the necessary work has been done and a certificate of completion has been granted. In the time between the making of the order and its revocation or the granting of a completion certificate, the landlord will commit an offence by reletting the house unless the private rented housing committee had consented to the let. The purpose of the amendment is to allow a prospective tenant to find out that that is the case. Amendment 61 will ensure that that information is openly available to any member of the public who inspects the register. Amendment 8 will ensure that a local authority is informed when a private rented housing committee consents to a landlord reletting a house while it is subject to a repairing standard enforcement order. That will ensure that the entry in the register that  amendment 59 will require will be removed. Amendment 9 will make a consequential adjustment, as the giving of consent is not subject to appeal. Amendments 62 and 63 will make detailed technical corrections. I move amendment 58.

All the amendments in the group will have a role to play in helping local authorities effectively to enforce HMO licensing. Licensing exists to protect tenants from physical danger and from exploitation by landlords whose only interest is profit. If licensing is not enforced, it does not work. I acknowledge the work that Pauline McNeill has done on HMOs. She has highlighted her local concerns and I have met groups from her constituency, who discussed a number of issues. Pauline McNeill's amendments address the concern that the current level of fines is not a sufficient deterrent when compared with the amount of money that a landlord can make from an unlicensed HMO. Ms McNeill lodged amendments at stage 2 that the Executive was not able to support because they would have resulted in different maximum fines in different local authority areas. I did not feel able to accept that in principle, although I said that I would consider the issue further. I believe that the amendments in the group offer a better solution. £20,000 is a large sum of money, and is a significant increase from the current level of £5,000, which is normally the maximum amount that may be imposed on summary conviction. Exceptions can be made, however, and I believe that the proposed increase is justified. Failure to obtain an HMO licence should not be viewed as an administrative matter or merely as a lack of the proper paperwork. The penalties need to reflect the risks to tenants and the amounts of money that landlords might make from them. I therefore  encourage members to support Pauline McNeill's amendments. Another aspect of enforcement involves helping local authorities to identify HMOs. New section 160(1A) was inserted at stage 2 for that purpose. It is required that a property be licensed if it is occupied by three or more people from three or more families. In investigating potential HMOs, local authorities need to know whether any of the occupiers are related, which includes people living together as couples. There are cases in which tenants have been instructed to say that they are a couple so that the landlord can evade licensing. We feel that it would be helpful to add that point to the information that local authorities can formally require to be provided, in order to put legal force behind such investigations. Members of the Communities Committee were clearly uncomfortable with such a provision, however. Concerns were expressed about people's rights to privacy and I have taken those concerns on board. I agree that, under most circumstances, it is no business of a local authority to inquire into people's relationships. However, in situations such as I have described, that might be the one piece of information that is required to determine whether or not a crime is being committed; that is, whether or not an HMO that should be licensed is operating illegally. It is important that we retain the provision. Amendment 67 will tie the provision down to particular circumstances in which it is necessary to obtain such information. I believe that that strikes the right balance between respecting tenants' privacy and enforcing the law. I hope that members will support amendment 67. Between investigation and penalty, there must be prosecution. I appreciate that local authorities might feel that it is very difficult to provide evidence that a certain property is the occupiers' main residence if the landlord maintains that it is not. The Executive has not lodged an amendment on that point, because I believe that it is important to retain the main-residence test. However, my officials are considering with the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service and with local authorities whether there are weaknesses in the current practice and, if there are, how they might best be remedied.

I will attempt to cover the main points that have been highlighted. If what Christine Grahame said met the definition of what it means for the SNP to give its support to a proposal, Nicola Sturgeon might need to look to her laurels. The fact of the matter is that  Christine Grahame said one thing in favour of the single seller survey—that she was in favour of it—and proceeded to undermine and demolish it and to highlight things that would cause people to lack confidence in it. I worry about what she would have said if she had said that she was opposed to the single seller survey. It is interesting that Phil Gallie defined amendment 2 as a sunset clause; I agree that it represents an attempt to get the single seller survey over with and to get it back off the statute book because Christine Grahame is not in favour of it. However, I acknowledge the points that Jim Wallace and Donald Gorrie made. We are not in the business of ignoring the law of unintended consequence. In fact, we are extremely rigorous about not doing that with our legislation in general. Although I think that many of our communities will benefit from the single seller survey, I am certainly keen for us to keep a close eye on it as it rolls out. On the regulations, Christine Grahame cannot have it both ways. She cannot argue simultaneously that we have not produced a perfect, fully fleshed-out proposal and that we have not worked closely enough with stakeholders. I give a guarantee that we will work closely with stakeholders and the committee on the development of the regulations. Why would anyone not want the new survey to work? The policy drivers behind it are so strong that of course we want it to work. I emphasise that the regulations will be subject to the affirmative procedure. As regards the rights that the survey will give the buyer and the seller, contracted conditions in the survey will put the purchaser in the same position that they would have been in if they had commissioned the survey themselves. Mary Scanlon said that the pilot did not really work, but our proposal is not all about the pilot; it is the result of two years of evidence taking, research and discussion. We have worked with the housing improvement task force over a long period. Given the task force's expertise, we should listen to what it said. Several points were raised about valuation. The lender could pursue options including the undertaking of a desk-based valuation, a valuation from an automated valuation model or a drive-by valuation, or they could instruct a further inspection of the property. Certainly, the first three of those options would be done at very low cost. Again, the issue is one of confidence. Much has been said—and much of that was scaremongering—about the cost of the survey. Scott Barrie made a compelling point about the costs that people incur at the moment, with nothing to show for them.  I was struck by the complacency of the tone that Murdo Fraser adopted. According to him, the system is perfect; there are no problems with it. Perhaps for some people in the profession there are no problems, but if Murdo Fraser were to get out a bit more, he would discover the other interest that is operating—the consumer interest. I am thinking in particular of the young people who are trying to get into a market that, 25 years ago, they would not have been able to enter. We have to reflect on the consumer interest as well as on that of the profession. We have to sit more closely with the professionals to ensure that the proposal is workable. In effect, Murdo Fraser was saying that if the market is operating, we should not legislate. The trouble is that the Tories, in their time, did not recognise the fact that the market was not operating. If we have learned anything from the Tories' period in Government, it is that, by their definition, a market that is working is one that leaves devastation all around. If the position that Murdo Fraser is taking to the market is political, that is fine.

Do not be ludicrous. It is evident that, through the proposal, we recognise that the market as it stands neither works nor encourages people to identify the difficulties with a property before they buy it. The market cannot solve the problems that the housing improvement task force identified. Much has been said about the cost of the survey. We are working closely with the profession to ensure that the cost is sustainable, workable and affordable. It may be in Murdo Fraser's interest to deny both the consumer interest and the limits of the market, but we do not operate in that way. We recognise that the Communities Committee raised the issue of problems for low-income sellers. We will work with the professionals involved to design the scheme in such a way that the market can deliver affordable packages. That could include short-term loans or the option of rolling up the survey fee with the other fees that are due when the property is sold and equity is released. Following the Executive's amendment of section 68 at stage 2, we will consider the need for a safety net through the scheme of assistance. However—perhaps Murdo Fraser will be heartened to hear this—we will not seek to substitute for private sector activity and the way in which that could be developed. A lot of noise has been made about the measure and we have heard some dubious support from SNP members. The single seller survey is a  measured approach to concerns that have been raised over a long period of time and is a result of the study of a changed private sector in which people buy property without recognising the commitment that they have taken on and are uncommitted to maintaining it. People also get caught up in spending money with nothing to show for it at the end of the buying process. The approach that the Executive is taking is serious. As we develop the regulations, we will work with all those who want to ensure that the measure is effective. I urge members to support the Executive amendments in the group and to resist Mary Scanlon's amendments.

The member's question brings us back to professional integrity. On the basis that the member has outlined, the survey does not mean anything to anyone and no one has any confidence in any professional advice that they might seek. I repeat that the surveyor has his or her own professional commitments. No one is stopping a person commissioning half a dozen surveys if that is what they want; our proposal is intended to address the unfortunate position in which, particularly in hot markets, people have surveys carried out and then find that they cannot afford the property. It seems only reasonable to make available to buyers a description of the property and any problems that it might have, and I should point out that the person who ultimately buys the property in effect pays for the cost of the survey in the purchase price. Although we felt that its approach was rational, the pilot still did not work. We then drew from that the—I think, entirely reasonable—conclusion that if the decision to commission a single seller survey was left up to individuals, those who in their honesty commissioned such a survey would be asking to have their property's condition opened up in a way that would not be asked of people who did not commission one. Despite Mary Scanlon's comments on our decision to go ahead with a compulsory single seller survey scheme, stakeholders, particularly those involved with the working group, have stuck with the Executive on this matter. I am sure that they will continue to work with the Executive to ensure that the final proposal that is developed is sustainable and effective. The Executive feels that the three objectives that were identified by the housing improvement task force remain as important as ever and, although offers subject to survey will not achieve those objectives, the single seller survey will. Amendment 30 seeks to enable regulations that are made under section 101 that would be used to establish the single seller survey and purchasers information pack schemes to include, if necessary,  a requirement for single seller surveys or other prescribed documents to be registered with a central body or bodies as part of a quality control regime. The use of the power or otherwise will be dependent on our continuing discussions with stakeholders. If the single survey is to be successful, buyers, sellers, agents and lenders will all need to be confident in the independence and reliability of the report that is supplied. Confidence in the survey product will be created primarily by the professional standards of the survey's providers, its legal terms and conditions and the available forms of redress. However, as we develop the detail of the scheme in consultation with stakeholders, we will consider whether it is necessary to provide further assurance to consumers through the use of a register of single seller surveys. Such a mechanism could, for example, reveal whether a property has been the subject of more than one survey. As with the rest of part 3, regulations covering this issue would be subject to the affirmative procedure. We will carefully consider the costs and benefits of any such requirement. We favour a system that is as simple and as straightforward as possible and that goes with the grain of the existing house buying and selling process. Equally, we acknowledge that it might yet be necessary to introduce a register and it is important that the bill provides sufficiently flexible powers in that regard. On amendment 2, I must first make it clear that we fully recognise the importance of closely monitoring the operation of the single seller survey and purchasers information pack schemes. As they involve a significant change to the house buying and selling process, we must keep a close eye on their progress. Indeed, I am sure that the Parliament and its committees will want to do the same. That said, the Executive does not support amendment 2. If a review were required to be submitted to Parliament within two years of the date on which the whole of the part was first in force, it might assess only one full year of operation. It is hardly appropriate to carry out a review in such a timescale. After all, systems need time to bed in and programming a review so early in the scheme's operation would serve only to create uncertainty in the industry about the long-term intentions for the scheme. I emphasise again that the single seller survey scheme seeks to help people who are selling or are trying to buy properties. Huge changes have happened in the past 25 years. Twenty-five years ago, 70 per cent of houses were rented; now, more than 64 per cent of houses are owner-occupied. We have not caught up with the different way in which the market now operates and the fact  that people now have different responsibilities. This proposal seeks to build confidence and trust and to ensure that people buy properties that they are able to maintain. I assure that the Executive will very closely monitor the operation and effects of the scheme. On the basis that I have already outlined, I ask Mary Scanlon to withdraw amendment 24 and not to move amendments 25 to 29 and 31 to 46.

I note that Mary Scanlon's amendments have been repeated despite the Communities Committee's considerations at stage 2. She has simply rehearsed what she has said in the past about the single seller survey and I am tempted to repeat now what I said then. I will take the opportunity to make the case again for the single seller survey. I am happy to expand on some of its advantages. First, let us consider the current system of house buying and selling. In effect, there are two different approaches. In the first, every potential buyer can have their own separate survey carried out on the same property. Every buyer runs the risk that their bid will be turned down; in hot markets, some unfortunate buyers—especially first-time buyers—can have that experience on a number of properties. The approach causes multiple surveys and wasted expense; it drives people to commission the cheapest form of survey—the scheme 1 valuation, which contains very little information on the condition of the property. The single seller survey provided at the start of the process with a valuation will enable buyers to avoid those risks and make use of an independent and detailed survey that will provide a proper assessment of property condition.

I would like to make a little more progress first. In the second approach, the market response to the multiple valuation problem has been offers subject to survey. That approach to combating multiple surveys has been adopted in some areas, most notably Edinburgh. However, I say to Mary Scanlon that she ought not to be so Edinburgh-centric, because the approach is not favoured by all property professionals. In the approach, the buyer submits an offer before the property is inspected or valued. They then have a survey carried out if they are successful with their bid. However, the approach still tends to employ scheme 1 valuation reports—perhaps because of the risks involved. If the valuation does not meet the offer submitted, or if the surveyor finds a serious problem, the whole deal has to be renegotiated leading to a risk for both seller and buyer that they will not get what they thought they were getting. It is far better if the buyer is informed about the condition and value of the property before making an offer. With offers subject to survey, that information is provided only after an offer has been made. That means further negotiation, risking delay or the complete falling through of the transaction. I know of someone who was in such a  position. There had been an offer subject to survey and the seller had to take the property off the market in order to negotiate. As a result, the seller may have lost the opportunity to receive offers from other people. The single seller survey will provide greater certainty and transparency to the whole transaction by providing the necessary information at the start of the process. Each party will know the condition of the property and will be able to sort out the finances accordingly—both the seller's asking price and the buyer's offer price—instead of having to walk in the dark and having to retrace their steps as they do with offers subject to survey. It is worth reminding ourselves of the objectives that the housing improvement task force identified for the single seller survey: to provide better information on property condition for sellers and buyers; to promote repair and maintenance work; to reduce wasted expense on multiple surveys; and to discourage the setting of artificially low upset prices. We know that if people have a problem with their property, their instinct is to find a way to sell it on and make it someone else's problem. However, that does not deal with the question of people being responsible for maintaining their properties and of how we allow people to know what they are buying before they make an investment that is probably greater than any other they might make in their lives. I have certainly spent less time over making such a purchase than I have spent deciding on the colour of my car. Mary Scanlon talked about having an evidence base. However, she undermines the surveying profession's integrity by implying that it would be minded to say something on the basis of who paid for the survey. The profession is accountable for its professional responsibility; it has an ombudsman and its own standards that must be applied. Moreover, the matter can be taken to court. It is unacceptable to suggest that a survey will be slanted towards the person who pays for it.

The point is that the transaction pays for the survey. The survey informs the transaction and the professional gives his or her professional advice on the property's state. Mary Scanlon should not suggest that the surveyor's professional integrity is such that what is in the survey is determined by what the person who pays for it wants it to say. Indeed, it is  dangerous to make such suggestions in any approach to this issue. We should also recognise that all legislation attracts vested and committed interests on all sides and that we should make a judgment about the point at which such interests kick in. I acknowledge Mary Scanlon's point that legislation must have an evidence base. No one in the chamber has ever suggested or pretended that the single seller survey pilot was a great success; it was not. Indeed, I know of someone who was told not to commission a single seller survey because it would not give them a competitive edge in the market and would open them up more than other sellers to exposure. In eight months, only 74 surveys were commissioned, 64 of which were in Glasgow and one in Edinburgh. However, the pilot scheme showed not that the single seller survey concept was flawed but that the system would not work if it was voluntary. I should also point out to Mary Scanlon that there is a difference between what she suggests happened and setting up a working group on the matter, taking advice, consulting people and ultimately taking an executive decision on the basis of that information. I am content with the Executive's conclusion after examining the single seller survey pilot that a voluntary approach did not work. However, we believed that the policy principles remained important, particularly for people who want to get into the property market, and that we needed to respond accordingly. The fact that there are simply insufficient incentives for sellers to pay up front voluntarily for a survey when they can just allow purchasers to continue to pay for survey after survey makes the case for introducing a mandatory single seller survey. The housing improvement task force itself recommended that a legislative approach should be held in reserve. We intend the single seller survey to follow the model used in the pilot. It will contain information on a property's condition, energy performance and accessibility. Moreover, to achieve all the task force's objectives, it will include a valuation.

When we introduced the pilot scheme, it did not work. We concluded that that happened because it was voluntary. However, we felt that none of the fundamental principles that it addressed in relation to the maintenance of  properties, artificially low upset prices and multiple surveys had been challenged. That is why we felt the need to move forward on the basis on the pilot.

The amendments in group 8 are mainly technical and tidying-up amendments. I will explain them as briefly as I can. Amendment 14 corrects an error in section 39(3)(a), which should refer to section 37(1) rather than section 37(2). Similarly, amendment 48 corrects an error in schedule 4A, which should refer to "this schedule" rather than "paragraph 3". Amendment 17 is intended to help to ensure that houses are kept up to the repairing standard.  Section 55 gives landlords the power to apply to the sheriff for an order if a tenant obstructs the landlord's efforts to carry out repairs that are required in order to meet the repairing standard. However, the section does not allow landlords to apply for an order if a tenant obstructs the landlord's access to inspect the house in order to check whether it meets the repairing standard. We want to help landlords to meet their repair obligations, so amendment 17 allows the section 55 procedure to be used in that situation as well. Section 55 already contains safeguards to ensure that the sheriff is satisfied that access is genuinely sought for the stated purpose, that it is reasonable and that the tenant is preventing access even though proper notice has been given.  Amendments 18 and 22 seek to delete certain sections in part 1 that are duplicated in the general provisions of part 8 and schedule 5. Those sections refer to building regulations and the Building (Scotland) Act 2003, which were originally mentioned only in part 1 but which now need to cover the whole bill due to the introduction of HMO amenity notices in part 4. Amendment 21 deals with the power in section 64A(2) that allows ministers to make the private rented housing panel the route of appeal against a landlord's decision to refuse consent to carry out adaptations to suit the needs of a disabled person or to apply conditions to such consent. That subsection also gives ministers the power to make further provisions on appeals. Amendment 21 clarifies that that power will cover not only appeals to the private rented housing panel but subsequent appeals to the sheriff. As Christine Grahame pointed out in committee, there is room for doubt on that point in the bill as it stands. Amendments 3 and 4 are consequential to the repeal of parts 5 and 8 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987. Amendment 3 means that a failure to carry out work required under the byelaws referred to in section 313 of the 1987 act, which relates to certain kinds of HMO, will be treated as a failure to carry out work required by a work notice and will be enforced accordingly. Amendment 4 repeals passages in sections 313(4) and 319(1) of the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 that relate to parts V and VIII of that act. I move amendment 14.  Amendment 14 agreed to.

I understand the intention behind amendment 12, as we discussed the matter in the committee. To some extent, it reflects people's sometimes difficult relationships and experiences in the private rented sector. However, the problem that was identified at stage 2 would remain. Amendment 12 seeks to protect a tenant from being evicted because he or she has referred the landlord to the private rented housing panel. Section 28(5) already provides a form of protection in that regard. If the amendment were accepted, a tenant could use the measures in it to delay the exercise of the landlord's right to the property at the end of the tenancy. All that the tenant would have to do would be to make a complaint to the private rented housing panel about a repair—spurious or not. The measures would take effect when the case was referred to a private rented  housing committee, by which point there would not yet have been any investigation into whether the landlord was in the wrong. Until the committee concluded its deliberations, the landlord would be unable to recover or occupy the premises. A landlord and tenant enter into a short assured tenancy knowing that the landlord is entitled to end it at the agreed term, subject to the statutory procedures and timescales. The landlord has a right to recover possession without having to demonstrate the reasons, and both parties know that when the tenancy is entered into. However, under amendment 12, the tenant would be able to stop the landlord exercising his or her rights under the short assured tenancy until the complaint to the private rented housing panel had been determined. Therefore, the landlord's right to recover possession would be frustrated by delay. Apart from the issue of rights, the matter could, in practice, be significant in a situation in which, for example, the landlord is trying to deal with the tenant's antisocial behaviour or in which the landlord has let a house while working elsewhere and has to return to the area. The landlord's alternative would be to prove in the sheriff court that one of the grounds for terminating a full assured tenancy applied. That would be onerous and, again, would delay the landlord's exercise of the rights that are part of the short assured tenancy agreed with the tenant. Amendment 12 would, therefore, create a situation that has significant potential for abuse. The purpose of section 28(5) is to protect tenants by preventing a landlord from entering into a new tenancy without the consent of the committee while the house is subject to a repairing standard enforcement order. That is a strong incentive for a landlord not to evict the tenant who made the complaint unless there are other good reasons why such an action is necessary. Of course, neither approach prevents a landlord from ending the tenancy after the repair works are completed. However, comparing the two approaches, I do not think that amendment 12 strikes the right balance between a landlord and a tenant. It could be used to delay a landlord's recovery of the property in a situation in which and at a time when it is appropriate for the landlord to do so. I therefore invite Tricia Marwick to withdraw the amendment.

Amendments 5, 6, 53, 69, and 7 will incorporate fire detection measures in the modernised repairing standard in chapter 4 of part 1 of the bill. The issue met with substantial sympathy when it was raised with the Communities Committee at stage 2. We have responded by exploring the issue further and by lodging these amendments. It is another example of the committee's scrutiny process refining policy and the Executive being happy to respond to sound proposals that arise from that. The repairing standard is essential for ensuring that a landlord keeps a house and the facilities provided with it in good working order and repair. That is in exchange for rent, or, in the case of tied tenancies, labour. The intention of the amendments is that a landlord will make satisfactory provision for fire detection in the first place and will maintain such detection as part of the fittings. Like the existing requirement in the repairing standard that a house be fit for human habitation, fire detection is so basic a need that it is right that satisfactory provision for it should be a requirement. In the light of the committee's discussion and after considering the alternatives, I think that the repairing standard is the best place for that requirement. The amendments say that the provision of fire detection measures should be satisfactory and have regard to building regulations and guidance. That does not mean that existing houses will have to be brought up to the standards required for building a new house. Guidance issued by the Scottish Building Standards Agency sets out what is appropriate for existing houses. Landlords should take the guidance into account. We will ensure that landlords are aware of the requirements in the guidance; private landlord registration will, of course, help that. When a tenant challenges a landlord's compliance with the agency's standard through the private rented housing panel, the committee hearing the case will consult the fire and rescue service to ensure that its formal decision is backed up by an authoritative  view and that there is consistency across Scotland. I move amendment 5.

I recognise the point that Donald Gorrie makes. He is right that many of the concerns about planning relate to the perceived inability to enforce standards. That is a general problem: regulations are undermined by ineffective enforcement. I am happy to take on board the points that Donald Gorrie makes about the regulations.  Amendment 5 agreed to.  [Amendment 6 moved—[Johann Lamont]—and agreed to.]

The amendments respond to amendments that Tricia Marwick lodged at stage 2—obviously, we have good cop and good cop today. Those amendments dealt with notification procedures for complaints to the private rented housing panel and raised a valid point, but we thought that their effect would go beyond what was intended. I am grateful to Tricia Marwick for withdrawing them in the committee on the basis that we would lodge alternative amendments at stage 3.  Amendment 11 will ensure that, where a tenant asks someone else to act for him or her in connection with an application to the private rented housing panel, the president will inform that person as well as the applicant if the application is rejected. Amendment 10 will ensure that if the president instead refers the application to a private rented housing committee for a determination, the committee will inform that agent as well as the applicant of the outcome. The amendments will ensure that a case is not held up by failures of communication. I move amendment 11.

I have nothing further to say.  Amendment 11 agreed to.

Amendment 70 responds to an amendment at stage 2 from Cathie Craigie, which intended to ensure that the use of assistance to improve housing conditions in the private sector is given formal policy recognition alongside the other issues in the local housing strategy. It is perhaps fitting at the start of today's proceedings to reflect that many of the Executive amendments at stage 3 are a response to pressure from the committee on issues of concern to it. I am glad that the amendment responds to its concerns. Amendment 70 concerns the powers that are at the heart of the scheme of assistance provisions in part 2 of the bill, rather than the more limited duties in that part. Its effect will be to ensure that local authorities' local housing strategies include their strategic vision for how they will use those powers to bring about improvements in housing conditions in the private sector. We could issue guidance to local authorities, saying that they should cover that issue, but I agree with Cathie Craigie that the policy significance of the scheme of assistance approach is such that it needs to have formal recognition alongside other statutory requirements for the local housing strategy. The provision will complement the requirement in section 69 for the local authority to publish criteria for how it gives assistance—those criteria will be focused on delivery within the strategy. I move amendment 70.  Amendment 70 agreed to.

Depending on the circumstances of a case, there may be a number of pieces of legislation with which such installations would have to comply if they were to be allowed on or in a public building or any other building. Examples include the Town and Country  Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 and the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974.

I would prefer to have more detail on such an individual case before commenting on it. I am conscious that comments on individual planning issues can be extrapolated in a way that might not be helpful for continuing and constructive debate. It is incumbent on everyone involved, particularly when it comes to telecommunications masts, to be as transparent and open as possible about where the masts are going, who is operating them and so on, particularly given the unease about telecommunications masts. Current research does not reinforce that unease, but I know from my area that neither the current research nor emphasis of the fact that we are tracking the matter sufficiently reassure people. It is important—I know that the industry is committed to this—to work as closely as possible with people, to continue dialogue with them and to try, if possible, to site masts where people are comfortable with them while recognising the tensions that the technology creates by virtue of its having to be spread around the country. It is important that people on all sides of the debate, through information and knowledge, can have more confidence about what is going on.

The aim of community planning partnerships is to deliver improved services that are more responsive to the needs of communities, to free up efficiencies through pooling resources and to increase trust, understanding and co-operation between partners. Community planning partnerships have made significant progress since their inception, particularly since the statutory framework was introduced in 2003. At national level, progress is monitored as part of the continuing programme of audits of best value and community planning.  Audit Scotland's extensive baseline review of community planning will be published early in 2006.

I am sure that Brian Adam would wish to recognise and welcome the significant funding of £318 million for Scotland's most deprived communities, while understanding that there is a poverty of place and that multiple deprivation has an impact on health and other outcomes. That is the right approach. There are issues about how CPPs are rolled out in a way that sits comfortably with communities. The challenge is that we cannot set levels nationally and then claim that the money is a community regeneration fund. The initiative must come from the bottom up. Communities clearly understand what needs to be done in their areas and the challenge for community planning partnerships is to work in harness with the funding. That does not necessarily fit comfortably with some views about how money should be monitored, managed and so on. There must, of course, be a robust financial framework. I do not accept the characterisation that Mr Adam applies to the Audit Scotland report. That report will go before the Parliament's Audit Committee. We will await the committee's comments on it and act on any lessons that emerge. We must recognise the substantial policy position that lies at the heart of this issue, which is to address poverty hand in hand with the communities where that is needed.

Two years ago, Parliament passed the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003. At that time, we committed ourselves to ending what was seen as an artificial distinction between people in priority need and those who were not, and to ending what was seen as unfair rationing of access to permanent, secure and safe accommodation among different groups of people. I am sure that we all want to create a fair and equal Scotland with rights and opportunities for all. We recognised, therefore, that discrimination against single homeless people, particularly men, was unjust and should be tackled. Today we meet to discuss how to deliver the 2012 commitment and the challenges that we face in doing so. We have every right to be proud of our homelessness legislation, which is widely regarded as being the most progressive in Europe. In our devolved Scotland, effectively preventing and tackling homelessness is a top priority and we believe that everybody has the right to a safe and permanent secure home—there is no place for homelessness in Scotland. The 2003 act provides for the abolition of priority need by 2012. We remain committed to that policy, which will ensure that every unintentionally homeless person is entitled to permanent accommodation. That fits with our objective to deliver good quality, warm, sustainable and affordable housing for all. The abolition of priority need by 2012 is a challenging target, but in supporting its establishment, Parliament recognised that the target is about social justice. Many of us have concerns about the implications of abolishing priority need. We have an opportunity to discuss those concerns today, to explore the implications and to find out whether they can be addressed. Today also provides an opportunity for me to reiterate the Executive's commitment to ensuring that we find positive solutions to the problems that homeless people face. Homelessness remains a challenging agenda, but that does not mean that we should put it in the box marked "too difficult". I trust that the debate will reflect the real challenges and tensions within the policy, which we need to recognise. We owe that to our communities and to the people who are affected by homelessness. Parliament and the Government are committed to the wider aims of  eradicating poverty, tackling social exclusion and changing Scotland for the better. Tackling homelessness and providing the fundamental right to a home are bound to those ideals. Our policy approach to homelessness is based on addressing the causes of homelessness and meeting the needs of individual households. That marks a move away from pigeonholing homeless people and rationing resources in an artificial manner. We know that homelessness is experienced in different ways by different individuals. The situation is often different within urban areas and within and between rural areas. We acknowledge that, for some people who find themselves in the most difficult circumstances, their experience of homelessness will be solved not so much by bricks and mortar as through other important areas of policy to which the Executive is committed.

That is part of the cause in certain places. In some cities, however, there are both homelessness and surplus housing. We must reflect on that in our policy, as well as recognise the issues of supply in other places that are caused by prosperity rather than by decline. We need to acknowledge the complexity of the situation. It is precisely because of our understanding of that need for supply at the affordable end of the market that huge amounts of money have been identified for supporting the development of an affordable housing programme. We are committed to providing sustainable housing outcomes for all homeless people. It is worth considering who homeless people actually are. Often, homeless people are stigmatised by society and are regarded as being undeserving or undesirable. The reality is that any one of us could become homeless through unexpected circumstances. We might know members of our own families, acquaintances or other people who have ended up homeless through reasons of employment, health, the cost of food and utilities or a lack of security in their family relationships. When dealing with those issues, we must remember that the homeless are not just people out there on the streets; they are people who we might all be if our circumstances were different. They require different solutions and different assistance to find ways out of their situations. We need to work hard to ensure that homeless people  are seen as individuals and as part of their communities, rather than apart from them. Each homelessness application is from a real person who has a unique set of circumstances and difficulties. Each of them is a person with potential. We need to ensure that they are not written off and that they are able to fulfil their potential within their communities.

We are currently considering abolishing priority need for intentionally homeless people. We need to move stage by stage on such questions, and we must explore whatever issues are raised with us by people who experience homelessness in different ways. We have already made real progress in delivering the wider homelessness agenda. Much has been achieved by local authorities and voluntary bodies working in partnership to deliver the recommendations of the two homelessness task force reports, which have helped to shape the blueprint for our national policy. We have already reformed the legislative framework to ensure that every homeless person is entitled to a minimum of temporary accommodation with advice and assistance. That has helped to expose hidden homelessness and has encouraged people who previously had no housing rights to come forward and receive assistance. We have made huge strides in tackling rough sleeping and repeat homelessness. All local authorities have homelessness strategies in place, and they are working closely with health boards, housing associations and others to combat homelessness in their areas. We now have better information about the scale and nature of the problem and we have been working with local authorities to ensure that that is fully reflected in the wider context of housing need and in the forward planning of housing stock. Our approach has always emphasised partnership. We have a challenging target, and we recognise the need to work with partners who are involved in delivery of services. As in so many other areas, national policy must be informed and shaped by people who know the situation on the ground and who know what does and does not work. The 2003 act requires ministers to make a statement before the end of this year, setting out the steps that ministers and local authorities have taken, are taking and will take to ensure that our vision for 2012 becomes reality. The legislation is implicit in its acknowledgement of local authorities as the main deliverers, and we have been working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and individual councils  in developing the policy. Local authorities' homelessness role is challenging and requires support from the Executive and other partners. I acknowledge the additional challenges that have been set for local authorities and extend my thanks for the hard work that has been undertaken. I am confident that continued close partnership working between all the relevant partners and sectors will lead to effective delivery of our ambitious homelessness legislation. It is vital that the priority need statement is based on up to date and accurate information. We have worked with local authorities and COSLA to gather detailed local information. All the available data will be considered in order to project housing need levels when priority need is abolished by 2012. Support needs and wider housing needs will also be covered. That data-gathering exercise is the start of a process to plan for the move to 2012. The information provides initial estimates that will be refined over time as more data become available. We will work closely with local authorities on that process. We acknowledge that major changes cannot take place overnight and that we need to be realistic about the deliverability of our policy. There is no point in expanding homeless people's rights beyond the capacity of local authorities to meet those rights, which is why the 2003 act provides the power to make changes over time. We made it clear during the passage of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill that change would not take place unless the additional burdens that were placed on councils were manageable and sustainable. That remains our position.

A manageable and sustainable activity must be resourced. Of course, we have continuing dialogue at all times with all sorts of bodies and organisations about resource need. The statement on priority and the work that has been done with COSLA are intended to identify the resource needs and how progress will be made. I am content to say that. I recognise that resource is not the only factor; other elements include how we work together and the timescales for delivery. The abolition of priority need raises questions about local authorities' ability to cope with the additional demands that will be placed on homelessness and housing services. Delivery of the target depends on an adequate supply of  affordable housing in the right areas. Availability of social and other affordable housing is a crucial part of the equation. It is important that a full range of housing solutions is available because we know that a social let may not be the best solution for every household. I appreciate that concern is felt that abolishing priority need will mean that social housing is made available only to homeless households, but that is not the desired outcome. We do not intend to displace housing need from one group to another. Work to examine the current situation and potential future scenarios has focused on the percentage of lets to homeless households. That will continue to be an important indicator in how we move towards 2012, but it will not be the only one. Given the immediate housing needs of homeless households, it is entirely legitimate that a high proportion of social lets should go to them. However, I recognise the need to balance that with the housing need of others and to ensure fairness and opportunity for all. That task is not easy, but we intend to consider it closely in preparation for the statement.

I say with respect that the conversations and dialogue that we have with local authorities are about precisely that. They know how the policies will be expressed locally. If the current proposal cannot meet the balance, we must have evidence about that and about how to redress the balance. The situation will be different in different places. We know that people in some places are being displaced into social rented housing from the property market because the property market is hot, for example. That is different from the situation in areas where decline has taken place because we have not invested in communities as a result of other difficulties. I am aware that many members have worries about the balance of communities in their areas. There is no question but that some homeless households have extreme support needs and can display challenging behaviour. However, most people who are in housing need or who are homeless are not antisocial. We should be careful not to create further stigma by inferring the general from the specific. One reason why I welcomed action against antisocial behaviour is that when such behaviour was not addressed in my constituency, it created homelessness when people had to flee harassment from others, or created housing need because an area became  undesirable—a place where people did not want to live. Houses were empty because we did not address antisocial behaviour. So far, I have talked about homelessness and access to housing, but as I said earlier, meeting the 2012 target is about far more than providing bricks and mortar. In order to meet the target, we must work in partnership with local government and the voluntary sector to deliver the broader homelessness agenda. Members will know that the homelessness task force placed a strong emphasis on prevention activity, which is a key factor as we move towards 2012. We want to make such activity a clear focus as we progress. As I have said, that makes obvious economic sense and is essential in reduction of social costs. Early action to prevent circumstances in which eviction is necessary also makes sense. That is not to say that we should ignore problems in our communities; we should act early, prevent problems where we can and deal with them where we cannot. In conclusion, I look forward to the debate and to hearing the views of members from all parties on the delivery of a key social justice policy. The debate will play its part in shaping the statement and the statement will shape action in the years ahead to deliver a shared commitment and to tackle poverty and disadvantage. We are committed to working in partnership to deliver the right to permanent, safe and secure accommodation to all unintentionally homeless households by 2012. Local authorities are our key partners and main deliverers, so our priority is to work with them. We must remember that our priority is to provide together safe and secure homes for all Scotland's people.

I welcome the opportunity to sum up in this debate. I start by reflecting on the significance of the debate. It did not start today, last week or last year. I am proud that this is a further stage in an important journey of more than 30 years of challenging inequality and injustice in our society. I am proud that a Labour Government is acting now and building on the groundbreaking work of previous Labour Governments, which was shaped by the work of Labour women, the Labour Party, the trade union movement and women far beyond the party. They understood that, in order to get real justice, we had to understand what inequality looked like, and they were determined to challenge discrimination against women.  We must recognise how far we have come. The debate could be a technical one about targets, structures and duties, but underpinning it is an understanding that has been developed over a long period not just that our society is unequal—for example, that women are more likely to be low paid, to be carers or to suffer pensioner poverty—but of why that happens and what needs to be done to deal with it. In that context of change and movement, we should reflect on the Opposition's position on the Sewel motion. It is not surprising that the SNP is taking another opportunity not to support a Sewel motion. The SNP spends its parliamentary life sprachling about looking for a hook on which to hang its constitutional obsessions. Of course there are practicalities, which I will try to address, but it is worth reflecting on the priorities of an Opposition that uses those practicalities as an alibi to talk down a policy. It will oppose the policy on a point of principle: because it comes from Westminster. On Carolyn Leckie's point about low pay, we must accept that the Equality Bill, which will inform and shape the issues around women's inequality, is only part of a broader purpose and will not sort out everything on its own. We must consider how to harness more effectively the powers at every level—locally and at the Scottish and Westminster levels—to deliver change. The equal pay issue is why the gender duty will be so important to the new body. A number of members made practical points about clauses 17 and 19. It will be possible for the CEHR to consider how those powers are implemented and to delegate the responsibility for them. Malcolm Chisholm has already made the case on that issue and we will continue to be in dialogue with the UK Government on it. There is a role for the Equal Opportunities Committee in monitoring the work. Nobody in the Scottish Executive or on the partnership side wants the equality legislation to fail, so we take the responsibility seriously. The Scottish commissioner will be chosen at a UK level because the commission will be a UK body. However, the Scottish ministers will have to agree on the choice. On Margaret Mitchell's point, there will be a separate commissioner. I am aware that the Justice 1 Committee will explore the issues of duplication further as the Scottish Commissioner for Human Rights Bill progresses. I also note the points that Nora Radcliffe and other members of the Equal Opportunities Committee made, specifically Cathy Peattie. The disability committee could continue after the five-year review if that was felt to be necessary. I am happy to advocate at least an annual debate on the issues in the equality legislation.  However, the challenge for the Parliament is not to think about equalities issues once a year, but to mainstream the thinking into every aspect of our work. I confirm that the elimination of harassment is to be part of the gender duty. Of course, Malcolm Chisholm will make a further detailed response to the points that the Equal Opportunities Committee made on that issue. That will not just be a response; we are determined to act on the important issues that have been flagged up. It is crucial that there will be on-going dialogue with Westminster. We want to talk to people at every level of government to make the bill work rather than to identify the barriers that Christine Grahame so tellingly pointed out. The reality is that what Christine Grahame said is not what the equality bodies have said about the proposals. She does not seem to be able to distinguish between promoting equal opportunities and laying down a duty. I am sure that when we lay down a duty, it will result in significant change in the lives of ordinary women. So often, people come to bury rather than praise our Labour Government and all things to do with Westminster. Let us take the opportunity to support the Sewel motion and to recognise how far we have travelled in challenging inequality. We should welcome the opportunity for members, the Scottish Executive and the Equal Opportunities Committee to work alongside Westminster, local government and all public bodies to make real in practice an aspiration that I am sure we all share: greater equality for women.

In the past two years, Glasgow Housing Association has made significant progress in delivering better housing for its tenants. During that time, £160 million has been invested in tenants' homes throughout the city, which has produced benefits such as more than 10,000 homes with new central heating systems, more than 13,000 re-roofed properties, more than 8,000 homes with new kitchens and more than 3,000 homes with new bathrooms. A further £127 million is being invested in the current year, and the GHA is well on track to deliver better housing and stronger communities for its tenants.

Bill Butler makes an important point about estate management. Often, things that are external to people's houses can have the greatest impact on them and can be as important as the quality of the housing. Indeed, there has sometimes been a failure of investment in things that are external to homes. We know of communities that are in decline in which the houses are exactly the same kind of houses as there are in flourishing communities in other places. It is impossible to overstate the importance of estate management and dealing with the fabric of houses. I am aware that the GHA understands and appreciates that. Indeed, it is to be applauded for the commitment and priority that it has given to the neighbourhood relations team, which absolutely understands that the quality of houses and people's living accommodation can be severely damaged if external things are not addressed. Obviously, as a result of the key role of tenants in community ownership, they have brought that matter to the attention of those who provide homes. On Bill Butler's final point, Communities Scotland has an important role to play in regulating, monitoring and supporting all housing  associations, a key part of which is understanding the important issues that have been described.

It would be wonderful if Sandra White would come to Glasgow, at least on one occasion, and recognise the huge investment that is being made in its housing. It seems that, for as long as stock transfer has been referred to, her abiding campaign has been to make the people of Glasgow feel that it cannot and will not work. The evidence is that it can work and will work. On her point about procurement, the fact is that it does not impact on second-stage transfer. The GHA has made it clear that it remains committed to second-stage transfer as a key way of ensuring the involvement of tenants—something that Sandra White and the Scottish National Party resisted even in relation to stock transfer. Clearly, it is a matter for the GHA to address. We are working closely with it and supporting it in considering the best way forward. The legal advice that was given before transfer was sound, and we are confident that second-stage transfer and the involvement of tenants—which is central to stock transfer and the transformation of Glasgow's housing—are still on track.

We are funding two major research projects to evaluate the impact of the central heating programme. The first is a long-term project that is being undertaken by the University of Edinburgh and TNS Social Research, which will examine the impact of the programme on the health of recipients. We expect that work to be  completed towards the end of 2006. The second is an annual survey of households that have been included in each of the first three years of the programme. That research has shown that, in the first year of the programme, almost nine tenths of the people surveyed who were in fuel poverty were lifted out of it after inclusion in the programme.

Karen Whitefield will be aware that we are undertaking a review of the benefits of the central heating programme and the warm deal to examine how progress can be made. Final decisions have not yet been taken, so information from members throughout the chamber about the difficulties created by programmes with particular rules and regulations will be fed into the process. I confirm that we propose to continue the programme at at least the same level as at present and will look to expand eligibility as far as possible within the available funding. I note Karen Whitefield's comments about flexibility and about partial and inefficient systems. As she knows, householders over 80 have benefited from such flexibility. We aim to expand the programme by offering upgrades and replacements of partial and inefficient systems for pensioners who are in receipt of pension credit. We must always bear in mind the issue of fuel poverty, and we have asked the fuel poverty forum and others to advise us on the matter. Raising people out of fuel poverty must be central to the development of the programme in the future.

Of course, the irony is that, if a third-party right of appeal were the subject of a Sewel motion, the SNP would oppose it on a point of principle. I welcome this opportunity to wind up a useful debate, in which members have been able to raise a range of concerns and issues. It has been interesting to see the division of views across the Parliament. I should point out that views among partnership colleagues are also divided, at least on the emphasis that should be given to various issues. We certainly know that the SNP is divided on planning. In fact, its leadership has simply quit the field in this debate, which is perhaps nothing new. That said, the Cabinet spoke with one voice and showed unity on the matter when it unanimously signed off the white paper. Planning—as any MSP, local councillor or MP will agree—is crucial to local communities. Karen Whitefield made that point. It is crucial in delivering facilities that we all want, such as schools and hospitals, and it is crucial in creating employment, business opportunities and economic growth—economic growth not for its own sake but because it transforms the life chances of people in our most deprived communities. Planning will also provide important facilities that we all require even if we do not want them near us—facilities such as waste recycling units or secure units. The challenge in planning is to balance the need for certain things against the resistance that we all feel about having such things on our doorsteps. In the planning process, it is interesting to note the imaginative explanations that people will find for opposing a particular development on their doorstep. If we think that they are imaginative now, imagine how imaginative they will be if people have only to prove that the application goes against the local development plans. We have to be honest. We know that planning has a bad image. People think of developers riding roughshod over local communities; we think of a slow, self-serving, bureaucratic and irrational system; and we think of a world full of nimbys and cowboy developers.  This debate has been measured, but in the general response to the white paper it was depressing that some groups sought out the old politics. They talked about power grabs and a developers charter. There was even triumphalism from some elements of the business community that want to continue in the old world of trench warfare and foghorn diplomacy, if I may mix my metaphors. We need to be measured and calm—which is hard for me, I accept.

We have to resist the temptation to distil the complexities of what we want to do in planning into one acid test on third-party right of appeal. We all know that the Scottish Executive and the Parliament work hard to engage with communities and lobbying groups—the so-called stakeholder groups—and we know about the task forces and the consultations. It is therefore depressing that some who say that they speak for local communities will, at the same time, drive down the expectations of those local communities of what the Scottish Executive and the Parliament will deliver for them. It is disgraceful that they will belie the reality that we want to work with local communities and that we are wrestling with how best to involve local communities. That is not the froth; it is at the centre of our commitment to change the planning system.

I would not judge my general view of interventions on my decision on whether or not to take an intervention from Mr Rumbles. We need to speed the system up, but we cannot allow developers to do as they please. We need proper engagement with local communities, but we have to acknowledge that some people will be happy only if we agree with them absolutely, as Karen Whitefield said. I know from the debate on Scottish planning policy 16 on opencast coal mining that there can be divisions within communities. It is possible for one community to take two different views on a planning proposal. In my view, third-party right of appeal might extend rights for some, but would override the rights of others. We have to reassert the importance of local decision making by local authorities, who have their own democratic accountability. We need honesty in the debate: there are bad developers and there are nimbys. However, not everyone is like that. In this debate, we have to  consider more than simply whether it will make us feel better to develop something or whether the development will work. I acknowledge the serious views that have been expressed on third-party right of appeal. However, will third-party right of appeal merely lengthen the process, or will it give people real powers? Will it give an opportunity to those with an ideological position on a development to object, or will it make a real difference to local communities?

We could have a further argument about what the evidence from Ireland means, but an interesting aspect of the situation, as I understand it, is that locally elected politicians in Ireland are not involved in the process. That is not something that I would want to happen here. For me, a judgment must be made about where to put resources. We must have a strong enforcement process. If I have to make a judgment about whether to lengthen the system or to strengthen it, I would argue that it needs to be strengthened. The message from opencast coal developments is that the enforcement road is the way to go. We must deal with individual rogue developers to build people's confidence in the system and to deter those who believe in a what-you-can-get-away-with culture in development. It is important to view third-party right of appeal as a short-term solution to the problems of the present system rather than as something that needs to be bolted on to a modernised and developed planning system. People should remember that we propose to impose a limitation on first-party right of appeal and they should welcome that. Another point that I want to make about enforcement and third-party right of appeal relates to environmental justice. We must not have a system that gives succour to the strongest voices at the expense of the weakest, because it is in poor communities that the cumulative impact of inappropriate developments emerges and develops. I turn to some of the points that members have made during the debate. The national planning framework was mentioned and, in that regard, we have said that we want to ensure that the Parliament will have a role to play. In addition to the suggestions on how the Parliament's role can  be developed that were made during the consultation, further ideas on that have emerged during the debate. We will produce our detailed proposals in time for the bill's introduction in December. I point out that some of the issues that Christine Grahame highlighted, such as nuclear power, are so big that they will be the meat and drink of cross-party political debate in the coming period and are just as likely to be solved in an election as in the planning process. There is no change in the Executive's position on nuclear power stations, which is that it will not support further development of nuclear power stations while waste management issues remain unresolved. The decision on whether to grant permission for the construction of a new nuclear generating station would be for Scottish ministers to make under the Electricity Act 1989. As part of their consideration, they would take account of consultations, which would be likely to include a public inquiry into the proposal.

That is what elections and being politically accountable are all about. Scottish ministers will make the decision and the people of the country will be able to pass a verdict on that action, just as they can on any other ministerial actions.

Yes. I will now address the cumulative impact of opencast coal mining and of other waste and minerals development. People who, like me, have met people from Greengairs and similarly affected places recognise the importance of the issue and understand why we want to underline the significance of environmental justice. The role of COSLA has been mentioned. We engage with COSLA on such matters and I know that a key aspect of COSLA's view is that, rather than centralising control in Edinburgh, we should work with local authorities and support planning authorities to do the job that we intended them to do. I turn to the issue of having a statutory purpose for planning. In light of the consultation, we are considering whether planning should have the statutory purpose of promoting sustainable development, on which, as members will be aware, work is being done across the Executive. In spite of the apparent simplicity of the proposal, a number of complicated issues are involved and  we want to proceed by ensuring greater clarity, not more legal complexity. That should be a watchword for our view on the planning process. I finish by emphasising that we are talking about creating sustainable communities and ensuring that there is equality and environmental justice for all our communities. That is not about rewarding the loudest at the expense of the weakest. We want to establish a modernised planning system that promotes sustainable growth and guarantees local people the right to make their voices heard while proposals are still on the drawing board. That will involve a cultural change, because people will have to be involved in the process at an early stage. We want the new system to devolve decisions to local authorities whenever that is possible and to rely on up-to-date, relevant and accessible development plans that have been drawn up with the full participation of local people following a clear assessment of the environmental impact. We want to encourage debate, engagement and dialogue rather than confrontation and frustration. Contrary to the impression that I may have created in winding up, I assure members that Malcolm Chisholm and I—and the rest of the Executive—will be open to discussion and debate as the bill proceeds through the Parliament. That said, we are determined to have a planning system that is fit for the 21 st century. We want a system that does not hamper but strengthens development in our local communities.

Under the Town and Country Planning (Control of Advertisements) (Scotland) Regulations 1984, a planning authority may issue a discontinuance notice in respect of the use of a site for the display of an advertisement. That includes vehicles that are used exclusively or principally for displaying advertisements.

I hope that Alasdair Morgan will do the same in his own area if there are issues with such hoardings. The matter should be addressed with local authorities, and I am happy to raise it in the on-going conversations that we have with them on the whole question of planning. The devil will be in the detail. Our planning commitments are to strengthen enforcement and to respond to local communities' concerns about the planning process. Therefore, I am happy to pursue the points that Alasdair Morgan has raised.

Although I have an extremely good grasp of my own brief, I am not sure that I have a good grasp of the briefs of the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications and ex-transport ministers. I would prefer to respond to the member in writing, having been able to reflect on the points that he has made. There are powers in the regulations to deal with such advertising hoardings where they have an impact on communities and amenity, and the matter is one for dialogue with planning authorities. In certain circumstances, it is also possible for signage to be put up; it is for the individual planning authority to define whether such signage is a hazard. If a hoarding distracts drivers, the regulations can address the matter. If the member corresponds with me, I will do my best to respond in detail to the points that he has raised.

I always thought that the advertising industry took the view that advertising had to produce results; however, self-evidently, those hoardings have not produced the results that were expected of them. As responsible political parties, we make our case in any way that we can. The lamp posts may do one thing but I am sure that, when Labour makes its case to the electorate in Cathcart and elsewhere, the people will do another: they will respond not just by noticing the posters, but by voting Labour.

I hesitate to take the advice of a lawyer about when I should or should not sue and will simply leave Christine Grahame's last comment where it is.  I thank the members who have spoken in today's debate and, once again, the Communities Committee for all its hard work in considering the bill. To begin with, I should address some members' general points about making legislation. We must recognise that there is a high demand for legislation, no matter whether it relates to charities, planning or housing, which this bill covers. Given the Parliament's commitment to fill certain legislative gaps, it would be hard to decide which of those matters should not be given priority. Our friend at the back of the chamber, Colin Fox, made a sweeping statement about the major scandal of housing. However, we make legislation in the Parliament by recognising that certain problems exist and then drilling down into how they manifest themselves. We have seen that from members' speeches this morning. The work of organisations and groups such as the housing improvement task force has given a hard reality to some of the difficulties that have been seen at a local level. Those groups must be commended on their very detailed work. Although such work might in some respects have produced an anoraky bill, the legislation will, if it is effective, address many of the serious concerns that people have. Linda Fabiani said that the legislation was far-sighted and that it would require a culture change. Such a change has two elements, the first of which relates to our own irrational approach to buying homes. We tend to give less attention to such a significant investment than we do to the colour of our next car; indeed, someone mentioned patio doors in that respect. It is difficult to use legislation to give people a row for being irrational about how they spend their own money, but there is no doubt that our housing market reflects that irrational behaviour. I acknowledge Linda Fabiani's comments about good landlords and the role of the private sector. However, some private landlords see their property not as a business but as an investment and expect to get money out of it without putting anything into repairs, how they treat their tenants or how they deal with tenants who are causing difficulties for people round about them. That is why we should welcome the bill's important commitment to the registration of landlords. Moreover, the level of disrepair currently amounts to about £5 billion and there is a consensus in the chamber that we need to change attitudes in that respect. Some members mentioned energy labelling, but I am concerned about investing too much hope in that. After all, we have only to look at the car market to realise that even though people know that something is incredibly energy inefficient they will still buy it—or aspire to buying it. Simply  describing a house's energy condition will not change people's attitudes when it comes to buying it, because a determining factor in buying a house is not even its current condition but its location. On the question of resources for local authorities, I should point out that they have already been increased significantly. For example, there has been a 40 per cent increase in funding and the Minister for Communities has reflected on the question whether funding should be ring fenced, which we need to discuss with COSLA. We must, however, recognise that there has been massive investment in housing. We are also considering how resources can be used better and addressing the issue of individual owners' responsibilities to maintain their homes.

This bill is about people taking responsibility for their own property. In the 1980s, there were examples of people receiving 90 per cent grants to improve their properties and then walking away with a huge benefit. There was an infrastructure benefit to the local community, but it was certainly not the same as the benefit to the owners. Disability issues are very important. The Executive has committed itself to discussing those issues further with the Communities Committee, with members more broadly, and with disability groups as the bill progresses. We are always delighted to have the opportunity to work in partnership with Westminster. I assure members that detailed and positive discussions are taking place on the points raised by Scott Barrie. I would be concerned if any organisation felt that it had not been appropriately consulted. Karen Whitefield raised that issue. However, significant consultation took place with disability groups, including the Disability Rights Commission. Ownership Options was given early insight into the bill through a reference group. Despite that, I acknowledge that some people felt that they were not consulted appropriately. Nevertheless, the processes of the Parliament ensured that issues of key concern to those groups were highlighted. I want to clarify a number of points to do with capping and means testing. I do not want people with disabilities in Scotland to be treated unfairly in comparison with people with disabilities in England. In England, there is an absolute cap of £25,000 for the cost of works that will be  supported by grant; in Scotland, the proposed grant when costs are more than £20,000 has to be referred to the Executive. The bill will now remove that control, although I stress that the grant is normally approved. Means testing is a separate issue. There is means testing for any grant in England or Scotland. In Scotland, the grant is more generous, with a minimum level of 50 per cent. As the Minister for Communities has said, we intend to review the means test and change it as necessary through secondary legislation. We have retained the right for grant for standard amenities. There is currently a right for grant for other adaptations; that is entirely at local authorities' discretion. We believe in working with the Communities Committee and with members more broadly so that we can address some of the anxieties over this issue. We do not want a postcode lottery. There will not be a diminution of rights. I do not think that it is news to anybody that the pilot scheme for single seller surveys was not successful. I said that it was not successful, so for others to say that it was not successful was not a very strong line of attack. We have to acknowledge what the single seller survey was about. Listening to Mary Scanlon, one might imagine that the market was operating perfectly as it is. However, we know perfectly well that there are irrationalities and frustrations. We also know that the stakeholders group that was involved at an earlier stage is still working with the Executive, wrestling with the issues and looking for solutions. For many people, the current system is frustrating and expensive, with multiple surveys, deliberately low upset prices, and a lack of reality about what people are buying. The Scottish Consumer Council has said that people are virtually blind in the purchase of a huge asset. Those issues remain compelling in relation to single surveys. The devil is in the detail and we will have to get things right. It has been clear from discussions with stakeholders that some people feel that the market itself will manage some of the practical problems. However, we are happy for the concerns raised to be pursued further. Mary Scanlon spoke about people not having early notice of our decision to move to a mandatory scheme. The announcement on that was made in response to a parliamentary question from Mary Scanlon. I am sure that she would not have thought it appropriate if advance warning of that answer had been given to people who are not in the Parliament. However, stakeholders were contacted as soon as the question was answered. I understand some of the concerns that have been expressed about the right to buy and the  single seller survey. However, we should acknowledge that right-to-buy purchases from first base are not being sold on the open market. It is really important that people have the right information, but that information will not necessarily be provided by the single seller survey in that situation. However, later, when houses are sold on again, it would be a different matter. Interesting suggestions have been made on energy efficiency and fuel poverty. Those suggestions go far beyond the scope of this bill; it will be important that they are fed into the appropriate places. In the Housing (Scotland) Bill, the tolerable standard is a condemnatory standard. We should not necessarily put other standards into the bill, because that would then involve statute in relation to repairs to a property that has gone below the condemnatory standard. I hope that people will recognise that point. On the issue of the private rented housing panel, we want to build on what we have. We first want to ensure that the measures in the bill bed in. We acknowledge the role of the panel; at a later stage, we might be able to consider some of the points that have been made. Work is being done on housing dispute resolution. Once that work is complete, we will be able to look further at other points. John Home Robertson spoke about housing problems, which are different in different places. The issue is not just about private sector repair schemes and so on; it is about planning, it is about the release of land, it is about the planning advice to do with 25 per cent of housing being affordable, it is about re-establishing the credibility of the rented sector, it is about addressing homelessness, and it is about considering how the market can operate in all its exotic ways. It is easy to say that many problems have come from the right to buy. Colin Fox again talks about publicly owned housing but we know that the housing association movement and the housing co-operative movement have been central in re-establishing the credibility of high-quality social rented housing in some places. I acknowledge that issues to do with rural housing have been raised often and, again, they are different in different parts of Scotland. My own family history is one of movement because of a lack not just of affordable housing but of any housing at all in a rural setting. I understand the problems. A significant amount of funding has gone into rural housing. It is important to work with local people to find out how housing needs can be addressed. Those needs are linked to economic activity in rural communities and to the way in  which the planning and economic development systems operate across Scotland. Nora Radcliffe raised the issue of Gypsy Travellers. Significant issues arise to do with the housing needs of Gypsy Travellers. Some issues to do with mobile homes are being addressed. However, because of the cultural and ethnic background of Gypsy Travellers, this is not just about our definition of what a house or a home is. From the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee, we know that some of the really difficult issues to do with Gypsy Travellers will not be solved using such definitions. The Executive has expressed a commitment to addressing those deeper problems.

I do not know how much longer I have.

So it was not 10 minutes then.

There would be huge implications for housing legislation in general if we redefined a house as a home. However, I make a clear commitment. We recognise that issues of housing need and homelessness are very particular for people from Gypsy Traveller communities. Rob Gibson asked about eco-housing standards. As I have said already, the bill is firmly committed to driving up standards in private sector housing. The eco-standard is interesting but, as I have suggested, it is not necessarily in this bill that the standard should be addressed for statutory intervention. On the cost of disrepair, the figure of £5 billion comes from work that was done by the Scottish house condition survey. Rob Gibson raised a very technical point about self-invested pension funds and the potential impact on rural communities. Self-invested pension funds are a very small part of the market. The vast majority of pension funds are already able to invest in private housing. The changes that the Chancellor has made are intended to simplify pension rules and not to encourage investment in any particular sector. The assessment published  by HM Revenue and Customs makes it clear that changes are not expected to have any major impact on the housing market. Bill Aitken spoke about the council being the lender of last resort. There is a plethora of lenders and yet the people who need the most help with the cost of putting their houses right still find it impossible to get a commercial loan other than from a loan shark. Therefore, the power for local authorities to lend is a sound policy that reflects our commitment to social and financial inclusion.

The debate has been interesting. We will reflect on the headline issues that members have addressed in relation to disability and the single seller survey, but also on the more detailed points that have been highlighted. I look forward to working with members in the interesting process during stages 2 and 3.

We plan to extend the central heating programme beyond March 2006 and will soon consult the fuel poverty forum and others on the options for the future programme.

I am aware of the scheme's popularity. Members from all parties have recognised the significant progress that has been made. We have provided free central heating installation, advice and other benefits to more than 51,000 households. We have two key tasks. Currently, we are considering the fuel poverty figures in the 2002 Scottish house condition survey, because we want not just to improve the general infrastructure of people's houses and the housing stock but to tackle the problem of fuel poverty. To that end, we are consulting across the board. I hope that MSPs will participate in the consultation. The fuel poverty forum captures interests such as the power companies, Energy Action Scotland, Shelter, Age Concern, Help the Aged, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and a range of other organisations—I can provide the member with a full list. The forum will be able to consider not just the issues for over-60s and over-80s—we have extended the scope of the programme for over-80s—but how the scheme can be matched with our fuel poverty targets.

When we extended the scheme to cover partial and inadequate central heating systems for the over-80s, we recognised the force of the argument that the member makes. At that stage, the decision was made that the over-80s were the priority group, but we can consider the issue further. John Home Robertson and Dr Murray have raised the issue of the role of landlords in the past. We are continuing to look at the matter to establish the extent of the problem. We recognise that the problem might be partly hidden, as some people might not make an application for a new system because they think that it will be refused by their landlord. However, the extent to which landlords can resist improvements that tenants might wish to make is one of the smaller focuses of the Housing (Scotland) Bill.

One of the fundamental aspects of the scheme is our recognition that vulnerable, elderly people are not necessarily in a strong position to negotiate with individual companies about the best system for them. That is why we tried to take away those difficulties through working with the Eaga Partnership Ltd. One of Eaga's responsibilities is to recognise the importance of speaking to people about using their systems efficiently. On the specific point that Alasdair Morgan makes, one of my constituents has had a similar experience, in that, although they have an adequate system, they are no longer in a position to use it. We have to be more imaginative about how we support people in those circumstances. If they are not strong enough to carry in the coal, it might be that we should not put in a new central heating system but look at whether their levels of support are adequate. We recognise those challenges. The central heating programme is part of our support for elderly people; it should not be a substitute for the other bits of the system in which we work closely with individuals and families who need support in different ways.

I advise John Swinburne to write to me so that I can make sure that he gets an absolutely correct and adequate response. There has been correspondence about the whole area. The original programme worked well for people who had no heating systems; in those cases, it was straightforward to install a new system. As systems have required replacement, we have had to ensure that our advice and guidelines catch up. The current position is that, if the installation of the new system does not require the old system to be taken away, people are expected to pay for the removal of the old system. I am more than happy to look at the specific details of the case that John Swinburne referred to, because we are not in the business of having a system that creates greater distress for people. As that case highlights, some of the details and implications of such a programme cannot possibly be evident when we initially devise it. Our commitment as we move towards 2006 is to ensure that the nitty-gritty issues that can cause a lot of grief to people are addressed through the programme.

As I said, we are consulting on how the next stage of the programme should be taken forward. At that level, nothing has been ruled out. A compelling case was made for the extension of the programme to the over-80s with partial or inefficient systems. That has to balanced against a reflection on the extent to which, as the programme develops, it still addresses issues around fuel poverty. I acknowledge Jackie Baillie's point about people with a disability. Indeed, a case can be made for a whole range of people. We will have to make a balanced judgment on the basis of not just what the representative fuel poverty forum says, but what the experiences of MSPs and others bring to the consultation.

It is a privilege for me to reply to the debate, and I congratulate Robert Brown on securing the debate to commend Barnardo's for its work over the past 100 years. There has been clear agreement across the chamber, not just on the proud history of Barnardo's but on the important work that it does now. I am happy to offer congratulations on behalf of the Executive and I pay tribute to the efforts of all Barnardo's staff, who work tirelessly to support some of our most vulnerable and disadvantaged children, young people and families. Robin Harper talked about going out busking for Barnardo's. When I was a brownie, we got a sheet for Barnardo's at Christmas and we went home and collected money. That was a wonderful way of securing support for needy children and made it stick in my mind, even as a very young child, that there were children who were disadvantaged and that we all had a responsibility to do something about that. Fortunately, times have moved on, but even then Barnardo's was a brand name for an organisation that identified needs and tried to address them. We have heard already something about the proud history of Barnardo's, dating from 1867, when Thomas Barnardo set up a ragged school. When he died in 1905, almost 100 homes had been established to care for around 8,500 children. During the second world war, Barnardo's played a key role in the evacuation and settlement of children at a difficult time for many young people. By the end of the war, and through the 1950s, it was clear that the focus of Barnardo's activities was shifting towards working with families in home and community environments. In the 1960s, new approaches were developed and, as Robert Brown said, the last traditional Barnardo's children's home closed in 1989. By then, caring for children and their families in their communities had become the key priority. Barnardo's priorities have expanded to encompass a wide range of activities, which have been identified in Robert Brown's motion and in the speeches that we have heard this evening. Although things have moved on, we know that the vital work in which Barnardo's is involved continues to be challenging for all of us, including those of us in government. If there is a connection  with the organisation's proud start in Victorian times, it is the recognition that there can be poverty amidst plenty and that people can suffer disadvantage while others are in comfort. Bardardo's acknowledgement that, for young people, disadvantage comes in many forms is key. Disadvantage might involve living in a family in which there is domestic abuse or being the carer of someone with an addiction problem. Assessing the disadvantage that young people face goes beyond mere consideration of a family's economic circumstances; it involves drilling down into other difficulties. Over the past year or so, Barnardo's has identified three of its most pressing priorities. Substance misuse and the exploitation of children for sexual purposes must be tackled and children's emotional and mental well-being promoted. Barnardo's aim is to promote innovative and child-centred approaches to reducing harm across those three areas. It is clear that Barnardo's is an organisation that is well attuned to the changes—both good and bad—in our increasingly diverse society. It has been able to identify and address the changing needs of children, young people and families in Scotland and to react to new threats, such as the use of the internet to groom young people for sexual exploitation, but in spite of its modern outlook, it has never lost sight of its founding vision, which is to free children from poverty, abuse and discrimination. Barnardo's is to be congratulated on its positive and challenging engagement with the Scottish Executive's agenda. The organisation represents how powerful the voluntary sector is. Funding has been discussed, and the Executive and others have acknowledged the key role that the voluntary sector plays in being innovative, understanding need and expressing what need is. One of the great benefits of devolution has been the understanding that has emerged that the Government does not sort things out on its own, but is extremely powerful when it harnesses bodies that understand how need is expressed in our communities. We must deal with the nitty-gritty of funding, but although we must fund innovation, we must recognise that there is a need for stability. That is the key underpinning commitment of the strategic review of voluntary sector funding. A powerful partnership of the SCVO, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Executive has formed to make progress on those issues. We have prepared a draft action plan, which is under discussion, and it is planned that we will publish the plan later in the summer. I believe that it will address the concerns that Robert Brown and other members have identified. On the partnership side,  we know that the Executive has been committed to providing three-year funding for voluntary organisations, when that is possible. It is certainly my view that using the voluntary sector is not about getting public service on the cheap; it is about obtaining the added value that the sector brings because of its understanding of the problems that people face. If we consider some of the care that Barnardo's provided in the past, which Robert Brown spoke about, there is no doubt that it reflected a lack of understanding of the risks that were posed to children by the adults who cared for them. Barnardo's has contributed to shaping a new understanding through listening and working with young people, which has helped to bring our society from a position of denial to one in which it is understood that child abuse exists and that we must tackle it. Barnardo's must be commended for the role that it has played. Members will have realised that many of the aims and aspirations of Barnardo's are identical to the Executive's policy priorities for children, young people and families, which, in many cases, have been underpinned by the legislation that has been debated and passed in our Parliament. It is clear that, if we can work together with both the statutory sector and voluntary organisations, including Barnardo's, to deliver our vision, we can support generations of young people to be successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors to society and responsible citizens. We have come a long way from the environment and circumstances that persuaded Dr Barnardo to help severely disadvantaged children and families. Employment rates are higher, our health is improving overall, life expectancy is higher, child mortality is decreasing, the educational attainment of children and young people is improving and we have statutory minimum pay and historically low interest rates. We are investing in the things that matter in an effort to tackle Scotland's historical legacy of poverty, deprivation, poor housing, poor health, high unemployment, low attainment and low aspirations. I would certainly not argue that there is not a long way to go. Even if I were to do so, organisations such as Barnardo's would ensure that I would not get away with it. Too many families continue to live in poor-quality housing and too many people lack the confidence and opportunities to make the move into employment. There are serious health inequalities and, as has been clearly identified, alcohol and drug misuse continue to take a heavy toll on lives, health and happiness for young and old alike. Through our policy priorities such as closing the opportunity gap, investment in affordable homes, the national health service, local government and schools, our  three-year programme to reform and strengthen child protection and our policies to tackle substance misuse and mental health, we are striving to improve the lives and livelihoods of current and future generations. Another of Barnardo's priorities is working in partnership with statutory organisations and other voluntary sector bodies. I am proud and honoured that Barnardo's counts the Executive as one of its partners. Barnardo's has been in the vanguard of the organisations that help to obtain children's views on proposals that affect them and their families and it has played a key role in ensuring that their opinions are heard. A good example is the role that Barnardo's played in the review of the children's hearings system. We are providing direct funding to Barnardo's for work with young sex offenders that includes early intervention work and family and aftercare support. Again, I believe that that work is characterised by the way in which it is both supportive and challenging of those with whom Barnardo's works. Barnardo's has clearly realised that partnership working across the statutory and voluntary sectors, particularly where children and families may have multiple needs, is the most effective way to deliver care and support when and where it is needed. Co-operation and collaboration may not always be easy for service planners and providers, but they are essential if we are to deliver high-quality integrated services that are built around the needs of the child, young person or family. The Executive has a Cabinet delivery group on children and young people that co-ordinates policy across a range of areas. We are striving to reduce bureaucracy through the development of joint inspections and we will consult shortly on new proposals for integrated assessment and quality improvement. Work is continuing in the crucial area of improving the sharing of information between services. We are looking at ways to further develop the skills and competences of those who work with children. Like Barnardo's, we are determined to place the child and not the process at the heart of our policies and services. I recognise the sincerity of the tributes that have been paid to Barnardo's from across the chamber. In that sincerity, I believe that we are making a commitment to and gaining an understanding of the power of the voluntary sector in addressing disadvantage. It is clear that the Executive shares many of Barnardo's hopes and aspirations. I am delighted to support Robert Brown's motion. On behalf of all members, I offer Barnardo's our very best wishes on its centenary. I hope that we can continue to work closely together in the 21 st century to improve the lives of children, young people and families in Scotland.  Meeting closed at 18:02.

I thank all those who have been involved in getting us to where we are today. In particular, I thank the convener of the Communities Committee, committee members and the clerks for their hard work and the rigour with which they developed proposals relating to the bill. I also thank all those who managed to cope with my moving from poacher to gamekeeper during the bill process. It has been a long journey. Duncan McNeil, in one of his grumpy modes, said that he did not see why we should thank everyone at the end of the day, because people were only doing their jobs. I was tempted to say that when we express thanks shortly before passing a bill it can be a bit like the Oscars. However, it is relevant for me to point out that, despite the noise and thunder at stage 1 from the SSP regarding one issue in the bill, the SSP was the only party that lodged no amendments at either stage 2 or stage 3. We had the old politics of debate by resolution, when the challenge that the Parliament presents to all of us is the hard  work of committees, of listening to interested groups and bodies, of working with one another within the committee structure and the chamber, and of recognising that there are diverse, wide-ranging and challenging interests across Scotland that deserve to be heard and to influence our legislation. I welcome the broad, deep and serious work that has been done by the vast majority of those who serve in the chamber. I am delighted to be part of the process today. There was a lot of traffic and there were a lot of noises off in connection with the purpose of the bill. However, we know that legislation was important to the charitable sector; the sector itself asked for it. The bill is important for those who are active in the sector, for those who benefit from the sector, for those who wish to give of their time and money to the sector, and for the fundraising base of the organisations in the sector. A flourishing charitable sector is important for the new way in which we do government, and I am genuinely disappointed that the Tories will not be able to support the bill as it stands. OSCR will be accountable to this Parliament. OSCR will be obliged to consult on its guidance and this Parliament has shown itself in the past to be very proactive—through its committee structure in particular—in pursuing issues with which it is uncomfortable. I therefore regret that the Tories will not support the bill. Congratulations have been offered to many people, including Jean McFadden, on moving the debate forward. However, I hope that people will not take it amiss if I add congratulations to people such as Jackie Baillie—people who drove on the debate and encouraged others to take up the issue. In particular, I congratulate Margaret Curran who, when she was Minister for Communities, acted swiftly to deal with scandals over the financial mismanagement of charities. Those scandals were generating huge anxiety, which was beginning to erode people's faith. At one point, we were perilously close to seeing real damage being inflicted on the sector. Margaret Curran, knowing how hard a challenge it would be for us all, moved quickly to commit the Executive to a bill. She is to be congratulated on doing that. Although we knew that legislation was necessary, we also knew that it would not be easy, because of the nature of the sector. The very things that we love about the charitable sector are the very things that make it difficult to legislate on. It is eccentric and it is odd. I congratulate the bill team on its capacity to respond to the very strange, different and unexpected things that came up as the bill went through its stages. The bill team was able to understand the eccentricities and the strengths of the sector, and the team,  together with many in this chamber, was able to respond. This is a good day for the charitable sector and a good day for the Parliament. We now have an objective and independent regulatory system that is in a position not to presume for or against anyone. The only thing that organisations have to do is to meet the public benefit and charity test. The vast majority of organisations that are currently charities will be able to meet that test. Regulation and management of the sector will be not for us, but for OSCR, which is an independent body. That will be a great strength, both for the sector and for Scotland. I am very happy to add my thanks to all those who have been involved, and to encourage support for the bill at decision time.

Amendment 16 is necessary to dispel any doubt about whether OSCR has the ability to remove charities from the register when they no longer meet the charity test. Although section 97 is aimed at achieving the transition from the current regulatory regime to that provided for under the bill, it is not a temporary provision. The charities that transfer to the register from the current HM Revenue and Customs index—the former Inland Revenue index—will be able to continue to operate as charities under the bill. Like any new charities that will be recognised and registered after the bill is passed, they will cease to be charities only if they decide not to continue as charities, when they can apply for removal from the Scottish charity register under section 18, or if it appears to OSCR, following inquiries, that they no longer meet the charity test, when they will be removed from the register. Amendment 16 is intended to make it clear that section 97 does not make charities' status unassailable and that OSCR can remove them in the same way as it will be able to remove new charities from the register. The first half of amendment 17 mirrors amendment 16, but the second part attempts to include text from stage 2 amendment 93. The amendment would require OSCR to inform an existing charity that it believed that the charity did not meet the charity test and to listen to the charity's response before using its power in section 30 to remove the charity from the register. I understand and agree with the intention of amendment 17, but it is unnecessary, as section 30 provides OSCR with an alternative power to direct a charity to take such steps as it considers necessary to ensure that the charity meets the test. Therefore, OSCR can issue a charity with such a direction before deciding whether it needs to remove the charity from the register. In practice, if a straightforward way exists to ensure that a charity can continue to meet the charity test, OSCR is unlikely to remove it from the register without giving it a chance to remedy the problems and time to respond. That is particularly the case since amendment 20 provides that in performing its regulatory functions, OSCR must be proportionate.  OSCR is also required to prepare a report on the subject matter of inquiries that result in the removal of a charity from the register. Any decision by OSCR to remove a charity from the register can, of course, be reviewed or appealed if the charity disagrees with OSCR's decision. Removal from the register does not occur until the time that is set out under the appeal mechanism has passed. If a review or appeal is requested, it must run its course before the charity is removed. That gives a charity time to consider OSCR's decision and to respond to or remedy the problems that have been identified. Therefore, I ask Donald Gorrie not to move amendment 17. I move amendment 16.

This is an important group of amendments that have generated a great deal of discussion and debate. I hope that you will give me sufficient time, Presiding Officer, to outline what we seek to do. The amendments deal with the section of the bill that relates to remuneration for services. The remuneration of charity trustees has been much debated during the progress of the bill. I am grateful to those who gave evidence to the Communities Committee and to members of the committee for their input, and I am pleased that there is now agreement on the way forward. Some people in the charity sector strongly believe that, to cement their position in the voluntary sector and to avoid any conflict of interest, charity trustees should not be remunerated for any work that they carry out as charity trustees. That view is held by some members of the Opposition parties. The contrary argument is that the level of service that is required of the trustees of some charities demands payment, otherwise people would not agree to be charity trustees in the first place. That is particularly true for larger charities. Many charity trustees are paid or receive a benefit for their services as trustees. For instance, many student associations pay students to be a charity trustee—for example, the treasurer—of their association. That covers lost income and allows them to take a sabbatical from their studies for a limited period. It might be helpful if I clarify the existing position in charity law in Scotland. There is currently no restriction on the payment of charity trustees or those who are in control of charities provided that there is express legal authority for such payment to be made. The authority for payment can be included in a charity's constitution or in another enactment, or it can be given by a Court of Session order. If authority by one of those means exists, a charity may remunerate a person who is carrying out the normal duties of a charity trustee; a person who is providing additional services that a trustee would not normally provide; or a trustee who is also an employee of the charity. The bill will tighten up the circumstances in which a charity trustee may receive remuneration in the future. Although there is a view that the payment of trustees should not be the norm, we need to provide sufficient flexibility to allow the bill to suit the wide range of charities in the sector. Permitting remuneration only in highly defined circumstances is the best way of achieving that. Amendment 34 and amendment 35, which is consequential on amendment 34, will clarify the position. Amendment 34 will add a new subsection to set out clearly that a charity trustee cannot be remunerated for their services as a charity trustee,  for other services or for services as an employee of the charity unless the strict conditions in section 66 are complied with. The conditions are that the maximum payment must be reasonable and set out in a written agreement and that the charity trustees must be satisfied that the payment is in the interests of the charity. Also, only a minority of charity trustees may receive remuneration, and there must be no provision in the charity's constitution that expressly prohibits the payment. The bill will also ensure that payment cannot be made to persons who are connected to charity trustees unless the same conditions apply. That will prevent a charity from being controlled by charity trustees who pay their close family for providing services to the charity, for instance. It would be wrong for us to remove existing rights for some charity trustees who already have a right to be paid, or for whom Parliament or the Court of Session has decided that payment is appropriate. That was covered in section 66(5) of the bill as introduced. Discussion during stage 1 indicated concern that the provisions were not tight enough, so the Executive's amendments 36 to 38 will clarify that the exemption from having to meet the conditions in that section for a charity whose existing constitution allows payment will apply only where payment is specifically allowed by an "authorising provision". There had been concern that some charity constitutions might contain non-specific, wide-ranging provisions allowing any payment that the charity trustees considered to be in the interests of the charity. The constitution will now be required to refer specifically to the payment or remuneration of a charity trustee and the provision will apply only to charities with an authorising provision in their constitution prior to the introduction of the bill on 15 November 2004. A slightly separate but related issue is whether the employees of a charity should be allowed to serve as trustees of their employer. In an ideal world, it might be preferable for those controlling a charity to be entirely independent of those employed by it, but neither we nor the charitable sector live there. I am aware that the rules that we are setting in this bill must be suitable for the wide range of charities in the sector. It is accepted that we expect more and more of our charities—more efficiency, more effectiveness and for them to be more businesslike. In some cases, it is particularly useful for the employees of a charity to be represented on the controlling body. For example, many further education colleges and universities have both academic and non-academic staff members on their board of management. That is also of wider value. It is desirable for employees to have an input in deciding the direction of their  company, and perhaps that should also apply to charities. With the amendments, the bill will give us an appropriate, flexible system that will provide reassurance to charities and the public that their funds will be used sensibly and transparently but will also help the sector to be more businesslike and effective in its operations. I move amendment 34, and urge members to accept the other Executive amendments in the group.  Amendment 34 agreed to.  Amendments 35 to 38 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm]—and agreed to.

John Home Robertson's amendment 26 would set out in the bill that OSCR may make inquiries either of its own accord or as a result of representations by the public. It is likely that a large proportion of the inquiries that OSCR  undertakes will be sparked by a complaint or inquiry by the public. One of the aims of the bill is to reassure the public by providing an independent regulator to whom they can turn if they are concerned about a charity's activities. As the bill stands, any member of the public may make a complaint to OSCR that could lead to an inquiry. It is nevertheless important to retain a degree of discretion for OSCR, and to state that it does not have a duty to investigate every complaint. There is, after all, always a possibility of vexatious or malicious complaints. OSCR will be accountable and will have to be reasonable in deciding not to investigate a complaint. Given the arguments made by John Home Robertson both today and at stage 2, which are on record in the Official Report , and the fact that amendment 26 sits well with the objectives of the bill, we agree with it and urge the Parliament to support it.  Amendment 26 agreed to.

As I mentioned in an earlier discussion, Donald Gorrie's amendment is helpful. It clarifies in the bill how conflicts between the interests of the charity and that of any person responsible for appointing a trustee should be dealt with. We believe that the amendment reflects current good practice relating to how such conflicts are dealt with by charities. Putting the text of the amendment in the bill will help to reassure the public of the practical independence of trustees in whose appointment an outside body or person has had a role. We therefore encourage Parliament to agree to it.  Amendment 57 agreed to.   Amendment 58 not moved.  Amendment 33 moved—[Malcolm Chisholm].

I will be as brief as I can. Since the bill was introduced, an attempt has been made to turn its passage into an argument about people's views on a particular part of the independent sector, which of course is highly diverse. That is not what the bill is about. The issue of how people choose to spend their money on their children would be more appropriate to raise in a debate about education. We are talking about the regulation of charities and those organisations that are entitled to call themselves charities. Amendment 53 seeks to reverse an amendment that was made at stage 2. It would remove the reference in the public benefit test that highlights the fact that, in deciding whether a body provides public benefit, OSCR can consider whether any charge or fee is unduly restrictive. The Executive did not object to that amendment at stage 2 because it did not alter the public benefit test. It was always intended that OSCR would be able to consider charging as part of the test and the amendment made that clear in the bill. That does not mean that a body will automatically fail the test because it charges a fee, but OSCR will have to have regard to that issue. I hope that I can reassure all charities that charging a fee so that access is granted to services will not automatically prevent bodies from being deemed as charities. Whether charitable status is granted will depend on individual circumstances and OSCR will consider each body on a case-by-case basis.  Amendment 54 is intended to address an issue that Donald Gorrie raised at stage 2. He seeks to clarify that the public benefit test does not prevent a body that is targeted at specific groups from being deemed as charitable. I assure him that, as it stands, the bill does not prevent that. That is made clear by the fact that the public benefit provision refers specifically to circumstances in which the benefit is provided only to a section of the public. Although I have no difficulty in offering reassurance on the point, I have some concern about the possible impact of amendment 54 as drafted. Because it outlines which conditions should never be considered as unduly restrictive, OSCR could find itself unable to deny charitable status to bodies with a discriminatory membership condition that would otherwise have been considered to be unduly restrictive. Moreover, some membership bodies that charge different rates for students or older people, for example, might be viewed under the provision as discriminating between members. As I said, the public benefit test as it stands will include those bodies that are targeted at specific groups. I hope that what I have said will reassure Donald Gorrie. On that basis and because of the possible problems that I have highlighted, I ask him not to move amendment 54. I emphasise that at the heart of the purpose of the public benefit test is the desire to give confidence to the charitable sector and to those who wish to give of their time and money. There is no presumption against or in favour of any group. Equally, any group that seeks charitable status should be able to establish public benefit. I am confident that OSCR, as an independent regulator, can take a rational, dispassionate and objective view of these matters. I believe that the public benefit test, as identified in the bill, gives sufficient guidance on the matter.

I am overwhelmed by members' humility. Christine Grahame lodged a similar amendment at stage 2 but withdrew it after the Executive agreed to consider the issue further. Following careful consideration, I still fail to see what benefits amendment 22 would bring. Although the bill does not place a duty on OSCR to maintain or publish a list of defunct charities or charities that have been removed from the register, nothing would prevent OSCR from creating a list of charities that have been removed from the register if it wished to do so, as I have said before. Indeed, it is anticipated that OSCR will maintain such a list. However, to require OSCR to do that has the potential to cause confusion, particularly as the amendment provides for a single list of charities that are defunct and of those bodies that are no longer charities. If OSCR maintained the information voluntarily, it could separate the bodies and have two lists. Moreover, if the list led some people to the mistaken belief that a particular body was still a charity, OSCR could suspend the list, whereas, because the amendment would oblige OSCR to keep a publicly available list, OSCR would be unable to react in that way if a problem were to arise. It has been argued that a list would provide greater clarity but, given that the only real charities will be those bodies that are named on the register, the situation is arguably already very clear: any body that did not appear on the register would not be a charity. If it was necessary to establish whether a body had previously been a charity, OSCR could specifically be requested to provide that information. In any event, OSCR is required to publish a report on each case on which it takes action, which would include action that results in removing a charity from the register. It has also been argued that a list of defunct charities would facilitate the revival of such charities or the redistribution of their assets. However, provisions in the bill allow OSCR to deal with charities that would previously have lain dormant, so a list of defunct charities is unnecessary. Assets of a charity that is removed from the register are protected by section 19 and dormant charities are covered by regulations under section 48. Under the accounting regulations, it is proposed that any dormant or defunct charity will still have to submit its accounts to OSCR. If it has failed to do so or, on examination of the accounts, there was concern, OSCR could apply to the Court of Session to reorganise the charity under section 41 to enable its resources to be applied for charitable purposes to better effect. The Executive believes that those provisions mean that the number of defunct  charities should be relatively few, which makes a list of them unnecessary. There is a risk that requiring OSCR to produce and maintain such a list could be an inefficient use of its resources. OSCR should retain the flexibility to produce lists if it feels that there is sufficient demand, but it should not be under a duty to do so. Therefore, I humbly ask Christine Grahame to seek agreement to withdraw amendment 22.

Presiding Officer, this is a series of significant amendments so, although I shall try to speak at a canter, I hope that you will allow me leeway to make the points that need to be made. Amendment 18 ensures that ministers can alter any enactment for the purposes of preventing a body from failing the charity test because its constitution allows asset distribution for a non-charitable purpose, as set out in section 7(3)(a), as well as because its constitution allows ministers to control its activities, as set out in section 7(3)(b). That will allow ministers to remove or alter any power in an enactment that allows a body to distribute its assets for a non-charitable purpose and will therefore allow it to meet the charity test. Section 7(3)(a) prevents a body with a constitution that allows it to distribute or otherwise apply any of its property from being a charity. Amendment 49 would add to that section any income as defined under paragraphs (a) to (c) of section 19(1). That is unnecessary as the definition of property already includes any income the body receives. The addition of a separate reference to income in section 7 could cast doubt on what is meant by property elsewhere in the bill.  Section 19 includes a specific reference to the type of property that is subject to the section, because it is intended to ring fence the charitable assets and any income accrued from charitable assets of a body that is removed from the register, so that they can continue to be used for charitable purposes, and to exclude assets acquired after the body ceased to be charitable. That provision is not relevant to section 7. Any income received by a charity would automatically become the property of the charity and would be a charitable asset, so  property does not need to be defined in the same way. Patrick Harvie is right to say that there is an important debate to be had on the issue of independence and its significance to the sector. Amendment 50 would mean that a body would fail the charity test if a local authority had a power of direction over it. We believe that the independence of such bodies at local level is best assured by the trustee duties to act in the interest of the charity. Those will be strengthened if the Parliament agrees to amendment 57, in the name of Donald Gorrie, which deals with conflicts of interest. Amendment 51 reflects the recommendation in the McFadden report that only a third of a charity's trustees should be allowed to be appointed by a third party. We have always argued and—Patrick Harvie may not be surprised to note—we continue to believe that what is important is not how a charity trustee is appointed but how they behave once in position. Amendment 57 provides further reassurance that if a conflict of interest arises, a trustee should put the interests of the charity first or refrain from taking part in any discussion or decision. Amendment 52 would prevent ministers from exempting bodies from the asset distribution test that I have outlined. The amendment would prevent the five national collections non-departmental public bodies from remaining charities. During discussions of the status of those bodies at stage 1, it was argued that charitable status was extremely important to them and to Scotland, and that it should be protected. It was also argued that, because of the national importance of the collections that they hold, control of those collections should remain in the hands of ministers. The constitutions of the bodies provide that, if they cease to exist, their assets revert to ministers. That provides valuable protection, ensuring that nationally important collections remain in the hands of the nation. We would resist any change to the provision. Amendment 52 would prevent the five bodies from retaining their status as charities. If amendment 51 is not agreed to, amendment 52 will fall. However if amendment 51 is agreed to and amendment 52 is not, some of the five national collections bodies will fail the test, because ministers appoint their trustees. Amendment 63 would insert in section 103 a definition of a public body. The only references in the bill to public bodies relate to co-operation in section 20 and information-sharing powers in section 24. The definition that is set out in the amendment could cause problems for the operation of those sections, as it would exclude any public body established by enactment, including many regulators that also oversee  charities, such as the Scottish further and higher education funding council and the care commission. OSCR itself would not be included in the definition. I have two further points to make about independence. First, direction at ministerial level is enshrined in law, so it is distinct from local authority powers of direction. Secondly, any exemption that is applied by ministers will be subject to affirmative decision by the Parliament. I hope that that gives members the comfort that they seek. Clearly, this is an issue that has exercised members' minds from the bill's early stages. I ask Patrick Harvie to withdraw amendment 49 and not to move the other amendments in his name. I ask the chamber to support amendment 18.

It is obvious that consensus has managed to break down for a little while before we move on to more positive matters. It is not the view of the civil service down the road that it is seeking to ensure that its will prevails over that of the Parliament. The Scottish Executive has come to a view, which it has expressed through its amendments, about how to address the concerns that have been raised. Members can criticise the Executive for that, but the situation has not arisen because civil servants want to dance on the head of a pin. I assure Linda Fabiani that although I might not have applied my  intellectual faculties to the matter in the way that she would wish me to, I have actually tried to apply them, as have people throughout the Executive. Therefore, she can take dispute with me, rather than try to take the argument somewhere else. Linda Fabiani and others have said before that they do not accept that, for the purposes of the law, mismanagement is regarded as a subset of misconduct. We can take a view one way or the other on whether we want to believe that, but we must determine how the law would be interpreted if a case came to court. Although we do not want to deter trustees from taking an active part in the work of charities, there is another side to the matter. We must not create the impression that being a trustee brings no consequences and responsibilities with it if there is wilful misconduct, and trustees have a responsibility to try their best not to make mistakes. I am intrigued that Donald Gorrie brought into his defence someone who reported on the Fraser inquiry report—I contend that that was a challenging comparison. The civil service commissioner to whom Donald Gorrie referred said that misconduct was distinct from blameworthy behaviour. However, the civil service commissioner was clear at the start of his report. He makes certain assumptions about culpability when he sets out his approach to determining whether misconduct has taken place. That he does so is evidence of the fact that any judgment about intent or error is not inherent in the term misconduct. If it were, he would not have needed to set out that statement at the start of his report. In some ways, the example of the Fraser inquiry and what it reported on highlights the fact that sometimes there is a false distinction between the consequences of misconduct and those of mismanagement. If anything were to happen in the Parliament as a consequence of a mistake rather than as a result of wilful error, there would still be a significant impact on the Parliament. Equally, we all accept that mistakes made over time would have an impact on a small charity, regardless of the motive of the people who made the mistakes. That is what we are wrestling with today, and what the Executive has wrestled with. We were concerned about the committee's approach at stage 2 in trying to include in the bill a way of recognising and addressing the problem. We contend that the committee's approach was not the right way to address the problem because it would not give the reassurance about the position of trustees that people sought. Indeed, it would create in the legislation extra layers before OSCR could take action.  It is important that OSCR acts proportionately when it takes action. OSCR would be expected to act proportionately if someone did not put a stamp on an envelope or forgot to post their accounts. If a charity has a series of problems because a range of mistakes have been made, we would not expect OSCR not to intervene. However, the way in which OSCR intervened would still have to be proportionate. I urge people not to think that there is a huge division in the chamber, but to recognise that we are wrestling with two distinct matters: the effective management of charities; and support for people who want to become active in charities. If we support the Executive amendments, the Executive will address those concerns with the committee and give strength to OSCR's role while making it clear that our expectation of OSCR is that it should act proportionately. I urge members to support amendments 20, 27, 33, 45 and 64.  Amendment 20 agreed to.

I am sure that the committee agrees that, over the piece, the bill has been a good piece of work, in that there has been a lot of constructive discussion and debate as the bill has progressed through its stages. However, there was a lot of wrestling and disagreement over mismanagement and misconduct, which is the issue that we seek to address in this group of amendments. I hope that members will forgive me if I take a bit of time to elaborate on the Executive's position on those matters, as they are at the centre of some of the concerns about the bill. The group is about OSCR's regulatory powers and the enforcement of trustee duties. There was a huge concern that, if trustee duties were considered to be too onerous, people would be deterred from taking up the responsibility of being trustees at all and that there would be a consequential impact on charities. That is a concern that we all share, and it is certainly not the Executive's intention to do anything to deter people from acting as trustees, so we were keen to find a way to make it clear that the regulatory framework was proportionate. During stages 1 and 2 of the bill, there was significant discussion about what actions ought to be taken if breaches of charity trustee duties became apparent and about the definition of misconduct and the circumstances in which OSCR and the courts should take regulatory action against a charity trustee—or any other person—who breached any of the bill's provisions. There was concern that making the duties of charity trustees and the consequences of breach too onerous could discourage volunteers or anyone else from taking on a role in charities. On the other hand, the bill is intended to establish a robust regulatory regime from which the public can take reassurance that any charity is well regulated, so that they can therefore have confidence when donating to or volunteering for a charity. It is at the heart of the bill that we strike the balance between not deterring those who wish to give of their time and re-establishing and sustaining confidence in the sector. Existing charity law refers to both misconduct and mismanagement, allowing ministers, through OSCR, and the courts to take action in the event of either arising. The bill as introduced sets out that any breach of the provisions by a charity trustee is to be treated as misconduct. For  clarification, mismanagement is defined in the bill as being included within misconduct. At stage 1, many of those who gave evidence suggested that they considered mismanagement to be more related to mistakes and minor breaches than misconduct, which was considered to cover intentional breaches. That distinction is not necessarily sustained, however, even if it is how people feel about those two words. I do not want to dance on the head of a pin as far as that is concerned, although the issues are substantial. The distinction is not substantiated by the dictionary definition. The dictionary establishes that the words "misconduct" and "mismanagement" do not distinguish between intent and error. Amendments based on that understanding consequently do not achieve what was desired and give rise to unintended difficulties. Many people felt that OSCR and the courts should be able to take regulatory action only in serious or intentional cases. The Executive has argued that it is more appropriate for the bill to be unequivocal and that any breach is misconduct, but that OSCR would, in practice, only take action that was necessary. The Executive attempted to reassure the Communities Committee at stage 2 that when OSCR took action, it would do so proportionately. As a public body, OSCR has a duty to act proportionately and reasonably under common law, and its decisions and processes may be subject to appeal or judicial review. Despite the power of the argument that the Executive presented to it, at stage 2 the committee agreed to amendment 149, which amended section 65(4) so that any breach of the trustee duty "may be treated as being misconduct", rather than "is to be treated as being misconduct". In light of our concerns, I indicated to the committee that we would wish to return to the matter at stage 3. I wrote to the convener, explaining why we would wish to reverse that amendment at this stage. At stage 2, the committee also agreed to amendment 5, which changed the definition of misconduct in section 103 so that it did not include minor mismanagement. The Executive understood why that was done, and although I do not wish to minimise the concerns that were reflected in that amendment, the Executive was concerned that, together with amendment 149, which was agreed to at the preceding committee meeting, amendment 5 had the effect of undermining OSCR's discretion, removing clarity and making effective regulation more difficult.  Neither of those amendments offers charity trustees the sort of reassurances that the committee sought, because it is still within OSCR's discretion to decide whether or not a breach is misconduct, and even minor breaches—other than those related to bad management—can still be considered misconduct. It is normal practice in legislation that action can be taken by a regulator in any case of a breach of the law. As I argued in my recent letter to the committee, if action cannot be taken following a breach of legislation, there is little point in its being set out as part of the law; in practice, that merely amounts to guidance. The amendments that we are proposing seek to impose specific requirements in the bill that OSCR must act proportionately and reasonably. Amendments 27 and 20 have been lodged to reassure members that actions against breaches of trustee duties and other cases of misconduct will not be taken unless they are really deemed necessary. That lies at the heart of the committee's concerns. Amendment 27 specifically restricts OSCR's section 31 powers to suspend a charity trustee unless such action is necessary and reasonable. Amendment 20 is a more general provision that requires OSCR to act in accordance with best regulatory practice when carrying out all its functions. That provision is similar to the duty that has been proposed for the Charity Commission for England and Wales under the Home Office's recently reintroduced Charities Bill. The criteria that are used to describe best regulatory practice—proportionality, accountability, consistency, transparency and targeting—are those that are recommended for regulation and enforcement by the better regulation task force, and they have been widely accepted. OSCR's decisions are also subject to review and appeal, and it is under a duty to publish a report whenever it takes regulatory action under sections 30 and 31. Donald Gorrie's amendment 58 appears to have the same intended effect as our amendments 20 and 27. However, amendment 58 is limited to instances in which OSCR may consider action against charity trustees, although it does not address the instances in which OSCR may consider action against the employees of charities. I believe that OSCR needs to act proportionately in respect of both charity trustees and charity employees. Our amendment 20 achieves that; amendment 58 does not.  Amendment 58 could cause other problems. It would restrict OSCR's powers to take action against a breach of the charity trustee duties to ensure that they are appropriate and  proportionate. That would be fine, but by also relating that restriction to the human resources of the charity, it would provide an unacceptable defence against breaching the law. The charity trustee duties are set out in the bill because they are important. I turn to Donald Gorrie's amendments 59 and 64. I understand that amendment 64 is intended to replace amendment 59, so I shall limit my comments to it. Amendment 64 seeks to place all charity trustees under a duty to take such steps as are reasonably practicable to ensure that any breach of a charity trustee's duties is corrected by the trustee concerned and is not repeated and that any trustee who has been in serious or persistent breach of either or both duties under sections 65(1) and (2) is removed as a trustee. That complements the powers that OSCR has and I encourage the Parliament to support the amendment. Amendments 33 and 45 reverse the changes that the committee made at stage 2. We trust that, as we have provided the reassurance in the bill that OSCR must act proportionately, members will understand the logic behind those amendments. Under amendment 20, OSCR will have a general duty to act proportionately in all its functions. Under amendment 27, OSCR's specific powers to suspend a person from being in management or control of a charity are subject to its being able to justify that the person has not acted honestly and reasonably in relation to the misconduct concerned and ought not to be excused. I urge members to accept Executive amendments 20, 27, 33 and 45 and Donald Gorrie's amendment 64, and to reject the other amendments in the group. I move amendment 20.

I trust that I can rise to the challenge of saying something that is sufficient to make Donald Gorrie act against his instincts.  Donald Gorrie made the point that he believes that the general thrust of the bill could be seen to be negative and, by implication, that it is anti-charitable sector. I argue that the bill's thrust is against the corrupt use and abuse of the word "charity", and against abuse of people who give of their time and resources to support good works. It is entirely right that, in regulating the sector, we will strengthen it rather than weaken it. I acknowledge that amendment 1 is linked to the Communities Committee's recommendation in its stage 1 report that the Executive should consider including in the bill "more general reference to promoting a flourishing charitable sector in Scotland". I do not denigrate the thinking behind the lodging of amendment 1, but the bill has always been intended to help the charitable sector in Scotland to flourish by providing a robust but not overly onerous regulatory regime that will give the public confidence in donating to charity. That is the whole point of the bill. We do not, however, believe that the bill should dictate how OSCR exercises its functions. OSCR is the independent regulator and should be concerned first and foremost with compliance with the law as set out in the bill. We intend that benefits to the sector will flow from that, in that public confidence will be increased and clarity will be provided to charities about what is required of them. Indeed, it is evident that the sector itself also has a responsibility to encourage the existence and development of a flourishing sector. Although we agree whole-heartedly with the sentiment behind Donald Gorrie's amendment, we do not believe that it should be stated on the face of the bill. The argument is not technical; we genuinely believe that there is a broad range of roles for OSCR and for the sector that are entirely determined by the existence of the legislation. I urge Donald Gorrie, who has listened attentively, to seek to withdraw amendment 1.

We are encouraging more people to volunteer, particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds, through the Scottish Executive volunteering strategy. We are dismantling barriers to volunteering, such as lack of awareness of volunteering and how to get involved. We are improving the experience that volunteers have by developing the skills of volunteer managers to recruit and support volunteers. We are encouraging more young people to volunteer through project Scotland and millennium volunteers. To those ends, the Scottish Executive funds the national network of volunteer centres, Volunteer Development Scotland, project Scotland and a number of specialised projects.

I suspect that it goes far beyond my remit to encourage Donald Gorrie in  the notion of my power over the civil service. However, volunteering is a very positive issue for the Parliament and the Executive. We recognise that it is one of the strengths of our communities and we fund it significantly. Last week was volunteers week, during which I, like many others, visited a number of initiatives that reflected on the goodness in our local communities, where people contribute so much. Anything that creates a barrier should be dismantled. I am more than happy to address anything that weakens the capacity of people to support others in their local community through volunteer activity.

It is clear that there is a partnership between the SCVO, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Executive to address funding issues. If the SCVO believes that its position has been misrepresented, it might have been helpful for it to direct its comments either to the Minister for Communities or to me, especially because we are working in partnership on funding matters. I do not believe that there is a division. I believe that there is a genuine commitment among the three partners to ensure that the voluntary sector is appropriately funded, that it is sustainable and that it is able to do what it does best, which is work within local communities to support those who are most in need.

Under the Environment Act 1995, a new regime for identification and remediation of contaminated land came into force in Scotland in July 2000. The interaction between that regime and the planning system is set out in planning advice note 33, "Development of Contaminated Land"

I am aware of some of those issues because Trish Godman, the local MSP, has raised with me the issue of the proposed development. Obviously, I do not want to speak directly about an individual development that may come before Scottish ministers in the future. The regime that is in place for contaminated land is serious and includes a commitment to understanding the anxieties of communities about contamination. Local authorities have a duty to investigate for contaminated land and to take remedial measures. Before any change of land use is granted, it is essential that contamination be assessed and risks identified, taking into account what the change in use is for. If necessary, the local authority must carry out the remediation work or ensure that such work is part of the planning conditions, in which case the challenge is enforcement. However, a model planning condition exists that can be submitted and approved by the planning authority. I am sure that we all share a commitment to and an understanding of the importance of local authorities carrying out those responsibilities.

The Executive is committed to  supporting the work of credit unions as part of the financial inclusion action plan and the overall closing the opportunity gap approach. We launched a £1.1 million capacity fund in September 2003 to increase credit unions' ability to help low-income households to gain access to financial services.

I welcome the question from Bill Butler, who as a fellow co-operator has indicated in the past his full commitment to credit unions. I pass on my congratulations to Drumchapel Community Credit Union on its anniversary. I not only welcome the decision on European Community state aid but think that we should congratulate the Scottish Executive on its pioneering role in pursuing the matter with the European Union and delivering on it. We should recognise that, as a consequence, other countries in the United Kingdom will pursue their notifications. This is a welcome opportunity. We believe that credit unions have a particular role to play in addressing the problem of financial exclusion. We know that people in poor communities suffer disproportionately from that, as a consequence of some of the regulations that relate to the financial sector. We are keen for credit unions to play a role in supporting people in poor and disadvantaged communities, so that they can maximise the benefits to those people of being able to save.

Requests for information that the Scottish Executive receives are handled in line with the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002.

I was not aware of the situation that Michael McMahon describes. This is the first time that I have heard such details. I am more than happy to speak directly to him about the matter and to go into detail about the issues that have been raised. When developing policy and approaches, the Executive is always keen to harness the energies of people throughout Scotland who have expertise. Such information should be harnessed equitably. I cannot comment on the specific matter that Michael McMahon raises, but I am more than happy to discuss it with him in the near future.

Compliment me?

I am often intimidated when the Deputy Presiding Officer is in the chair; I am even more so after that last exchange, so I shall try to be on my best behaviour. The challenge of the debate on the voluntary sector is that it poses a question for us all: How do we debate the voluntary sector without being cosy, precious or patronising and without focusing merely on the funding issues that face voluntary organisations? I hope that we will identify what makes the voluntary sector crucial and challenging, that we will consider how it can be nourished and sustained and that we will discuss how we can develop the broader dynamic of the social economy. The challenge is to capture the sector's essence and to develop it. We must acknowledge that it does not fit easily in any box. As I have said, that is the joy of the sector and what makes it interesting. In underpinning all our work with the voluntary sector and broader social economy organisations, I hope that we do not squeeze out of them what makes them different and gives them the goodness that we all recognise. The Executive intends to support Mark Ballard's amendment and to oppose Linda Fabiani's amendment while acknowledging the important issues that both amendments raise. The voluntary sector matters because it undertakes tasks that we cannot always undertake, especially locally, such as their grass-roots services that reach individuals in their communities. The sector is much more than another service-delivery vehicle for the Executive or anyone else; it provides the opportunity to test new initiatives and to develop partnerships between agencies. The sector tells us what needs to be done and what we must be more aware of. I appreciate that challenges arise from always looking for new initiatives and innovation, but we know that central to the voluntary sector is the opportunity that it presents to test measures, to consider exciting developments and to understand better what need is. For example, the sector provides vital services to people who have become dispossessed. It could be argued that a  homeless person is much more likely to accept and seek help from a voluntary sector worker than from someone who is seen as being more official. The sector challenges us to think about matters in a new way, and to tackle issues that are sometimes difficult to talk about. We all understand and recognise the role of local housing providers not just in shaping housing to meet need, but in shaping our understanding of how homelessness and other housing needs are expressed. We want to support the sector in a way that promotes sustainability for organisations and which helps them to become better at the things that they already do so well. I think that there is some consensus on that. My feeling is that the voluntary sector is at its best when it is built from the ground up, with a focus on a community-based desire to do things differently in order to improve life chances, services and opportunities. Sometimes those things grow and sometimes they do not, but that is not the key issue. Organisations do not need to be big to make a tangible difference to people's lives. The voluntary sector is at its best when it moves towards and achieves self-reliance, with its own income, progressively less reliance on Government funding, efficiency of organisation and sufficient robustness to be able to offer independent views. An interesting interface can perhaps be seen in the co-operative movement, which is arguably a fitting example of what I am talking about, although not all co-operatives grew from voluntary organisations. Organisations such as local soap companies and Cafe Direct, which operates nationally, are examples of well-known and well-run organisations that make tangible differences to our society. The best voluntary organisations are forward looking; indeed, they often drive Government's vision by challenging us and by focusing debate on how we can create a better world in the future. A compelling feature of the best voluntary organisations is their dogged determination to turn things round and never to give up on the issues that they think matter. By focusing on their vision and by keeping at it whatever the odds, they try to make others understand the issues that they find so compelling. They campaign tirelessly to raise awareness. Organisations such as Child Poverty Action Group, Barnardo's and Help the Aged are among the many groups that have a long history and which continue to go from strength to strength. Their campaigning drives them towards providing vital services and, through that delivery, they help to shape broader policy by providing an understanding of how such services ought to look across the community and across society. We  need to build on that by ensuring that we encourage the best organisations to do better, and that we help those that want to take more action. Clearly, the social economy overlaps with the voluntary sector and social enterprises make a positive contribution, as the amendment in the name of Mark Ballard identifies. Social economy organisations add value to delivery of public services and are flexible and able to innovate. The social economy is becoming more what some people might call business-like in its approach to service delivery. As we know, some organisations generate significant surpluses. Such more-than-profit organisations invest in the communities that they serve and play diverse roles in addressing regeneration and in developing their communities.

I may not be able to address that issue in detail, but I acknowledge that such organisations are crucial and that they perhaps epitomise the social economy and voluntary sector. I may develop some such points later, but the fundamental point is that such organisations exist not just to deliver services on behalf of the state. The organisations themselves should determine what those services should look like. A far more powerful message than simply handing over resources only for organisations to do what we want them to do is that the organisations share understanding of what needs to be done. We need to understand the diversity of the sector. We need a clear vision of a vibrant, sustainable, strong and independent voluntary and social economy sector so that organisations can, from a position of strength in our communities, choose when to work in partnership with Government and when to challenge us to do things differently. Clearly, achieving that vision presents challenges to the Executive and the voluntary sector. As we look to the future, we must ensure that we develop policies that help the sector to play to its strengths, and which build its independent voice and capacity to deliver. That is why I want to work with the sector as we develop the detail of how we will implement that vision. Within the Executive, we are already starting to look at where and how we work with the sector, when that works best and how we can build on and develop that. From letters that I have received and from conversations that I have had, I know that voluntary organisations face a number of challenges. Some organisations are thwarted in their delivery of services because they must continually chase funding and some are drowned in paperwork from the people who provide the  funding, which I will deal with in a moment. In realising our vision for the sector's future, we will consider what the big issues are, consider how we can tackle them and then take action. We have moved forward in three main areas: securing funding and sustainability; providing the best possible frameworks and processes for the sector; and on volunteers, who are the lifeblood of the sector. On funding and sustainability, the Scottish Executive's funding of the voluntary sector is substantial. Our financial commitment to the sector now stands at more than £400 million each year. Funding is available from all parts of the Scottish Executive, its agencies and non-departmental bodies. Our review of the social economy explicitly recognised that social economy organisations can deliver quality public services, and it recognised the barriers to growth of such organisations, which challenges the lazy and false misunderstanding of where the public sector is and where the private sector is. It is possible to understand that services that are not directly delivered by Government can still be seen as a crucial part of delivering public services. We have sought to develop a package of support measures for the social economy, in order to contribute to the further development of the sector. A key element is futurebuilders Scotland, which is investing some £18 million in the social economy sector until 2007. Already, almost £3 million has been awarded to more than 80 organisations.

It will certainly be essential to review the effectiveness of the futurebuilders initiative. The underlying commitment to building the social economy through futurebuilders is well stated. We must ensure that that programme fulfils our aspirations for the sector. A key criterion for all applications to futurebuilders is that they must play a part in closing the opportunity gap. One Plus in Glasgow has been awarded funding to secure the long-term sustainability of its organisation through the purchase of its central Glasgow premises. We have come a long way in understanding the opportunities that the sector has developed in meeting needs such as child care, which was once not even understood as a policy. We have a strategy for the futurebuilders fund that understands the need to give children the best  start and which provides opportunities for parents, particularly women, to go to work. It also provides work and training opportunities for people who are far from the labour market. That is an underpinning of our commitment to closing the opportunity gap. Our investments mean that organisations can begin to generate income through trade, or can build and expand on early successes. For example, FEAT Enterprises in Fife has developed a social enterprise known as Green Team. Investment from futurebuilders Scotland will enable FEAT Enterprises to develop the Green Team business considerably, providing much-needed employment and development opportunities for the individuals that it works with. Our investment will help to build a strong and sustainable social economy that is capable of delivering excellent public services. Co-operatives have a particular contribution to make in economic and social development in a number of ways. They provide an attractive start-up option for people whose capital, experience or confidence is limited. By pooling their resources and experience, people can share responsibilities and risks that might make self-employed working unviable. Co-operatives secure prosperity for communities and, crucially, they have a democratic component that ensures greater accountability, understanding and knowledge.

I cannot take any more interventions. I welcome the undertaking to establish a co-operative development agency, and I understand the crossover into social enterprises. It is a long-held commitment of mine and other Labour and Co-operative party members to support a sector that people have often not understood. A social economy advisory board is to be set up. Through that board, the sector will have an important opportunity to make significant input to the work of the Executive in developing the social economy and in sustaining dialogue with the diversity of that sector. There will be a challenge in developing such opportunities as the CDA develops its role. The strategic funding review will address the points that Linda Fabiani will perhaps raise. It is important to say that the Executive, local authorities and the voluntary sector are working together to conduct a strategic funding review to address and highlight the problems. We know that the SCVO and other organisations have made surprisingly positive briefing contributions to the debate and we welcome the opportunity to harness their energy. The voluntary sector sometimes takes on with great relish the role of  scrutinising and challenging the Executive and government at every level; that is a powerful thing that is not to be resisted. I believe that the debate is central to understanding not only how our social and community experience can be developed, but how our economy and enterprise approaches can be developed. We often say that we celebrate the voluntary sector, but the challenge will be for us to act to ensure that the sector is vibrant, sustainable, strong and independent, that it works with Government and with local authorities and that it works with all those who are committed to a strong and supportive Scotland where everyone has equal opportunities. I move, That the Parliament recognises the contribution that the voluntary sector and social economy make to Scotland; supports the Scottish Executive's continued commitment to developing them through Futurebuilders Scotland, the Volunteering Strategy and Project Scotland and the development and promotion of legislation on charities; supports the Strategic Funding Review being undertaken with SCVO and COSLA; welcomes the establishment of a Social Economy Advisory Board, and supports the Executive in developing a detailed strategy, in partnership with the voluntary sector, for the sector's future.

I am delighted to add the Scottish Executive's congratulations to those of other members, who have already expressed their recognition of the importance of the debate. The issue is very dear to my heart. Perhaps I may make a gentle point to you, Deputy Presiding Officer. I recognise that the number of members attending the debate this evening is low. I ask you to take back the reflection that the late notice of the subject of the debate might have excluded some people who would have wished to prepare themselves and make a contribution to the debate. I would like to devote a lot of time to the matter. I think that some people were not able to rearrange their commitments to be here this evening. That is simply a procedural point. As I said, the issue of disability is dear to my heart and I am delighted that the Equal Opportunities Committee is conducting an inquiry on it. I very much look forward to its consideration of the issue. I understand that representatives of Inclusion Scotland are here tonight. I am pleased that it has taken the initiative and provided a clear account of disabled people's views and an indication of the kind of things that it believes should be done at Westminster, by the Scottish Executive and locally. I make the commitment on behalf of the Executive that we will work with Inclusion Scotland and other organisations that represent people with disabilities in developing an agenda that ensures that there is equality, access and a lack of disadvantage. To respond to Kenny MacAskill's point, when we have this kind of debate about disability issues we can mark progress that reflects a change in what people believe politics to be about. When I became politically active many years ago, there was a view that politics was about the economy and giving people sufficient income, for which the trade unions were a powerful lever, and that other things could be sorted. Over the years we have seen a growing understanding that inequality, exclusion and disadvantage come in many forms and that it is the business of politicians and our broader community to address inequality however it is expressed and to understand how it expresses itself in order to challenge it. That is why the Executive has been working closely with Inclusion Scotland for a number of years. We consider it a key partner in delivering our equality strategy and our work to tackle prejudice and discrimination and promote equality of opportunity for disabled people. A feature of the work of the Parliament and the Executive is an  understanding that to change people's lives we have to work with those who most understand how inequality is expressed now. We work with people to deliver change; we are not in the business of doing things to or for people. If we act on that basis, we will never get policy right. By understanding that people have the solutions and that we must work closely with them to develop policy, we will have more success. I am delighted that we have been able to support Inclusion Scotland through funding of more than £650,000 to help it deliver its programme of engagement with disabled people and disability groups throughout Scotland. That has been tremendously valuable for us and we have learned a great deal through our work with Inclusion Scotland. It contributed a huge amount to our work on the European year of disabled people in 2003 and we are continuing to work with it in our strategic disability working group, which aims to establish priorities for the Scottish Executive and partner organisations, to promote equality for disabled people in Scotland and to develop proposals for longer-term mechanisms for engaging with the disability sector. Promoting access to services and equality of opportunity are fundamental to ensuring that disabled people can participate in Scottish society at all levels. The Executive has a long-standing commitment to promoting equality for disabled people and has taken significant action across departments through legislation and partnership working. I believe that we have made a real difference to disabled people's lives. I remember talking to a friend of mine whose child, who is now a young adult, has a learning disability. He described to me how caring for his child was often a battle to get the appropriate help and support to meet their needs and to support him in allowing his child to reach their full potential. It ought not to be a battle. I salute those who have not only battled on behalf of their children and the people for whom they care but have taken the time to contribute and demand policy changes at every level. People who have experienced that battle will ensure that the battles will diminish for others in future. The Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 introduced a duty on education authorities to educate pupils with special educational needs in mainstream schools unless certain specified exceptions apply. Education within mainstream school is the norm for the majority of pupils with additional support needs in Scotland. That is not, however, about closing special schools. Ministers are committed to ensuring that a range of provision exists to meet the needs of the individual child.  The Education (Disability Strategies and Pupils' Records) (Scotland) Act 2002 requires education providers to have in place accessibility strategies to improve access to education for children with disabilities. The Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 modernises legislation on the assessing and recording of special educational needs. Some £12 million was set aside for 2004-05 and some £14 million was set aside for 2005-06 to support the implementation of that. I heard what Patrick Harvie said about housing. We will ensure that there is a rigorous debate on the implications of the proposed housing legislation for people with disabilities and I reassure him that the Executive will not act in a way that reinforces discrimination. I highlight the fact that there has been a great increase in the number of direct payments over the past three years and in their value. In 2001, there were 207 payments; in the year to 31 March 2004, there were 912 payments. The value of payments has increased by nearly £6.2 million, from £2.1 million in 2001 to more than £8.3 million in 2004. It looks like the interventions that have been made are beginning to have an effect. The focus for 2005-06 will be on increasing direct payment uptakes by groups that are currently eligible, particularly by users of disabled children's services and mental health services. We will work closely to deliver such uptakes. On transport, I heard what Sandra White said about timing and so on, but she will be aware that the matter is Westminster's responsibility. However, people at every level have responsibilities and I will ensure that the Scottish Executive makes its contribution so that where there is a connection between our areas of responsibility and our commitments, we will ensure that people will work in the best interests of those with disabilities. We are working to understand disabled people's transport needs and we have established a mobility and access committee for Scotland to advise ministers. I feel strongly about transport. In my city, being part of the parallel transport liaison group—which works with users of internal services that take people to special schools, adult care centres or wherever—has been a great privilege. The group works with those people, carers and groups that advocate on behalf of people who use those transport services and it sits beside those who deliver the service. If everybody sits in a room together, they will understand better how a service can be delivered—that has been a powerful lesson. It is not the theory that matters. Somebody said to me that it was just a bus that was being discussed. I  am talking about making a difference for somebody who cares for a parent with Alzheimer's disease and worries about the time a bus will come because of the consequences for the rest of their day that will result from the distress that will be caused if a bus is late. I commend Glasgow City Council for recognising that harnessing people's energies and their understanding of their own experiences is a powerful way to deliver a quality service. Taxi drivers in Glasgow now have to go through disability awareness training in order to get their badge. We know that such training will improve the experience of people with disabilities. That also fits in with the message on advocacy and the power of talking to people who understand how services impact on them. In the national health service, as part of the fair for all overarching equality and diversity strategy, a fair for all disabled people initiative has been established. The initiative is a joint initiative with the Disability Rights Commission to support NHS Scotland in implementing the requirements of part 3 of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. The initiative will provide strategic guidance to NHS Scotland and implement a range of activities to support the development of good practice. We are also funding disability organisations throughout Scotland. For example, we are supporting the development of the local access panel network across Scotland and progressing the recommendations of the Scottish Council of Voluntary Organisations' review of access panels in Scotland. Some £800,000 has been allocated to date, including a £500,000 package to support the network of local access panels. We are trying to make real the idea that we can harness that energy. Patrick Harvie talked about the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which is an important tool. It is possible to raise, address and scrutinise issues as the bill progresses rather than wait until the legislation is on the statute book. Of course a great deal of work has still to be done if disabled people are to participate fully in public life. There are people in the disabled community who have the energy and drive to ensure that that work will be done. The new duty to promote equality of opportunity for disabled people, which has recently been introduced through the UK Government's Disability Discrimination Act 2005, will help to ensure that we eliminate discrimination and promote equality in all that we do. The new duty will mark a shift in the nature of disability legislation from compliance to pro-activity and will drive the mainstreaming of disability equality across all activities of the public sector, which is a critical element in challenging discrimination.  The issues can, of course, be complex. Disabled people are not a homogeneous or a small group. Some estimates suggest that there are around a million disabled people in Scotland. The range of impairments and diversity of needs are also broad. We must have policies that recognise that. Clearly, there are many issues that we need to consider in order to deliver the new duty. We should not underestimate the challenges that we face or the complexity of some of the issues. The Inclusion Scotland manifesto reminds us of the many issues that disabled people see as key to achieving change. However, we should not be deterred from addressing those issues. As members from all parties have said, it is in the interests of all of Scotland that we have a Scotland to be proud of, which means a Scotland with equal opportunity for all.   Meeting closed at 17:45.

It is a great privilege to  respond to what has been a good and moving debate. When I was first appointed to my current position, I was aware of some of the difficult challenges that might face me, but it was when I was informed that I was the veterans minister that I felt overwhelmed and humbled. I feel humbled today to know that there are veterans in the gallery. It is an honour to have such a responsibility. Like Linda Fabiani, when I was at school I learned, through poetry, about the horrors of war. There were some who thought that there was a contradiction between understanding the horror of war, and marking and commemorating those who had suffered in war. For me, one reinforced the other. Remembrance day is always a significant day, for no matter why we fight we know that those who suffer and pay a sacrifice have to be respected. In cherishing the development of our new Parliament, it is fitting that we reflect that, as Sarah Boyack pointed out to me, our nearest neighbours are the veterans of Whitefoord House, without whom we would not be here. In our work, we should respect the sacrifice that they have made for us. Today we seek to mark, commemorate and acknowledge the courage of all those involved in the war effort. We are all too aware that no matter how carefully we have chosen our words—and I believe that everybody has done that today—we can never truly capture the courage and comradeship that was shown. It was not an unthinking courage, nor a bravery without fear, but surely, amazingly, a bravery despite the dangers and fears that people faced. Last year, I had the privilege to visit the site of the D-day landings and to see where the soldiers fought. On one occasion, I visited a war cemetery in Crete and was overwhelmed by the way in which it had been maintained. I not only remember the cenotaph in my own great city, which marks the sacrifice made there but the little graveyard on the island of Tiree, where we can see the price that was paid by a small island community. The merchant seamen paid greatly as well. In the graveyard on Tiree, there are gravestones to unknown soldiers and to seamen of the first and second world wars. We have to remember that people suffered.

We are trying to mark the sacrifice of all those in the war, and I will reflect further on the points that have been made about what we could do in relation to those matters.  I remember my mother talking of people who came back to Tiree who had been prisoners of war. They never spoke about it. We wonder what pain they suffered on their own. Across Europe and north Africa, and in the jungles of the far east, Scots servicemen fought alongside their allied comrades, always with the same objective: to turn back fascism and tyranny. The people of Scotland and the Parliament owe a great amount to those men and women who fought to preserve our freedoms, our democracy and our way of life. The debt of gratitude can never be greater than when we remember those who fell in combat, or who died incarcerated in prisoner of war camps. In this, the 60 th anniversary year of the cessation of hostilities, we remember the contribution not just of those who died on active service—and those who still die on active service—but of those who remained here in Scotland, on the home front. We remember men and women—perhaps, as has been said today, in our own families—whose resilience and resourcefulness saw them through conscription, rationing, evacuation, the blitz in 1941 and the fear of invasion. Their contribution in keeping the agricultural, industrial and civic machinery of the nation running cannot be dismissed lightly. Life was difficult. We should remember what was at stake. It was not a given that fascism could be defeated and it was not assumed that fascism would be destroyed. Fascism represented a huge and terrifying challenge to the nature of our society. We need to be vigilant, because fascism emerged out of a democracy and it could be argued that it emerged from a failure of our international endeavours. We must remember the importance of being vigilant and hold tight to the importance of what Europe and the international community represent. When we describe one another in political debate we must remember what we share and what divides us from what we were fighting in those days. We should show, in our language, a respect for our democracy and perhaps not run too quickly to condemn others for what Nazism represented. Thankfully, the allies prevailed, in the far east as well as in Europe, but as we commemorate the end of the second world war this year we do so knowing that it is perhaps the last major commemoration that veterans of that war shall be able to attend. That is why throughout the summer a whole series of commemorative events will take place throughout Scotland. Those events are too numerous to detail now, but I urge people to make contact with Veterans Scotland, the Veterans Agency or the Royal British Legion Scotland, which will all have details of what will happen in local communities. Do not underestimate the importance of those events in keeping alive awareness of what  happened. The commemorative events that took place last weekend prompted my seven-year-old son to ask what happened and why the celebrations were taking place. I noted his shock when I told him about the second world war. He asked me, "Did 6 million Jews really die simply because they were Jews?" His shock brought afresh to me a realisation of the horror of what the second world war was about. When we commemorate, we bring alive the history for our young people and that brings a capacity to learn the lessons of what it represented. In addition to local events there will be two further major national events of commemoration. At the end of veterans awareness week on July 10, the national service of commemoration will take place in the high kirk of St Giles in Edinburgh, following an impressive parade down the Royal Mile. On August 14, the Royal British Legion Scotland will mark the anniversary of victory in Japan day with a major parade in Glasgow that will be attended by up to 2,000 veterans. That will be followed by a beating of the retreat at the Kelvin Hall. I encourage everyone who wishes to do so to attend those events and to show their gratitude and respect for Scotland's veterans community. Veterans awareness week will run from 3 July to 10 July throughout the entire United Kingdom. Although commemoration will feature during the week, the focus will be on raising the awareness among the public—and indeed among politicians—of what it is to be a veteran in 2005. Many people define a veteran as someone who fought in one of the world wars and therefore think that they should be old and venerable. However, a veteran is defined as any person who has served in the armed forces for any length of time, their spouses and their dependants. They do not require to have seen active service in a combat zone. As has been said, our words of commemoration are important but, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and others have said, they must be matched by a commitment to address the needs of veterans. We know that the vast majority of ex-service personnel make a successful transition back into civilian life when they leave the forces. However, that is unfortunately not the case for some, who, for any number of reasons, can face seemingly insurmountable barriers to transition. For those veterans, the first port of call is often one of the many veterans benevolent organisations and charities that work so selflessly throughout the country. In some cases all that is required is some understanding, some helpful advice—on anything from benefit claims to housing applications—and perhaps some practical assistance, for example to gain employment. That  is another example of how powerful harnessing the voluntary sector and working with charitable organisations can be in delivering the aspirations of the Government and the Parliament. Those charitable organisations understand the need better than we do. Our commitment must be to drive policy from where they have identified that need. More specialist care and support are required by many who have mental or physical disabilities. That is where charities such as Combat Stress—I am mindful of the comments that were made about the issues there—and Erskine come to the fore. I know from the Deputy Presiding Officer, Trish Godman, who is unable to speak in the debate today, how important and effective the work of Erskine is. It is important that those organizations and charities receive not only our recognition but our support. This Executive has already put in place a series of programmes and policies that will support our veterans and help to prevent them from dropping into social exclusion. That reflects our determination to understand inequality and disadvantage, however it is expressed, and challenge its causes. Veterans have to be part of that overall approach to dealing with those who are disadvantaged. Of course, more could always be done, and often it will not be the Government that is in a position to deliver it. That is why we liaise closely with our colleagues at the Ministry of Defence and are building on our relations with Veterans Scotland and the Scottish veterans community at large. We have to think about veterans when we are talking about employability; what will help them and support their particular needs in the labour market? We have to understand the needs of veterans when we talk about homelessness and we are going to work hard to implement the recommendations of the homelessness task force. We have to form new partnerships across Government and work with the veterans organisations to see where we can help to meet the needs of Scotland's ex-servicemen and women. Were it not for the allied victory in 1945 we might not be here, in a democratically elected chamber, to debate the motion in the first place. We owe it to them to ensure that the Parliament is a power for good, for veterans' families and for generations to come. Fifty-seven thousand Scottish men were lost in a total of 61 million people killed. That represents 1 per cent of Scotland's resident population in 1945. More important, it represents thousands of grieving widows and mothers, devastated families and orphaned children. It represents a sacrifice not just for the nation's defence but for its values, its freedoms and its democracy, and it is a  sacrifice that allows today's veterans the opportunity to live with dignity and pride. I urge Parliament to support the motion. It has been a privilege to be part of the debate. We have to send a clear and unequivocal message of recognition, thanks and support to all in Scotland's veterans community, young and old. Today's debate marks our respect, but it also represents a huge challenge for Government and all of us in our actions to understand the needs of veterans; to understand the power of what they did on our behalf; and to ensure that we do our bit to make Scotland a place where people are treated with respect and equality.

We are aware of concerns about the supporting people programme charges, but it is for councils to determine charges in line with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities guidance. COSLA is consulting local authorities on revised guidance and we are in discussion with COSLA about that.

In any particular case, it is always helpful if the constituent writes to me with the details so that I can give the member a full and accurate response and so that I can make sure that the individual's particular circumstances can be covered. There should not be extra charges without the agreement of the person involved. The extra charges should relate only to inflation or to changes in services. We are closely monitoring the situation, along with COSLA. We should not forget the huge budget of the supporting people programme. An investment of £1.2 billion over three years is a significant level of funding to support some of the most vulnerable people in our communities.

The member misunderstands. There is a change in the way in which charges are made for the payment of rent to the landlord and for the provision of services. It is an important point because, for example, it allows voluntary sector providers to tender for work. The member knows as well as I do that the quality of the work that is done by voluntary organisations that have  expertise in dealing with vulnerable groups is crucial, and we want to harness that. It is also important to understand our commitment to local decision making. We expect there to be differences in different parts of the country, given the different local authorities' priorities. We are also committed to harmonising the policy throughout Scotland and we will be considering it closely along with COSLA.

The Executive currently plans to issue finalised guidance in June.

It is not possible for me to comment on the applications to which the member referred because they have been notified to the Executive under the current rules and regulations. However, it should be clear that councils must take account of all relevant material considerations, such as the policies in development plans, national planning guidance and the views of statutory consultees and the public. We are already in a position in which there must be recognition of the environmental consequences of a development, but we must establish whether there is community benefit.

On the question about revised Scottish planning policy guideline 16, and the presumption against opencast mining in particular, there has been some misrepresentation and lack of understanding of the changes. It is understandable that we still recognise the economic benefits and local job opportunities that come with opencast coal mining, but we also recognise that there might be consequences for communities from developments and their cumulative impact. A major shift has not been proposed; I clarify that there is no presumption against opencast coal mining in toto, but against proposals that are not environmentally acceptable or which would not provide local benefits. I hope that all concerned on both sides recognise that we seek to strike a  balance and that even when the proposal is finalised, it will be open to regular scrutiny and review and we will be aware of the consequences for both sides. I note what the member said about health issues; we are always open in respect of the health consequences to communities of any developments and I will ensure that that is kept on the agenda.

It is true that some people are frustrated about the opencast coal industry and that some people in the industry are frustrated by some organisations' bad practice in working with communities. It is my view that where there has not been appropriate consultation, and where people have not lived up to the conditions to which they committed themselves, frustration has been created that is sometimes captured in the idea of extending the right of appeal. The Executive remains committed to maintaining a balance between increasing inclusion of communities in the planning process in order to build confidence, and speeding up the planning process so that it gets to grips with some of the beneficial developments in our communities.

I commend the people in the industry who have already voluntarily developed compliance projects, who have worked with communities and who have committed themselves to working with them. I am sure that people in the industry who are committed to its success want to separate themselves from some of the more unacceptable practices of the past.  I agree with the member about compliance. It is generally true of planning that people have faith in a system if the conditions that are imposed are seen to be enforced and monitoring is done properly. That is clearly recognised across the board and the Executive is committed to it.

The Housing (Scotland) Bill will improve the right of private sector tenants to homes that are properly maintained. It will also give them the right to adapt their homes to suit disabled occupants. We are increasing the protections that are available to private sector tenants by introducing mandatory registration of landlords and by improving the licensing system for houses in multiple occupation.

Jackie Baillie will be aware of my personal commitment to, and belief in, the importance of demanding high standards from the private sector. We all know about the consequences for the sector as a whole of the few landlords who do not meet those standards. We have proposals for registration of landlords, which means that there exists the possibility that there will be proper dialogue with them. I draw the member's attention to other proposals in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. I do not have enough time to list all those proposals, but a key commitment in the bill is that we will ensure that landlords are required to comply with a letting contract, that there are statutory repair obligations and that there are gas and fire safety requirements. We are addressing the tolerable standard and there is recognition that landlords in the sector have rights and that tenants have obligations, although tenants have rights, too. It is in the interests of everyone in the sector—and people outwith it—that we ensure that the quality of housing that is provided by the private sector is, as Jackie Baillie says, fit for the 21 st century.

The Scottish Executive's guidance on the matter is set out in national planning policy guideline 19, which states that planning authorities need not treat radio frequency emissions as a material consideration where a development complies with the public exposure guidelines of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection.

In compiling its guidelines, the ICNIRP reviewed the broad base of the scientific evidence, as we would encourage it to do. The member will be aware that the recent NRPB report "Mobile Phones and Health 2004", which was a follow-up to the Stewart report, specifically considered whether the issue of public health should be addressed by planning departments when determining whether to grant approvals for mobile phone base stations. The board supported the view that, "whilst planning is necessarily a local issue, the assessment of evidence related to possible health concerns associated with exposures to RF fields from base stations is best dealt with nationally."  That makes sense and it also makes sense for those health considerations to be considered as broadly as possible.

Sustainable development principles and eco-friendly features are becoming common aspects of housing that is funded by Communities Scotland. Good examples exist in Lochaber and Shetland of housing developments that use biomass and waste-fuelled heating systems. In Orkney, there is an example of the application of a passive solar system and, in Highland and Shetland, heating systems that use heat that is extracted from the ground are in use. Communities Scotland will continue to consider innovative approaches of that type.

The member should know that 97 per cent of new-build houses that Communities Scotland funded in the previous financial year achieved that body's energy efficiency target. That is evident mainstreaming. In 2003-04, the average level of CO 2 emissions from new-build properties that were funded by housing association grants was 1.7 tonnes, which was down from the figure of 2.9 tonnes in 2002-03. The Scottish Executive has confirmed funding of £6.6 million in the next three years for the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. In 2004-05, the SCHRI is funding 17 capital projects for housing associations, with a total grant of £410,000. The member will accept that, given our successes on the issue and our funding commitment, the Executive regards such schemes as mainstream and is committed to them.

As Communities Scotland's name suggests, it has a commitment throughout Scotland. We are always in the business of promoting good practice. As I said, 97 per cent of new-build houses that were funded by Communities Scotland in the previous financial year achieved the body's energy efficiency target. Communities Scotland and the Executive are committed to such schemes. I am happy to discuss with Communities Scotland how it intends to use its experience of funding in the past to make progress.

Housing policy may have been perverse and irrational, but the point that I was trying to make was that we, as individuals, often make perverse and irrational decisions about housing—for example, buying a house after giving it less scrutiny than we would give a new coat. It is difficult to manage a sector in which people make that sort of decision when choosing between putting in a kitchen and repairing rot in the roof.

People will be aware that, over the past two weeks, there has been a series of important developments in the Executive's approach to housing. After all, every member in the chamber shares the interest in housing that has woven its way through the Parliament's work since its earliest days. In the past two weeks, we have published our new policy statement on housing, "Homes for Scotland's People: A Scottish Housing Policy Statement"; launched our new homestake initiative to help first-time buyers and others get a foot on the home-ownership ladder; introduced the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which focuses on the quality of the maintenance and repair of private sector housing; issued new planning advice on affordable housing; and announced how we intend to progress the single survey scheme. Of course, housing is important to us all, and it can bring out in our policymakers the most creative thinking and the most perverse and irrational decision making. Although I will try to cover the amendments later, I must say that I am disappointed that there has been such a focus on the right to buy instead of on the breadth of related and complex housing issues. After rigorous scrutiny by the Parliament in 2000-01, the right to buy was reformed. However, as Linda Fabiani's amendment points out, current tenants' rights were preserved and, as a result, I believe that there has already been the movement that the amendments call for. We accept that a range of measures is required to support first-time buyers. Indeed, some important announcements that have been made at Westminster today will have an impact on that matter as well as on other matters that will be discussed this afternoon.

No, I will not. We recognise that problems for first-time buyers are different in different places. One particular problem might be supply, and we believe that the Executive should focus on creating new homes for buying and renting. Our approach to shared equity does what right to buy has been criticised for not doing: it acts as a recyclable benefit. When it has benefited one  person, it can move on and benefit another instead of providing only a one-off benefit that is tied to one first-time buyer.

The last time that I opened a debate, I got so waylaid in various highways and byways that I did not get through the substance of my speech. I assure members that, if I can, I will take a number of interventions, but I am driven by the responsibility of getting to the end of my speech in one piece. In particular, I do not want to miss my next point. Today, we have announced the details of Communities Scotland's £404 million investment programme of affordable housing for next year, with increased provision in all local authority areas. Of course, there is a connection between that significant investment and the quality of the management of our economy at Westminster.

No. This debate therefore offers a timely opportunity for Parliament to consider our vision and ambitions for housing in Scotland and how we intend to turn them into reality. The focus of the motion is the housing policy statement, which takes stock of our policies across the housing agenda and their links to other policy areas. Since devolution, there have been massive increases in public investment in housing; ambitious legislation on homelessness and antisocial behaviour; and major progress in relation to community ownership, fuel poverty and tenant participation. We felt that it was time to draw together those strands to ensure that we make coherent progress. In creating safer communities and addressing the difficulties that are experienced by tenants, we are reclaiming housing for use. Not only are we addressing the issue of blight in our communities, as felt by those who live in hard-to-let areas, but we are recognising what a hugely wasted resource such housing is. We must meet the challenge of addressing the needs of fragile communities that may be falling into disrepair.

I give way to Richard Lochhead.

I accept that there is a specific problem with land. I welcome Richard Lochhead's recognition that simply supporting people with individual financial packages will not address the issue. If he bears with me, I will address the issue of land supply. The policy statement sets out in detail our objectives and our plans to deliver them. It emphasises that housing is not just about bricks and mortar—it is about places that people can call home, and the delivery of good-quality, warm and affordable housing in safe communities. Decent homes of the right type and in the right place are vital to the health and well-being of individuals and communities, and to economic growth. The policy statement covers a wide agenda. In the short time that is available to me, I will pick out some key themes. We need to increase the number of quality homes that are available to buy and rent at affordable prices, and we need those homes to be in places and communities where people want to live, both in our cities and in rural areas. We need to ensure that rented homes are brought up to standard, so that tenants are offered homes that are safe and secure and which fulfil their aspirations.

No. We need to respond to the aspirations of young families and others to own their own homes, but recognise that many people will continue to find rented houses more suited to their circumstances.

No. We need to give the elderly and other vulnerable people access to support to allow them to live in their own homes and communities. We need to close the gap between deprived and more prosperous areas. We need to have a balance of housing provision and to make real the right to rent—not as a worst-case option—but we should also build flexibility into our housing choices, to allow people to have the most appropriate housing for them at each stage in their lives.  Our stocktake has reinforced the clear view that we must address the workings of the housing system as a whole—market housing as well as the social rented sector. Housing policy cannot be seen in isolation. Our initiatives on land-use planning, transport and the economy, for example, will play a major role in influencing what can be achieved. Public investment is a fundamental part of the equation. The recent spending review announced an increase in public investment in affordable homes to £1.2 billion over the next three years. That has allowed us to make huge progress—from 18,000 to 21,500—in the number of affordable houses that we will be able to fund over the period. As I said, next year's investment programme will amount to £404 million, which represents an increase of 23 per cent over this year's budget. We have announced today the details of how that money will be spent on the ground. Investment in social rented housing is increased by more than £75 million to nearly £290 million, while investment in owner-occupation initiatives will total £30 million, which is a 60 per cent increase in the budget. In urban areas, the programme recognises the need to regenerate communities and to address demand pressure in certain areas. Funding has been increased by a third to £235 million. Investment in affordable housing in rural areas will increase to £97 million, which is a record level. Spending on affordable housing in rural areas this year represents a 107 per cent increase on spending in 1999. More than £150 million will be invested in pressured areas, in which demand outstrips supply and prices are beyond many people. That figure is up by 70 per cent. In addition—and linked to increased investment in pressured areas—there will be an increase in spend on advanced land acquisition. The £404 million investment by the Executive will lever in an extra £170 million in private finance to boost the money that we can spend. All 32 local authority areas in Scotland will see an increase in expenditure under the new investment programme for the coming year. Local details will be announced shortly.

No. However, public investment is only part of the answer. We will also need to enable the housing market to deliver for Scotland. Land supply is crucial. Major reforms to the planning system, involving new legislation and guidance, are under way and a white paper will be published later this  year. Our reforms must assist the provision of long-term, effective land supply for housing. That will provide the certainty and confidence that are necessary not just for the development industry, but for communities. The planning system can play an immediate role in relation to affordable housing. In areas in which clear need is demonstrated, the new planning advice note on affordable housing, which we published last week, recommends that 25 per cent of the units in a private sector development should be contributed as affordable housing. Suggestions have been made that that figure is too high or too low.

I am talking about both social rented housing and low-cost home ownership. We want to target a particular group of people through the approach that I described. Local authorities are well versed in issues about their areas and I am sure that they will use the new approach in a productive and positive way. We are taking a range of actions to free up public sector land for potential development. The massive investment in strategic water and sewerage infrastructure that was announced recently will help to overcome constraints on housing development. We have placed a lot of emphasis on assisting people into home ownership. I make it clear that renting a home is as valid a choice as home ownership, but we must respond to the aspirations of the many people who want to own their home. In some parts of Scotland, many people who traditionally would have become first-time buyers have been priced out of the market, which has perhaps started to have an impact on the capacity for movement in the social rented sector. Our investment plans include nearly 5,000 homes for low-cost home ownership by 2008, which is the largest expansion in low-cost home ownership for a decade. The approach will not happen at the expense of social renting, because those homes will be in addition to the 16,500 social rented homes that we will fund during the same period. The homestake scheme, which we announced last week, will help in particular first-time buyers and people on low incomes and, as I said, the scheme will be recyclable, to the benefit of the broader community. The scheme will be used, in large part, in connection with new supply, but we will pilot its use for the purchase of houses on the open market.  Our determination to improve the physical quality of homes in Scotland is a mainstay of the policy statement. We have introduced the Scottish housing quality standard, which we have used to set demanding targets to ensure that warm, dry, decent homes become the norm in 21 st century Scotland. Prudential borrowing and community ownership are powerful tools to help to achieve the quality standard in social housing. A further 80,000 homes are on the community ownership programme and, subject to the balloting of tenants, will transfer to community ownership. I will mention briefly the Housing (Scotland) Bill—the Communities Committee did a great deal of work on the bill this morning. The quality of private sector housing is the main focus of the bill. It is estimated that £5 billion-worth of repairs, some of which are urgent, are needed in the private sector. The bill will address the problem by modernising the powers that are available to local authorities to deal with housing that is of poor quality or in poor condition. For example, local authorities will have new powers to declare housing renewal areas, which will allow a comprehensive approach to be taken to condition and amenity problems. Local authorities will also have powers to require owners to maintain houses and to carry out work on a house if, without that work, the house might lapse into serious disrepair or affect neighbouring buildings. Because some owners genuinely need help to carry out their responsibility to repair and improve their houses, we will allow local authorities greater flexibility in how they provide assistance. We must find a way of focusing on the responsibility that we all have to maintain our homes, rather than simply to do up the bits that will look attractive to the outside world. The bill will provide enabling powers for the single survey scheme. At least in part because of the cost of shelling out for multiple surveys, the vast majority of people who buy a house commission just a basic valuation survey and then face steep repair bills in the first few years of occupation. If people are to have responsibility for maintaining their homes, knowledge of a house's condition should be of central importance. For that reason, the bill will give ministers the power to introduce a mandatory single survey scheme, whereby when a house is marketed the seller will provide upfront to prospective purchasers a thorough survey of the house's condition.

We acknowledge that the issue has generated a great deal of debate and we want to work closely with stakeholders to ensure that the measure will have no unintended consequences. However, there was a huge sign-up to the idea that people who are trying to get into the housing market ought not to have to pay for a number of surveys over a period of time, when at the end of the process they might not even know about the condition of the home that they had bought. No one could say that our pilot scheme was successful; not even Pollyanna herself could put a good construction on it. Nevertheless, we believe that the concept is not flawed and that the rationale is as strong as ever. We will pursue the concept with stakeholders. As usual, I have managed to run out of time. In conclusion, I would say that the housing world is changing rapidly in Scotland. Much has been achieved since devolution. We must now consider issues to do with the private sector and I am sure that Cathie Craigie will be happy that we will consider issues to do with private landlords. Our commitment that people should have access to good-quality, warm and affordable homes can become a reality and not just an aspiration. I believe that the plans that are set out in "Homes for Scotland's People" provide a sound basis for moving forward. I move, That the Parliament acknowledges the wide range of policies outlined in Homes for Scotland's People to increase the quantity and improve the quality of homes in both the social rented and private sectors; welcomes the £1.2 billion investment to achieve the three-year target of 21,500 affordable homes and the 23% increase in the Communities Scotland budget for next year; endorses the Homestake initiative to help first-time buyers and others into home ownership; acknowledges new planning advice setting a benchmark, where need is demonstrated, of 25% of all new housing development to be affordable homes; supports recent announcements and ongoing work to develop water and sewerage infrastructure for new housing and boost the availability of land, and welcomes the Housing (Scotland) Bill published last week which will seek to raise standards in the private housing sector and strengthen the rights of private sector tenants.

I do not know whether I should declare an interest, as I am married to someone who works for the SCVO. I do not know whether that is a delight or a burden—I will allow other people to judge that for themselves.

He is too scared to say. I am delighted to have the opportunity to sum up in this very important debate. This is the first stage 1 debate that I have been involved in from this side of the fence, so to speak, and it has been an interesting experience. I am happy that there is genuine consensus on the importance of the bill and that, in general, there are no divisions along party lines on the key issues that the bill identifies. That is a good-news story that gives confidence in the Parliament's work of wrestling with the difficult issues that will make a difference in local communities. We should remember the history—and understand the importance—of the commitment to introduce legislation on charities, which represented recognition that there had been a sapping of public confidence in charities. There was a fear that if charities were not operating in accordance with a common understanding of how they should be operating, there would be an impact on charitable giving. We should commend those people who through their work strove to ensure that that position would be turned round not just by the bill, but by restoring faith in the charitable sector. Acknowledging that something is important does not make it easy. The charitable sector does not exist in straight lines or in boxes; it was not created and developed by policy wonks and bureaucrats. That means that it is difficult to legislate clearly and simply on what the sector does. It is important that when we legislate we recognise that diversity is to be celebrated, but that it is not easily managed. In legislating for the sector, we must be careful that we do not drive out those bits of it that we cherish so much.  A lot of hard work has gone into developing the bill and it is gratifying that the Communities Committee has endorsed it. I congratulate the committee and its convener on the role that they have played. I acknowledge the hard work that Jean McFadden's commission did all those years ago in identifying the areas in which it was important to take action. I pay tribute to my colleague Margaret Curran, who caught and responded to the public mood and the desire for legislation by making the commitment to legislate that we are delivering on. There is agreement that charities are vital to Scotland's community and that they need a regulatory framework that protects the public interest and helps them to flourish. It is evident to me that, as the committee noted, on certain issues we may not have got things quite right yet, but that indicates that we have a successful parliamentary scrutiny process. I am looking forward to analysing the committee's recommendations before we propose amendments to the bill at stage 2. Independence is not a new issue—Jean McFadden flagged it up. Everyone understood that bodies might have to choose between independence and charitable status. Although the Executive recognises the compelling case that has been made for the distinctive role of the cultural NDPBs because of their responsibilities for the national treasures, that is not an indication that we devalue independence.

I want to progress a little. Christine Grahame made a point about organisations that act in the public interest, but the fact that an organisation acts in the public interest is not sufficient to make it a charity. I acknowledge the concerns about the FE sector, on which we will reflect. We have already made a commitment on third-party direction. However, I am concerned that we do not diminish the importance of the independence test or misrepresent its purpose. It was not just about addressing the position of NDPBs. As Malcolm Chisholm said, trustees—no matter how they are appointed—have the crucial role of working in the interests of their charity. When there is direction from elsewhere, there will be tension, at the very least.

I refer to a point that I have made before. What is important is not where someone comes from, but how they act once they take up their position. A trustee's responsibility is to operate in the interests of their charity. I want to deal with independent schools. I say to the SSP representative that I will take no lectures on my commitment to the state sector, in which I worked for 20 years. Every day I delight in the fact that my children are educated in that sector. At the age of 11, I refused to take the scholarship test that would have allowed a working-class girl from Anderston to go to what I perceived to be a place of privilege. We understand that there is an issue to do with elitism, but I must tell Tommy Sheridan that I know from my experience of education that privilege and inequality exist inside the state sector, too. It is deeply ironic that the example on which the SSP draws to make its case is the importance of its policy on free school meals. The SSP's free schools meals policy would draw money out of the community in which I taught and give it to better-off communities. In the places where I taught, 70 per cent of the children already had free school dinners. Under the SSP policy, the new investment that is being put into school meals would be taken from those children and given to children elsewhere. Instead of spending funds on initiatives like home start or on working with families and the disadvantaged, the SSP would spend money on things that stop youngsters from achieving equality.

No, I will not. Mary Scanlon made a point about the independent sector. The public benefit test is a real test; it is not a tick-box test. Indeed, the huge significance of the proposals in the bill seem to have escaped Tommy Sheridan's notice. No body or organisation will automatically become a charity; each one will have to prove its case. The report acknowledges the diversity of the independent sector. In acknowledging that, we should also recognise that the bill offers no guarantee of charitable status. Those that want charitable status will have to prove their case. Schools also have to contribute to the community. If a body loses its charitable status, its assets—which it gathered for charitable purposes—must continue to be used for charitable purposes. Those bodies would therefore still have to deliver on education. The point was also raised that OSCR would need to understand the importance of the public benefit test. As I said, the test should be robust. We know that OSCR will have to consult on its guidance and that it can be asked to give evidence  to committees of the Parliament. Indeed, it will also have to report to the Parliament. If any committee is unhappy with OSCR's performance, it or the Parliament can promote legislation to address that. In the time that remains, I want to respond to a few other points that were made in the debate. Donald Gorrie spoke about the list of charitable purposes. The Executive has made a commitment to address the points that were raised in respect of adding heads for sport and belief. We also agree to consider the points that Frank McAveety made. I also want to refer briefly to the point that Patrick Harvie made about designated religious charities. In our communities at the moment, the Church of Scotland has a particular role to play. We can argue about whether it should have such a role, but it is not for the bill to change that. Religion has a particular role in people's lives. If we want to change the role that religious bodies play, we can do so by argument or legislation at another time. In the designation of religious charities, the Executive acknowledges that those charities have internal structures that regulate them; we are not saying they are being allowed to opt out of regulation. At the same time, we have argued that the powers that OSCR should retain over the designated religious charities are powers that relate purely to the protection of the charitable functions of the body. We will work with those who have concerns about the implications of the measure. Scott Barrie made a point about the difference between misconduct and mismanagement. The Executive has reflected on the serious nature of that point. We do not want to endanger the very fabric of the voluntary sector or set challenges that deter people from becoming involved. I commit to looking further at the matter. The last thing that the Executive wants, simply because it used language with which lawyers are comfortable, is to say to the people who operate in the charitable sector that there may be a cost to them of doing so. There is no such cost, but we might want to look at how we can reassure people of that.

We could argue all day about what we think education is and what we think the benefits of education are. I have nailed my colours to the mast on where I want my children to be educated; other people have to make their own decision. We must be clear about the matter; the charity test is for the schools to pass and not for us to facilitate. Given the scrutiny that the Parliament and the committee will afford in the  development of the guidance, I am confident that the public benefit test will be robust. I look forward to stage 2, at which time we can consider in detail the issues that have been flagged up today. I urge the chamber to support the general principles of the bill.

The final decision is dependent on the satisfactory conclusion of a legal agreement between the applicant and North Lanarkshire Council. I understand that the council hopes to conclude the agreement in the near future. On receipt of the agreement, Scottish ministers will make every effort to issue an early decision.

As the member will be aware, Scottish ministers have already indicated that they will accept the report from the reporter, but we currently await the agreement between the local authority and the company to ensure that the conditions that are attached to the planning permission will be complied with. I think that Mr Neil knows that as well as I do. The member will also be aware that the Scottish Executive is committed to addressing issues of environmental justice, which involves balancing the needs of local communities against the needs of the economy in any development or planning proposal. I look forward to a positive discussion in the Parliament on those issues, on which we will focus in the forthcoming planning bill.

As I have said, recognition must be given to the cumulative effect of such developments, to the rights of communities and to the proper involvement of people in the planning process. The need to ensure that conditions are enforced once planning permission has been granted has also been a particular concern. Indeed, a recent meeting that I attended scoped out some of the issues around enforcement. On the proposed development at Greengairs, people should reflect on the fact that the proposed conditions will require the applicant to seek to set up a liaison group involving representatives from the council, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the operating company, the organisations that comprise Greengairs joint action group and any other local resident whom the council approves. I recognise that such a planning condition is probably not the first position that Greengairs residents would have taken, but it will go some way towards ensuring the proper monitoring and enforcement of the planning conditions, if and when agreement is finally concluded between the local authority and the company.

So far, the central heating programme has installed more than 46,000 central heating systems, the majority in older households. Recent research on the first year of the central heating programme showed that, of the people who were fuel poor, nearly nine out of 10 were lifted out of fuel poverty after the programme.

It is clear that the programme has been a huge success and has made a huge difference, and we must not understate the significance of the programme in addressing fuel poverty and improving the infrastructure of people's homes. Far more homes now have central heating than had it in the past. I also recognise that there are specific problems in specific places, and the individual experiences that members from all parties have raised will be reflected in any development programme in future. Some issues around the way in which the construction industry operates have also been highlighted, and we are committed to addressing those issues in relation to the central heating programme and elsewhere. I assure Richard Baker and other members that the work of individual contractors is monitored. It is important that if there are specific issues in certain parts of the country, we know about that. Just because the programme is free to people at the point of receipt does not mean that people deserve a lower level of service. I would be concerned if any attitude in the industry suggested that that was the case.

I will do my best to be as well behaved as possible, Presiding Officer, because from this angle you are even scarier than when you are close up. I welcome the opportunity to sum up in this debate. Although there are divergences and differences in what we say, I have been struck by the extent to which we agree. We are currently recognising the 60 th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. Earlier in the week, I happened upon a programme on the BBC in which those who lived through the experience of Auschwitz gave moving testimony of their experience of calculated barbarity and of the hostility of Nazism rationally delivered. I was struck by how fresh it was in their minds even now and by the fact that that Nazism was underpinned and driven by racial hatred and racial superiority. I recognise that in this chamber, whatever our differences, we all understand the danger and power of racism to destroy the lives of individuals and communities. In this country, we are a mix of cultures. We  come from different places and we go to different places. Sometimes when we have travelled, we have not travelled well. Often, we took prejudice with us. Donald Gorrie talked about the need to challenge prejudice. I do not often say this about the SNP, but we are fortunate in Scotland that the mainstream nationalist party does not draw racist conclusions from its particular commitment to Scotland. However, there are those who do, and we must challenge that prejudice in whatever form it is expressed. Understandably, some of the debate has related to immigration. We must take our immigration policy seriously. Perhaps we need to have a debate about whether there should be an immigration policy at all. It is my view—I will spend a moment on this, because I want to spend the greater part of my speech on what can be done inside the Parliament—that the essential element of any immigration policy should be that the experience of all those who come into contact with it is the same, regardless of their race, creed or beliefs. However, that is only part of the debate, and only part of understanding racism and how it operates and is experienced. As I have said before in this chamber, as a child of Gaelic-speaking Hebrideans brought up in the centre of Glasgow, I was brought up alongside people who had moved from Pakistan to live in Glasgow. As they arrived in Glasgow, our parents believed in the same things, but I know that my contemporaries then have had a lifetime of experiencing being Scottish in a very different way from me, because it will have been a lifetime with experience of racism. Racism expresses itself in many ways, such as in racist bullying and intimidation in our local communities. I know as a constituency MSP that the same young people who express their antisocial behaviour in one way towards a white family often target it in an expressly racist way against a black family. We know that in this debate we should reflect the reality of Scotland. There are grounds for concern. Bobo Balde and Jean-Alain Boumsong are at the height of their powers and the peak of their profession. They are young, talented, wealthy and powerful men, but they are still victims of racist abuse from football supporters simply because of the colour of their skin. However, there are grounds for optimism in that area. We remember the young Dundee football supporter—a young boy—who spoke up courageously about the racists who were standing roundabout him and shouting racist abuse. That was a small, still voice, but it gives us hope for a real change in attitudes, particularly among our young people. Of course, we know that there are too many fearful families and isolated individuals within our  communities. Too many people from all sorts of backgrounds experience a lack of respect and the abuse of their basic rights, which is totally unacceptable. That is what our commitment to our campaign today is about. Marlyn Glen raised the issue of data collection and Linda Fabiani talked about the capacity of public bodies. The points that they made were made frequently during the review of local race equality work and we will consider how to address both issues. We have discussed many aspects of anti-racism today, but it is worth remembering why we are having the debate. We know that in Scotland employment rates among people from minority ethnic communities are lower than those in white communities, yet we know that the level of entrepreneurship among some minority ethnic communities is high. We know, too, that people from minority ethnic communities are under-represented in most occupations—certainly in the occupation of being a politician—and continue to experience racism in work. The issues of institutional racism and racial harassment are still far too prevalent in Scottish working life and act as a barrier to individuals and organisations fulfilling their potential. We also know that there are real issues about equal access to secure and good quality housing for minority ethnic communities. We know, as members have said, that although the number of racist incidents might be increasing, because people have more confidence to report them, they are still a reproach to our idea of Scotland as one nation in which everyone can be safe. Mary Scanlon asked whether the figures could be broken down and I will certainly explore that to see whether it is possible. We know from research that people in Scotland say that they want to live in a country that is welcoming and friendly and where all have equal opportunities to prosper and succeed. Their aspirations for Scotland—both for its nature and for its place on the global stage—are incredibly high. However, at the same time, they reveal entrenched prejudice and attitudes that cut across that—attitudes that result in the exclusion and the relative and, in some cases, absolute deprivation to which I have referred. The research has also shown us that people acknowledge that racism is a problem in contemporary Scotland, but see it as something for which others are responsible. I agree that we must confront it in ourselves and take responsibility for ourselves. The reality is that racism is a problem at all levels of society and across all geographical areas. Scotland has a history of welcoming strangers and that tradition has never been more important  than it is now. I was struck by the fact that, in my community and others throughout Glasgow, people had anxieties about the experience of asylum seekers. It was often in the poorest communities and among the most vulnerable and deprived people that the hand of friendship, support and compassion was stretched out. I hear what Patrick Harvie said about Glasgow. The fact is that Glasgow City Council had the courage to welcome asylum seekers and to support them in their experiences. The debate has focused on the challenges that Scotland faces in the 21 st century because of its falling population. Sandra White asked about the fresh talent initiative. I should say that the report from Westminster acknowledges the fact that Scotland faces a demographic challenge and is different from the rest of the UK and emphasises the importance of regional solutions such as the fresh talent initiative. It is clear that much work remains to be done to refine the detail of the five-year plan and its implementation, but it presents Scotland with the opportunity to ensure that our unique needs are reflected. We will engage actively with the Home Office on that. Mary Scanlon asked, "What is the connection? Why are we having a debate about anti-racism that mentions fresh talent?" The reality is that we must create the climate for people to be welcomed here. If people come here and are racially abused or find Scotland to be a place where it is legitimate to abuse other people from minority ethnic communities, others will not want to come. That is why we focused so much on promoting race equality and why the one Scotland, many cultures campaign is so important. It sets out aspirations for the sort of Scotland in which we want to live. We do that not only because we want to attract and retain people from abroad, but because we need to do so for the kind of Scotland that we want and for the people who are already here. All of us, from whatever background, are lessened and diminished by racism and racial inequality that goes unchallenged or is tolerated, as Linda Fabiani said. Scotland has produced great thinkers and its people have demonstrated enterprise and innovation and have contributed to the world in many significant ways. Scotland has also benefited from the contribution of the many people who have visited and settled here over the centuries. We continue to do so today and we must not be complacent about a comfortable Scotland, because we know that the statistics challenge that idea. The Scotland of the 21 st century needs innovation, interchange, energy and dynamism to continue. There is no place for small-minded prejudice and narrowness of vision if we are to be successful. Racism detracts from that  vision; if we do not tackle it, we let ourselves and Scotland down. Everyone can help to create a climate in which racism in unacceptable. Those are not trite remarks and I recognise the genuine commitment across the chamber to understanding the issues. We understand the seriousness and complexity of the challenges that confront us. We believe passionately in seeking resolution and we are determined—as I am sure the Parliament is—to secure the change that we all want and that our communities deserve. I urge members to support the motion.

The Scottish Law Commission is undertaking a review of the legislation that governs the operation of the land register, the Land Registration (Scotland) Act 1979, as part of its sixth programme of law reform. The commission published the first of two discussion papers in February 2004. The paper considers the connections between the law relating to registration and the underlying rules of property  law. It sought views on proposals to improve the alignment between those areas of law and is available on the commission's website. The commission is working on the second discussion paper, which is to focus on practical aspects of registration, and expects to publish it in June 2005. The commission expects to publish its findings in a report at the end of the year. The Executive will consider carefully the report and any recommendations that it makes.

We should remember that registration counts from the date of receipt of application, so no one is disadvantaged by delay. We must recognise that it is important that the process is thorough, that people have confidence in it and that any possible disputes are dealt with at a very early stage. Thus far, 0.1 per cent of dealings have led to a dispute that required indemnity. I do not accept that the whole process is in chaos. There are delays because cases are at an early stage and thoroughness is essential. We are conscious that it is important to seek to eliminate delays by improving efficiency and are moving towards electronic registration. However, we must focus on the fact that these are complex matters and people must have confidence in them. Once the more complex cases have been dealt with, we can deal with more straightforward ones and the process can be developed in a way that allows everyone to have confidence in it.

The planning appeal to Scottish ministers from Scottish Water was received by the inquiry reporters unit on 10 January and is in the early stages of the appeals process. It has not been decided whether the appeal will proceed by public local inquiry or by an exchange of written submissions.

First, the appeal is for a proposal to erect a waste water screening and pumping works and associated landscaping and fencing. It is not for a waste transfer station, as Mr Rumbles claims. Obviously, I cannot comment on the individual application, although I am keen that the process is carried through appropriately. The inquiry reporters unit's decision on whether to proceed with the inquiry by an exchange of communication will depend on the preferences of Scottish Water and the planning authority. Before coming to any decision, the unit will take into account the complexity of the issues that are in dispute and the level of interest within the community. If significant issues are involved, the Scottish ministers may in certain circumstances recall the appeal for their decision, in which case an inquiry would be held. However, that decision will be made further along in the process.

I welcome the opportunity to sum up the debate, although the chamber is emptying—I will try not to take that personally. The award is a great achievement for LGBT Youth Scotland. I am delighted to add the Executive's congratulations to those that others have expressed and to recognise the significance of an award that carries the name of Philip Lawrence, who understood much about the needs and potential of young people. The award is an honour for those who have received it and it is a delight and a pleasure for us to congratulate them on receiving it. I commend LGBT Youth Scotland for supporting young people to make a difference in their communities through volunteering. As Nora Radcliffe said, we learn yet again about the significance of volunteering and how important it is  in our society that people seek to meet an identified need for no reason other than that that need must be met. I welcome the opportunity that Susan Deacon's motion provides to outline the Executive's commitment to such important work and I commend all those who made powerful speeches in the debate. I reflect again on the power of those who experience discrimination when they speak out about that discrimination. When they give their experience a voice, it is powerful in shaping how we as a society tackle that discrimination. We do not just hear of that experience; it shapes and drives our response. The Executive has worked closely with LGBT Youth Scotland for several years. We consider it to be a key partner in delivering our equality strategy and in our work to tackle prejudice and discrimination and to promote equal opportunities. We have provided a grant of £150,000 over three years for the organisation's core running costs and a further £65,000 to develop mechanisms for consultation and engagement with LGBT young people. I am particularly pleased to announce tonight that we have just agreed a further £105,000 from April 2005 for a three-year project to strengthen further our engagement with LGBT young people and ensure that their voices are heard. Listening directly to the voices of LGBT young people—to their concerns, experiences and aspirations—will help us to deliver services that tackle the problems and barriers that LGBT young people face. Since the repeal of section 2A of the Local Government Act 1986, a new commitment has been made in Scotland to embracing equality in sexual orientation and gender identity. With Patrick Harvie, I recall those difficult days, the emotion and difficulty of the debate and the noise and clamour. However, in the middle of that, the clear voice of reason emerged about why the Parliament had to take the decision that it did in the name of justice and equality. In partnership with the national health demonstration project, healthy respect, LGBT Youth Scotland has contributed to that culture change. Together, they have progressed many training opportunities for professionals and young people. Since 2001, healthy respect and LGBT Youth have achieved work with young people that includes awareness sessions in secondary schools and a theatre in education project called "Them & Us: whose side are you on?", which is designed to challenge homophobia. Work with professionals has included training sessions with teachers and school nurses on LGBT awareness and homophobia. The organisations have also worked with parents and carers and produced a  guide on LGBT issues for teachers that went to all Lothian secondary schools. We are also working with LGBT Youth Scotland on other projects to tackle homophobia and bullying in education. We are committed to ensuring that children in Scottish schools benefit from equality of opportunity and demonstrate respect for themselves and one another. In that context, the needs of LGBT young people and other young people who are affected by the issues must be addressed. We acknowledge that homophobia continues to be a problem in our schools and that it must be tackled. We have therefore commissioned LGBT Youth Scotland, in partnership with the centre for education for race equality in Scotland, to undertake work to ensure that homophobic bullying or harassment in our schools is dealt with consistently and effectively. Any form of bullying in schools is unacceptable, including homophobic bullying and attacking people on the ground of their sexuality. The Executive, local authorities and schools are working hard to ensure not only that bullying is tackled wherever it arises, but that our young people are instilled with values of tolerance and respect and an appreciation of diversity, which will help to prevent bullying. The recent national anti-bullying competition highlighted discrimination as a theme of bullying and addressed homophobia, racism and disability. The competition asked young people to think about the importance of being friendly and helpful and about how we should embrace the differences between people. The entries that we received proved that those values already exist among our young people. We have a responsibility to nurture those attitudes and to ensure that our young people grow up to be responsible, caring citizens. We must also ensure that young people who are the victims of homophobic bullying feel supported in seeking help and advice. New anti-bullying resources for schools address homophobia in detail, so that young people can identify it and know what help is available to them if necessary. That information recognises LGBT Youth Scotland as a key contact for those young people. February 2005 is the first LGBT history month, and the Executive is delighted to support that initiative. We believe that Scotland will be stronger and more successful if we celebrate diversity and the ways in which different cultures, ideas and experiences enrich Scottish life and have defined us all as Scots. I am delighted that my ministerial colleague, Malcolm Chisholm, will host a reception for LGBT communities at Edinburgh castle later this month to recognise and celebrate the contribution of Scotland's LGBT communities and to recognise in particular the work of LGBT Youth Scotland. I understand that some of the young  people from LGBT Youth Scotland have been invited to attend that reception. We all agree that there is no place in Scotland for homophobic prejudice or discrimination. It is the commitment of the Scottish Executive to continue to work in partnership with Scotland's LGBT communities to recognise their key role in helping us to deliver services that meet their needs and shape the action that we, as a society, must take in the future.  I again congratulate Susan Deacon on securing the debate and thank everybody who has contributed to making it worth while. I also congratulate the young people who have secured this prestigious award and wish them all the best in their continuing efforts to support the LGBT communities.  Meeting closed at 18:01.

Community ownership of the housing stock is bringing a huge range of benefits in those areas where it is being implemented. Not only is it leading to an unparalleled level of investment in new and better-quality housing, it is also, crucially, putting tenants at the centre of the decision-making process. We are delighted that those benefits are being recognised by a number of other local authorities that have successfully joined the Executive's community ownership programme.

There would, of course, be significant benefits to the Highlands if the community ownership programme was agreed to, and we welcome Highland Council's decision in that regard. Community ownership would offer the opportunity for significant investment to modernise houses, provide tenants with guarantees about future rent increases and, crucially, involve tenants in decisions about their homes, which makes it far more likely that investment will stick in the longer term and create the benefit that we want. However, I emphasise that community ownership is not the only thing that we are doing on housing in the Highlands and elsewhere. There is £79.2 million in the development programme for rural housing investment, £24.2 million of which is available to the Highlands and Islands. The point that Maureen Macmillan makes about sustaining the social rented sector is important, and I assure her that we will monitor closely whatever levers exist. Local authorities already have opportunities through the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to take action in cases where they feel that social rented housing is vulnerable. We are investing in a range of opportunities in rural housing—and in non-rural housing in parts of the Highlands, of course—and the community ownership programme is a significant part of that.

People must make an informed decision and a judgment. They know that one of the benefits of transfer to community ownership is the writing off of debt. Will they opt for a transfer, with the benefits and the opportunity for increased investment that that brings, or will they opt for an alternative, with retention, the use of the prudential borrowing scheme or a combination of partial transfer and some retention? People have to make that decision on an informed basis. Because of its other benefits—not just those associated with the writing off of debt—including tenant involvement at the centre of the process, the community ownership option is a serious one, which a number of authorities have already taken.

Our investment in affordable housing is underpinned by Communities Scotland's sustainable development policy and its "Sustainable Housing Design Guide for Scotland", which provides advice on design, materials and the use of energy and physical resources. In this financial year, Communities Scotland investment of £2.6 million in rural home ownership grants is expected to support 90 houses, mainly through self-build.

I do not think that anything that Rob Gibson said conflicts with the general thrust of Scottish Executive policy. Since 2002, all houses funded by Communities Scotland have required to achieve an energy efficiency standard that is higher than that required by building regulations. Ninety-seven per cent of new-build houses funded by Communities Scotland in the past financial year achieved its energy efficiency target. In 2003-04, average CO 2 emissions in new-build properties funded by housing association grants were down from 2.9 tonnes to 1.7 tonnes. All the key identifiers in the Communities Scotland programme—the use of brownfield sites, energy efficiency and average energy costs—tend in the right direction in achieving our policy aims. There is a lesson to be learned from that. It is important that we continue dialogue with those who have an interest in the different things that we can do to achieve those aims. Because its funding from the Scottish Executive is so significant, Communities Scotland has an important role to play in securing the energy efficient and eco-friendly buildings that Rob Gibson mentions.

A number of the points were in the text of my speech, but I chose to take interventions from a significant number of members in order to facilitate the debate. That is not to say that I devalue in any way those important issues.

It was not an apology.

The figures that I gave came from the Scottish household survey, which is based on people's perceptions of how they feel about the situation. Recognising that some  pensioners are not in poverty does not diminish our responsibility to address or focus on the issue of pensioner poverty.

I am pleased to introduce today's debate on an important issue that has probably threaded through the Scottish Parliament's discussions in the chamber, in committees and in cross-party groups since its earliest days. Before setting out our thinking on older people and what we are doing to support them, I want to highlight some points that we must be careful about in developing policy for older people, given the diversity that exists in the age, interests, experience and opportunities of people who might be defined as old. Indeed, for some of us, even the definition of "old" is becoming a slightly touchier matter than it once was. We should not think of older people as a block or a burden or only as passive recipients of our largesse. The issues that we must address include the demographic time bomb, the needs of carers and those for whom they care and, crucially, deprivation and the way in which poverty among older people is unevenly spread across Scotland. Of course, there are also issues around the experiences of particular groups—such as disabled people or women in older age—which are shaped by the responsibilities that those people had in earlier life. Those are not the only issues that we need to address in developing policy for older people. We must understand that policy must cover more than just how we look after older people, albeit that that is important. We have already demonstrated our commitment through a number of flagship policies, including free personal and nursing care, free concessionary travel and the central heating programme. That important start provides a foundation on which to build, but we continue to be committed to the needs and interests of older people. People sometimes think that new policies that are not labelled as being for older people are of no benefit to them, but the reality is that many of the Executive's actions have a direct impact on older people's lives. For example, we know that many older people are concerned about safety in their neighbourhood. Our measures to deal with antisocial behaviour will help to make the lives of  everyone, including older people, safer and more secure. I can tell the Tories that the current generation of pensioners—especially those in their 60s and 70s who lived with the consequences of the Tory policies that created high unemployment and fractured communities—understands better than most people the importance of work and employment. From that experience, they understand that stable economic policies that are driven by social goals are also important in shaping their experience in old age.

No, I do not agree. We know that poor pensioners have lived with the consequences of economic policies that were shaped by the belief that unemployment was a price worth paying for the Tories' economic goals. The Tories did not live with those consequences, but ordinary people in our communities did. We also know that older people are contributing and participating. I cannot be the only constituency MSP who is amazed at the extent to which older people support communities and hold them together. Many organisations would simply fall apart without the support of older people. No doubt much of today's debate will be about what is being done and what should be done for older people. That is fine as far as it goes, but it is only part of the bigger picture, which should be about recognising, valuing and supporting what older people are doing for themselves and for others in their communities and about listening to what they are saying about their communities.

I am aware both of the issues relating to dementia and of the tireless way in which carers fight on behalf of the people for whom they are caring. That issue was raised with me when I first became an MSP. At that time, I was struck by the fact that, when developing  policy, we needed to pay much more careful attention to what people were doing. I hope that later we will be able to say more about the details of how progress can be made in that area. However, I assure the member that I recognise the importance of the issue that he has raised. Sarah Boyack's debate last month on older volunteers demonstrated one important way in which older people are involved and contributing. I want to reflect for a moment on the extent of that and other types of involvement. Recent analysis showed that about a quarter of people aged 50 or more had done some volunteering in the past 12 months. The proportion falls with age, but many people aged 75 and over are still actively volunteering, often in ways that help other older people. As the research carried out last year for the retired and senior volunteers programme demonstrated again, volunteering benefits both volunteers and those whom they help—it has double benefits. Many of our programmes are predicated on the commitment of volunteers. The credit union movement was shaped by volunteers, who were often older people. Those people are still working in partnership with us to deliver financial inclusion. Although most people have left the labour market by the time that they reach the state pension age, many people want to continue working, perhaps in different ways or in different jobs. According to the Scottish household survey, more than 10 per cent of men aged between 65 and 74 are still in some form of employment. That trend is growing, and longer working is associated with better health as well as higher income. There is increasing awareness among Scottish employers of the benefits of an age-diverse workforce. Employers are developing good practice in assisting older workers to continue in work in ways that suit their needs, as well as those of the employers themselves. Most older people do not need care, but many of those who do rely on informal carers—relatives, friends and neighbours. Many of those carers are themselves older people and the value of the work that they do is incalculable. More than a fifth of women aged between 50 and 59 provide care. Almost one in 20 men and women aged between 65 and 84 provides more than 50 hours of care a week. We also know that many older people play a significant role in their families' lives as grandparents, providing both emotional and practical support to their families. In many households, the grandparents look after the children while their parents go out to work. Where families break up or have serious problems, often the grandparents step in to look after the children. It is my experience that in some of our fragile  communities, where drug addiction is a serious problem, grandparents are holding together not just families but the broader community by their commitment. We know that older people in Scotland are and want to stay involved. It is essential that we find ways of ensuring that older people have the best possible quality of life. We are working in a range of ways to support older people; I will mention just a few of those. The first is free concessionary travel. We want to remove barriers and what better way of doing so is there than to provide free, unrestricted national bus travel for people over 60 and those with disabilities? Recently, the Minister for Transport announced that, from April 2006, all older and disabled people will be entitled to Scotland-wide free bus travel. By offering a more joined-up scheme, we are directly addressing concerns that older people's organisations have raised about the difficulties that their members regularly experience. The scheme will provide free travel to all parts of Scotland at any time of day, not just at off-peak periods.

I will ensure that we raise the issues of disability and equality, for which we have responsibility, with the Minister for Transport. We must also identify areas in which community transport and so on can help people. Transport should follow the needs of those who use it and should not be restricted to the main routes. I assure the member that we will pursue the issue that he has raised. Under the scheme, older and disabled islanders will be offered two free return ferry journeys each year. We all recognise that ferry services help to enrich the lives of islanders. The new scheme is a significant expansion of and improvement on our existing free bus scheme. Of course, the improvements do not come without a cost. We are investing a maximum of £159 million in 2006-07 and £163 million in 2007-08. By making that investment in older and disabled people, we are listening to their requests and removing the barriers that they have experienced. We are committed to tackling pensioner poverty. Most pensioners are not poor. The vast majority feel that they have enough to live on; just over 5 per cent of pensioners feel that they have difficulties with their finances, compared with more than 20 per cent of non-pensioners. However, some older people are poor and we need to continue tackling that problem. We all know the consequences of poverty on quality of life.

I have not said that there are not poor pensioners. Tommy Sheridan's point indicates precisely why the Government and the Executive have a strategy to commit huge resources to those who are poorest in our communities, as well as to those communities in which mostly older, poorer people live. I will skip ahead now, because I will not have time to cover a number of points. There are issues to do with pensioner households and people who are fuel poor. We have committed through the independent review of local government finance to look at not just council tax but the distribution of funding across local authorities, to recognise the link between deprivation and poverty among older people. We also have to address health care for older people, an area in which significant progress has been made. I trust that today's debate will be productive and constructive. Members across the chamber have shown a commitment to older people. We recognise the diversity of older people and we recognise their significance in our communities. We are determined to ensure through our policies that, in old age, people have a secure life in a secure community. I move, That the Parliament recognises the contribution that older people bring to our communities; recognises the substantial progress that has been made in meeting the needs of older people through policies such as free personal and nursing care, the central heating programme and free bus travel anywhere in Scotland at any time of day; welcomes other policy initiatives that benefit older people by promoting volunteering and lifelong learning and tackling anti-social behaviour; seeks to build on these by recognising the diversity of older people and tackling ageism, and welcomes the involvement of older people through the Older People's Consultative Forum, and in other ways, in the development of policy across the Scottish Executive.

I shall attempt to rise to Bill Aitken's challenge and concentrate on delivery rather than on rhetoric. It is my intention to say less of what I had written down formally and instead to try to respond to points that have been  made. If I do not address specific points, I am more than happy to correspond with members on them. In any debate such as this that highlights targets, objectives, strategies and approaches, we might end up obscuring what is at its heart, which is the people whose life chances are diminished, whose opportunities are reduced and whose quality of life is affected by their poverty and the poverty in their communities. This is not merely an academic debate; it is about our understanding the narrative of people's lives in our poorest communities. Many of us know the people, the faces and the places where lives can be changed and where, indeed, lives are being changed by Government action and commitment, but that action must be shaped by understanding of what needs to be changed. There was a time when it was argued on the one hand that what we needed was free collective bargaining, which would sort everything out because there would be a trickle down to those who were poor and in low-paid jobs. On the other hand it was argued that all we needed was to get the economy right and somehow the benefits would trickle down to the poor. We do not accept trickle-down economics in our approach to poverty. In the past few years community organisations, women's groups and others have developed the case for considering other issues that impact on people's lives, that reduce opportunities and that make it difficult for people to access the opportunities that others have. I agree with Cathy Peattie about the importance of people in the community shaping our policies. Poverty and lack of opportunity are challenges for the whole of Scotland. All of us here must take ownership of the map of poverty and deprivation and we must understand the individual experience of poverty and the experience of living in poor communities. I say to Jamie Stone that, as the daughter of parents who left their remote part of the Gaidhealtachd to secure work and homes, I understand the rural dimension and the issue of access to services. That is why we have a target on that. We have to understand our responsibility to find out exactly where the real deprivation is concentrated and what that concentration of poverty does to people's lives, even if individuals in that community are not poor. We want to do three things: we want to prevent people from falling into poverty in the first place; we want to provide routes out of poverty for those who have not enjoyed the opportunities that are available to the majority; and we want to sustain people in being free from poverty. We must improve access to opportunities and, crucially, provide the support and assistance that people  need to take advantage of opportunities. Sandra White said that we should give people well-paid jobs. That is right, but there are people in our communities who are not in a position to take such jobs. We have to support them in preparing themselves for work and when they are in work. One of the lessons to learn is about people's anxiety about moving towards work. That, as well as the other parts of our targets, is important. We have to consider the concentrations of worklessness and the reasons for them. We have to consider the stubborn inequalities in health that exist between the least affluent people and the most affluent people. When we talk about health inequalities, we have to start considering measures for prevention of ill health. We have to try to understand that the geography of ill health maps where deprivation exists. When we talk about health provision at acute-service level, proximity to health services and access to those services are two completely different things. We have to consider the continuing low achievement of our poorest-performing pupils, which prevents them from making a successful transition out of school. I must say to David Davidson that it is right for us to concentrate on the earlier stage. We must understand why young people in our poorest communities opt out long before they would ever have to think about tuition fees. I alert him to the fact that although I understand the importance of considering vocational training and people being turned off by the curriculum, we cannot foster the attitude that people should be hewers of wood and drawers of water if they come from poor communities. We want to unlock the potential of all our young people, whatever they might be, for academic achievement or their potential go to the appropriate job. I will tell Bill Aitken what happens when people vote with their feet. In the 1980s, I taught in an inner-city school in Glasgow. People voted with their feet in many such schools. Those schools did not improve—they shut down. We must understand that the approach that is now being taken of investing in such schools is crucial. If we talk only about supporting the individual who moves away from their community, the community is left behind and is not regenerated. Our regeneration strategy must understand that we want to support people in all such communities to learn and survive. Not only do we target young people who may be turned off—we offer them real second chances if they drop out. As I have said, it is crucial that we harness potential and talent. Members talked about various measures at Scottish and UK levels. We work in partnership  with the UK Government to transform the lives of the most disadvantaged individuals, to strengthen vulnerable families and to regenerate our most deprived communities. I return to Brian Adam's point about practical delivery. Yesterday, I had the privilege of visiting a project called saved by the bell, which is a savings club in a Dundee primary school. The club is run by young people, who are learning early about volunteering. They are supported by adult members of the local credit union and backed by a partnership that includes Dundee City Council. We must focus on what works at a basic level. The challenge, if a measure is not working, is to reconsider it. The Opposition should not in such cases simply say that we have made a U-turn. I will make a couple of points about what Christine Grahame said. We know that one in five pensioners lives in poverty, as she said. However, we also know that such figures are concentrated in certain areas. A balance of general spend—on things such as central heating and travel—against targeted spend applies as much to pensioners as it does to any other group. Christine Grahame mentioned well-paid jobs and supporting people into work. She also talked about the citizens pension. The reality is that a citizens pension would be of marginal benefit to the people who are in most poverty. She then made the completely contradictory point that we throw money at this, that and something else and that that does not work. It is accepted that significant money is being provided. The challenge is in where and how we spend it. I return to the point that I made about understanding what is happening, so that we address issues such as child care.

I find it offensive when the people who live in my communities are described as living in sink estates or ghettos. People in my community who are struggling to work to change the situation and to highlight problems do not want to be treated as if they were part of a human menagerie. I understand that difficult issues exist, but the idea is bizarre that poverty and disadvantage and concentrations of them can be sorted by a  constitutional change that is followed by a citizens pension—the only measure that Christine Grahame highlighted—that would provide a 5p increase for couples and a 55p increase for single pensioners. Bill Aitken mentioned the importance of apprenticeships and talked about the public sector. He should remember that throughout the 1980s and the early 1990s in places such as Glasgow, only the city council supported young people into real training and apprenticeships; the Tories encouraged the private sector to abandon them. Important work is now being done in harnessing the private sector and working with public agencies in my constituency and elsewhere to make a real difference. Many points have been made. There are practical points around the financial inclusion action plan, which Linda Fabiani mentioned. I agree that there are difficulties, but the reality is that it highlights poverty. We all work within the same credit framework, but we manage debt difficulties differently. If a person does not have a bank account, they will not have access to certain things. I welcome Patrick Harvie's generally positive contribution in acknowledging the progress that has been made and asking for further monitoring of such issues. When we discuss such matters, it is important that we have the honesty to understand the size of the challenge without allowing it to create an atmosphere of hopelessness and despair. The Executive and I are happy to work with everybody in Parliament and in our communities—which is crucial—to understand the problems and then to address them as best we can.

Will the member give way?

Over the past few years, an unprecedented amount of funding has been made available to organisations that are involved in the  prevention of domestic abuse. From 2000 until 2006, almost £26 million will have been spent on tackling domestic abuse. A further £6 million will have been spent on the wider forms of violence against women. The funding includes such programmes as the refuge development programme, the domestic abuse service development fund, the Scottish domestic abuse helpline and the domestic abuse court pilot.

Absolutely. The Scottish Executive has recognised the key role of Scottish Women's Aid, both by providing funding and by working with such organisations to develop a strategy. We know that 89 per cent of the victims of domestic abuse are women and that more than 89 per cent of perpetrators are male. The two purposes of our strategy are to support anyone who is a victim of violent intimidation and abuse and to prevent it. Unless we acknowledge the pattern of violence and unless we challenge the attitudes that underpin it and allow it to develop, we will never change it. Scottish Women's Aid and other organisations like it have been crucial not only in supporting survivors of abuse but in raising the hard issue of what causes abuse, which gives us an opportunity to take action to eradicate this evil.

The Scottish Executive is committed to working with organisations and projects that seek to make the changes on which we all agree. Although I do not know the details of the project to which Kenny MacAskill referred, I am more than happy to meet him to talk about it or to receive correspondence from him highlighting the issues, which I will ensure are pursued within the Executive.

When I was a schoolteacher I worked with young people who were often blamed for their non-attendance and difficulties in school, when in fact their behaviour was absolutely logical given what was happening to them in their homes. Sometimes they were afraid to leave their homes because they were afraid of what they would go back to if they left their mother on her own. I understand the issues that Rosemary Byrne highlighted. The £6 million that has been allocated to children's workers recognises that there are people who, although they are not working in Scottish Women's Aid refuges, have a central role in working with young people. It is crucial that as a result of training for teachers and other people who work in schools and elsewhere, they should be able to ask the right question at the right time, to allow young people to explain their circumstances in a safe way and get the help that they and their families need.

Under the spending review, £1.2 billion is available over the next three years for housing support services. Local authorities are being asked to conduct local service reviews in order to identify services that do not fit with strategic priorities and gaps in provision and they are being asked to deliver improved value for money. The Scottish Social Services Council is examining the scope for introducing a training qualification for housing support staff.

We all recognise the challenge that always comes with redistribution and change. In its dialogue with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Executive has acknowledged some of the difficulties that have emerged around the supporting people fund. We should be clear about a number of things, however. First, £1.2 billion over three years is a significant amount of funding in anybody's language. Because it is spread over three years, it is providing stability and an opportunity for local authorities to plan ahead, as they themselves have recognised.  We have discussed with COSLA how the change will be managed. We recognise the difficulties. Transition funding and support will be given to local authorities that are in particular difficulty. In addition, there will be service reviews over the next period. In guidance, we will be asking local authorities to assess the impact of the change. We must recognise the necessity of the change. When we are spending £1.2 billion, it is logical to ensure that there is a match between funding and need. Currently, there are some huge disparities. One local authority is spending £235 per head of population; another authority is spending £16 per head of population. It is clear that funding and need do not match at present. Moving the distribution as we have under the formula brings difficulties—we have acknowledged that. We are working with COSLA and local authorities on the matter. However, we believe that the drive underpinning the change is correct: there should not be a postcode lottery for vulnerable people across Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to close the debate. This is the first members' business debate in which I have had to speak as a minister and I realise that such debates are different, in that we try to join together and agree, so I will do my best to be consensual despite my instincts to the contrary. As Dennis Canavan said, the motion explicitly excludes the question whether St Andrew's day should be a holiday. However, it was interesting that much of the focus of the debate was on that question, despite the fact that the motion, which the Executive is happy to endorse, expresses many areas of consensus. I will comment on the positive matters that the motion highlights and then, if I have time, I will address some of the arguments about whether St Andrew's day should be a national holiday. On that question, I will make one basic point now. Members will be aware that Karen Whitefield has a proposal for a member's bill to establish the rights of shop workers to a holiday on Christmas day. That shows that declaring a day to be a holiday does not mean that it is a holiday for everybody in our communities. Indeed, some people would have to work to provide the kinds of things that members have said we would do with a national holiday, such as playing football. I congratulate Dennis Canavan on bringing the issue to the Parliament. The Executive recognises the importance of St Andrew's day and welcomes the increased recognition for the day here and abroad that has been built up following devolution. St Andrew's day is rightly a day for celebrating and promoting our Scottish identity and Scottish achievements. It is also a day on which we should reflect on the things that have divided us and made us different; we should reflect on our history, good and bad. Earlier today, we talked about some of the historical difficulties that our children faced in our communities. We should aspire to making our Scotland a safe Scotland for all our children, which involves reflecting on our past as well as on our aspirations for the future. It is interesting that mention was made of the St Andrew's day march that the STUC organises to fight racism and fascism, because that fight is one of the challenges that we seek to meet in embracing a notion of Scotland as a place in which everyone's culture, faith and ethnic origins can be celebrated. I was involved in the establishment and early days of that march, when the Labour movement came together with black and ethnic minority community organisations in an understanding that the old symbol of St Andrew's day could be harnessed to celebrate the idea of a new Scotland with a diversity of cultures, where  everyone had the right to have their voice heard. We recognised that we needed to challenge some aspects of our culture. It is great that that march has fostered an understanding of the issues that are expressed in the motion. The ideas and aspirations that people have for using St Andrew's day are, rather than being only symbolic, about what we are, how we live in our local communities and the kind of things that we want to do. As members might be aware, the Executive has agreed that, to capitalise on the increased recognition of St Andrew's day, there should from next year be an annual theme around St Andrew's day, the first of which will be "One Scotland. Many Cultures". That is exactly the right place to start and it will provide an ideal opportunity to celebrate and challenge Scotland's history and traditions as well as our cultural, religious and ethnic diversity. We will ensure that the celebrations are inclusive and acceptable to all faith groups. The details of how we will use the theme will be worked out with local authorities among others and we will publish our proposals in the spring. Dennis Canavan and I are both ex-schoolteachers, so we know that having a holiday means different things to different people. One of the easiest things to do is to ask people, "Would you like another holiday?" The challenge lies in how we implement such a proposal.

I would be interested to see the details of that proposal. Anything that encourages people to come and visit Scotland and to learn more about it has to be welcome. Ted Brocklebank made the point that perhaps we should try to trade nationalism with internationalism in our choice of days on which to have a holiday, which was an interesting juxtaposition. Our "One Scotland. Many Cultures" campaign—and the supporting work—has focused on anti-racism, but it is also about celebrating our cultural diversity and acknowledging the richness that that diversity brings culturally, socially and economically. Through the campaign, we are setting out a vision of the kind of Scotland in which we want to live. St Andrew's day can be harnessed to that purpose, but wishing it does not make it so. Just having the day does not mean that all our communities are united. We all share the challenge of what that will involve for everyone, whatever they are organising. We want  to live in a Scotland where we respect and value the diversity of our communities, where the skills and talents of all are fostered and harnessed and where we welcome new blood and different perspectives. The campaign challenges head on ingrained racist attitudes. It gets people to think about the sort of Scotland in which they want to live and whether their behaviour is getting in the way of that. Racist attitudes, regardless of whether they are consciously held, and behaviour hurt not only those who bear the immediate brunt of the prejudice, but Scotland's international reputation as a progressive, confident and outward-looking nation. Scotland should be dynamic and inclusive, a place where people want to come to live and work. It should also be a place where people, whatever their background and wherever they live, can contribute to the country's well-being and share in its benefits. The Executive supports Dennis Canavan's motion fully. We are aware that he is carrying out further consultation on making St Andrew's day a public holiday and we await the outcome of that with interest. No one should say that to oppose the holiday is to oppose the aspirations that we all share for the way in which St Andrew's day can be progressed. However, there are practical issues to consider. I think that there is a separate issue about rights at work and the number of holidays that we have. Some might argue that, on average, we do reasonably well in terms of holidays. However, it is also true that low-paid workers—generally women, who often have part-time jobs—do not have the same kind of holidays. It would be ironic if our declaring St Andrew's day a public holiday meant that low-paid women workers had to find someone else to deal with the child care. Those are the kinds of hard, serious discussions that we have to have around the practicality of declaring St Andrew's day a national holiday. If all that it meant was that those of us with leverage in our workplaces had the holiday and those of us without that leverage had to manage the consequences of the holiday, none of us would want it to happen. John Swinney talked about confidence, saying that confident people can have a national day. I think that confidence comes out of communities that are strong, respect one another, value and understand difference, celebrate diversity, have a strong economy and good local services and work with and respect faith communities. That is where confidence comes from. If we can use St Andrew's day to celebrate that, it is to be welcomed. As I said, I congratulate Dennis Canavan on securing the debate. We look forward to his report  on the consultation in which he is engaged on declaring St Andrew's day a public holiday. However, I am sure that we all share the belief that St Andrew's day can give us opportunities to unify ourselves around a commitment to safe communities in which we can celebrate our differences and similarities.   Meeting closed at 18:04.

indicated agreement  .

Earlier this month, we debated the serious issue of domestic abuse and its impact on women and children. That debate demonstrated the shared commitment across the chamber to tackling domestic abuse and the need to do all that we can to challenge those men who abuse and to protect people who suffer as a result. During that debate, we set out the Executive's belief that domestic abuse has its foundation in the inequalities between men and women and the abuse of power within a relationship. As long as there is wider acceptance of gender inequality, the task of addressing the issue will be harder. I know that that is a controversial issue for some. Let me make it clear that two separate matters are involved. We can deal with individual victims of crime, however they present themselves and whatever their needs are, within the justice system. However, if we are going to challenge the issues that cause crime, we will have to examine and understand the patterns that develop. An issue that has been raised in this regard is that, while we have a problem with domestic abuse, we also have a problem with, for example, knife crime. It is interesting that the very people who were hesitant about the provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, which sought to prevent youth disorder, address the development of gang culture and challenge young male crime in our communities, are the same people who now do not want to talk specifically about gender-related crime. As we know, we have to understand the pattern of behaviour. In relation to the experience of young men who are the victims of the knife culture that we now live in, we have to recognise that if we do not address the fact that it is young men who carry knives and young men who fall victim to knife crimes, we will not solve that problem either. We should be comfortable debating all issues relating to crime and violence in terms of a proper understanding of what generates them in the first place. No one should be in any doubt that the struggle for women's equality is real and far from over. Lone parents, the majority of whom are women, struggle to run their households. Women are concentrated in the lowest-paid jobs Women experience discrimination and harassment in  employment. Disabled women, women from ethnic minority communities, older women and lesbian and bisexual women experience multiple discrimination. The pay gap between men and women is 11 per cent, a figure that rises significantly for older women and part-time workers. Women are still not visible in boardrooms, senior management positions or public offices in anything like the levels that they should be. Women's inequality is still with us. Nowhere is that inequality more marked than in the violence that is perpetrated against women by men. On this international day for the elimination of violence against women, we are in good company. The United Nations has highlighted the fact that violence against women "is arguably the world's most prevalent, pervasive and systemic problem. It is a problem without borders, a universal scourge on women and their families that knows no boundaries of geography, culture or wealth" and the UN secretary-general, Kofi Annan, said that it is "perhaps the most shameful human rights violation." The UN also states: "Unless tackled systematically at all levels of society with zero-tolerance policies and a concerted effort by the international community and governments to make it socially unacceptable and a crime, gender-based violence will stall any real progress towards equality, development and peace." It is right that we mark today—the UN international day for the elimination of violence against women—with a debate in the Scottish Parliament. Across the world, the day of action—as well as the 16 days of action that follow—is recognised by Governments, voluntary organisations, trade unions, local, national and international groups and men and women who support the campaign to highlight the fact that male violence against women is a human rights issue. We should recognise that that consensus was not always there. It is not that long since the blame for domestic abuse, rape and other sexual assaults on women was somehow laid at the door of women. It was assumed that women had brought that violence upon themselves by the way in which they behaved, the way in which they dressed or the choices that they made about the places in which they lived. That is why the debate on violence against women is important. We should celebrate the fact that there is a growing consensus about the unacceptability of violence against women. In the debate on 4 November, we stated that domestic abuse is just one aspect of violence against women. There are many others and, as  always, the statistics are sobering. We know the figures on domestic abuse: more than 36,000 incidents were reported in 2002 and 11 women died as a result of domestic abuse. Between 1994 and 2003, 237 women were murdered in Scotland—43 per cent by their partners or ex-partners. The total number of male deaths over the same period was higher but, significantly, in 6 per cent of cases the main accused was a partner or ex-partner. Recorded cases of rape and attempted rape increased by 8 per cent to reach 988 in 2003, which is the highest number ever recorded. Those are a few of the reasons why we must act. Violence against women takes many forms such as prostitution, trafficking, pornography and sexual assault. The Executive and I are aware that there are diverse views on those issues. I hope that through the Parliament and its committees we can address those difficulties where there is not an absolutely right or wrong position but where the issues desperately require to be sorted.

I recognise the points that Elaine Smith makes and as the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation (Scotland) Bill goes through the Parliament, there will be an opportunity properly to explore those issues further. The Executive's work in the area of violence against women is at an early stage, but work has begun. Our recent debate on domestic abuse highlighted the progress that has been made during the past few years so I will not repeat those points. It is sufficient to say that the work has been considerable. The wider violence agenda is at an earlier stage. The national group to address violence against women, which was chaired by Mary Mulligan when she was the Deputy Minister for Communities, last year changed its name, its membership and its remit. It is actively working to set its agenda for the way forward. One of our first moves was to give support for infrastructure for and delivery of services to women who are experiencing violence.

The member will be aware that there was a referral to the Scottish Law Commission on the issues of rape and the point that she has raised will be addressed. We look forward to hearing what is said. We abhor rape and sexual assault however it is expressed. We established a new violence against women service development fund at the end of 2003, and in March we awarded £1.5 million in funding to support 21 projects across Scotland. That funding is designed to improve and extend the services that are offered to women, which have been under-resourced for too long. We are the first Government department in the United Kingdom to provide direct support to rape crisis centres, radically transforming their ability to serve and support. The £1.96 million that we are giving over the next two years to 10 local rape crisis groups represents a major investment in an area that has traditionally been under-resourced. We have also provided funding of £100,000 to Rape Crisis Scotland to help it to develop its work, ensuring consistency of service across Scotland. During recent years we have developed close links with Rape Crisis Scotland and the new funding marks a significant investment that will make a real difference on the ground. We have also funded a feasibility study on the establishment of a rape and sexual abuse helpline and £200,000 has been set aside for its future establishment, depending on the study's conclusions. We expect to receive the feasibility report shortly. In order to determine a more strategic approach to that broader work, the national group agreed to establish an expert committee to consider all the issues that might fall under the heading of violence against women. Although its precise remit is yet to be determined the committee's role is likely to include agreeing a working definition of "violence against women"; gathering data on the nature and scope of violence against women; identifying gaps in policy, legislation and provision; and agreeing priorities for action. The establishment of that committee marks the commitment and determination of all the organisations and individuals involved to address the challenges ahead and I look forward to working with it during the coming months. As a contribution to the process we commissioned a comprehensive review of the literature on violence against women, which was completed in September and is available on the Executive website. From reading the literature review I think that it is very clear that the issues ahead of us are complex, are sometimes controversial and are not easy to solve.  One early priority for the expert committee will be to develop of a working definition of "violence against women". Our starting point is likely to be the definition from the 1993 UN Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, which states: "the term 'violence against women' means any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life". We do not doubt that there will be much discussion on the working definition and on which aspects of women's experience it should include. We are aware that there is not agreement on all issues and that different analyses and approaches are advocated on issues such as pornography, prostitution and lap dancing, but I hope that, as we develop our arguments on those issues, people do not lose sight of the direct experiences of women. We should not become obsessed with definitions at the cost of understanding how violence against women impacts on women's lives.

I must therefore skip over the many initiatives that the Executive is taking in a wide range of fields, all of which I am sure would gather huge applause from all sides of the chamber. In conclusion, we recognise the real difference in the way in which women experience violent crime in our communities, although that is not to belittle any victim of other forms of violent crime. It is clear that violence against women takes many forms. I have touched on some of those, but I readily acknowledge that there are others that I have not mentioned. I have set out some of what the Executive is doing and where it hopes to go in the future. I believe that setting our action in a wider context and developing a strategic approach will allow us to move positively towards creating a climate in Scotland in which it is acknowledged that all violence against women is unacceptable. It is the responsibility of us all to challenge the conditions that allow such crime to continue. I look forward to today's debate to mark the United Nations international day for the elimination of violence against women. I move, That the Parliament supports the International Day to Eliminate Violence Against Women on 25 November 2004; affirms its commitment to eradicating all forms of violence against women in Scotland; acknowledges the significant funding that has gone into domestic abuse initiatives over the last four years; welcomes the more recent work of the Scottish Executive in setting up the Violence Against Women Service Development Fund and supporting Rape  Crisis Scotland and the ten rape crisis centres throughout Scotland, and, noting the complexity of many of the issues involved, supports the Executive's decision to set up an expert committee to support the development of a strategic approach to tackling these issues in future.

Independent research will be commissioned early next year to assess the effectiveness of existing planning policies. The recently established environmental advisory forum for renewable energy development and other stakeholders will be involved both in the research and in the subsequent policy review.

I do not know whether the member's question was a test on which of my NPPGs we were going to talk about. I hope that I do not fall at the first hurdle. The forum for renewable energy development was established in response to NPPG 6, but the member is referring in particular to NPPG 16.

Yes, but I get a bit confused when I get to PANs. Consultation on the revised opencast guidance will close on 3 December 2004 and finalised guidance will be issued in spring 2005. The member will be aware that the review already recognises that the current guidance has provided a sound and robust framework that has significantly enhanced planning authorities' ability effectively to control the adverse impact of opencast coal development on local communities and the environment and that, of course, strikes the balance that the member refers to. Although there is some contention about the impact of NPPG 16, it is clear that the overall level of production in Scotland has not been affected by its introduction. Indeed, the level of production in 1998 was 6.2 million tonnes, whereas the level of production in 2002 was 7.1 million tonnes. In any case, the member can rest assured that the Scottish Executive is very much aware of the issues surrounding the matter and will report in the spring. We remain committed to understanding the  environmental issues and the economic pressures on local communities.

The Scottish Executive has commissioned research on minimum standards for open space and the interim findings are now being considered. The research will be published in early 2005 and will feed into the revision of planning policy on open space later next year.

We should make it clear that our commitment in the planning process is to a presumption in favour of playing fields and open space. National planning policy guideline 11 on sport, recreation and open space—which is currently under review—considers how our open space can be used and how our playing fields can be protected. The member will be aware that the presumption is currently that a development will be supported only if it will enhance an area, if an alternative is in place or if there is over-provision. Sportscotland, as a statutory consultee, has the right to object formally, in which case the matter would come before ministers. The Executive is committed to young people's health, to space that is safe and to playing fields that are fit for purpose.

Although I am the minister with responsibility for planning, I am not yet immersed in all the technicalities of the planning system—I have not been awarded my anorak yet. However, as a constituency member, I am aware of the impact of planning on communities. I would be grateful if the member could give me more details of the case that she highlights, so that I can reflect on whether general issues arise from it.  In the context of strong minimum standards for public open space in residential developments, landscaping works must take place early. If they take place later, local people object on the basis that the property is no longer the property that they bought. We have to find a way for communities to have confidence in the planning system and for developers to recognise that early discussion and a commitment to carrying through what they say at an early stage is the way forward. If the member writes to me with the details of the case that she mentioned, I will look into the matters that she has raised.

As I said, we have the interim findings on minimum standards for open space and we will examine them. It is an important issue and the Executive is committed to ensuring that our young people are active. We are also committed to the provision of safe open spaces, which is why, in the planning advice note on open space, there is recognition that local authorities must consider what is needed at local level. A local authority that is committed to supporting its young people must, as part of its strategy, not just leave open space, but be rigorous about how that open space is used and about whether it is safe for children. Cars can be very dangerous and other things are dangerous to young people in our communities. We are keen to work with local authorities on that.

I welcome the opportunity to sum up on behalf of the Executive in what is a very important debate. I would like to think that no one doubts the seriousness of the issues that we have debated this afternoon. I welcome the many thoughtful points that members of all parties have made. I assure members that, if I do not manage to address each point individually, my ministerial colleagues and I will deal with them in writing. That applies especially to the detailed comments that Christine Grahame made. We may divide on some elements of the amendments, but I assure members that the thrust behind them will be taken  seriously, because they genuinely seek to reinforce our strategy on domestic abuse. A debate such as this one raises initial concerns. There is perhaps the feeling that some people might wish to separate domestic abuse from the broader issue of violence against women. I am optimistic that we will have a debate on that broader issue towards the end of the month. We should acknowledge that, in today's debate and in others, we have come a long way towards recognising the issue of the abuse of power. Someone mentioned child sexual abuse. We all acknowledge the role of women's organisations in raising that issue and recognising that a serious problem existed. Another concern is that we simply focus on the what of domestic abuse and are content to study the bruises and pity the victims. Cathy Peattie mentioned other ways in which domestic abuse expresses itself. However, the survivors of domestic abuse do not look for our pity; indeed, I am often struck by their strength and resilience. Our awareness and action now have been shaped by survivors of domestic abuse. As I have said to Mike Rumbles in the past, a test of the reality of an experience is whether self-help groups begin to develop, no matter how difficult the problems are. The commitment in our strategy is not to good words, but to services that meet needs. The young people at last week's listen louder event demonstrated powerful composure and a wish to ensure that other young people are helped by their speaking out. They asked us to listen and act. They want the what to be addressed. We must consider how we support young people who experience domestic abuse. We need to improve refuge provision for women and their families in a way that best meets their needs at particular times; we must deal with individuals' pain and fear; and we must provide a range of support services for children so that somebody is there to ask the right question and to make young people feel safe enough to tell the truth. We heard about young people with mental health problems. I have worked with young people who were described as having such problems because they stayed at home and did not go to school. However, what they were doing was entirely logical and rational, because they thought that if they left home their mother would be dead when they came back. We must listen carefully to what young men and women say. They are entitled to have the what addressed, but we must also address the why. Given that we shall not eradicate domestic abuse only by managing its consequences, we must confront the issues that shape the behaviour of violent and aggressive men. We are concerned about all violence, however it is expressed, such as through male violence on the streets or by  young women who get involved in gangs, but the reality is that domestic abuse is not simply about unfortunate individuals who live under the same roof with another aggressive person who might have a drink problem. Any violence in the home is a problem, but female murder victims are far more likely to have been murdered by a partner or ex-partner than male murder victims are. Violence expresses itself in different ways, but I owe it to my daughter and son—we owe it to our daughters and sons and to all Scotland's young people—to accept and confront the pattern of behaviour that is reflected in the figures on domestic abuse. More than 90 per cent of those who perpetrate domestic abuse are men and more than 90 per cent of the victims are women. That is a pattern in anybody's language and we will not break the pattern if we start by denying that it exists. Many issues have been raised in the debate. I acknowledge the points about funding and I recognise the complicated issues of housing benefit and secure funding. Members can be assured that we will consider those matters further. Margaret Mitchell made the point that initiatives are not enough. The domestic abuse courts are proving successful because women need to know that there is a reason to report a problem. To return to Bill Aitken's point, the domestic abuse courts make the justice system more consistent and show that it takes the problem seriously, which increases levels of reporting. Shiona Baird mentioned the forthcoming family law bill and contact with abusive parents. In the near future, the Minister for Communities and the Minister for Justice will meet representatives from Scottish Women's Aid to discuss its concerns on that issue. I acknowledge Stewart Stevenson's points about mobile phones and helplines, but we must remember that women are sometimes frightened even to be seen with a telephone or telephone number. How deep the problem lies. Maureen Macmillan made a particular point about the promotion of the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001. I can assure her that I will ask my officials and Justice Department officials for a report on how that legislation is being taken forward. Jackie Baillie spoke about issues in the justice system, and I will pursue those matters with the Minister for Justice and the Lord Advocate. Courageous women survivors of abuse are beginning to shape the way in which the justice system affects all victims of crime.

We can do that. We know that the police have moved a long way from the characterisations that have been used in the past. I am aware that a minister has visited the Tayside domestic abuse service in the past, and we will consider the points that have been made on that subject. This has been a positive debate, and recognition has been given to a positive strategy. We recognise the range of points that have been made and the consensus that exists. Although we will not support the amendments, we will nevertheless be united in our commitment to dealing with the issues that are addressed in the amendments and the motion.

Members might notice that although I am delighted to wind up the debate in my new position as Deputy Minister for Communities, I am growling at them more than usual, because I have a problem with my throat. The minister has agreed to take over if my voice goes altogether—I think that that would be the first recorded occasion in history on which I allowed a man to speak on my behalf. The housing debate is an interesting debate. When we reflect on our lives, housing tells a story about our families, histories and priorities at different stages. As members know, I come from a crofting family and I was brought up in the west end of Glasgow when it was still Anderston. My family was not allowed a council house because my father was at sea, so we lived in the private rented sector, which was not a comfortable place to be. People in such circumstances have a better chance of securing good housing now than they did in those days, although a great deal more remains to be done. The communities portfolio understands that we must consider access to mainstream services. Just as we understand that education is not just about providing schools and that it is difficult for some young people to access education, we know that the same thing is true in housing. Some  people regard housing as a simple matter of supply and demand. I think that all members welcome the Executive's commitment following its review of affordable housing. A number of points have been raised about that and I cannot go into much detail. However, significant money has been spent in rural areas to deal with the problem of affordable housing and there is significant understanding of the way in which the housing market has developed in different places. Susan Deacon and Pauline McNeill highlighted that point.

I want to make progress. Pauline McNeill made an important point about the possibility of using the planning legislation to set quotas for affordable housing. We can draw on our research and learn from the approach in Ireland and we will bring forward the matter at a later stage.

I want to progress a little more. Housing is not simply about bricks and mortar. Those of us who attended a Scottish Women's Aid event yesterday understand that housing need in certain circumstances is about far more than the provision of a home. Women's organisations made that point in the past when they discussed refuges with local authorities and argued that women should be provided not just with a place to stay, but with other support. Safe, warm, desirable homes are not just about putting bricks on bricks. In my own city, we know that it is not just about investment. Historically, there were cycles of investment in Glasgow that did not stick. One of the elements of the Executive's housing policy of which I am most proud is that the Executive understands what people in communities understand: if people are given power over their lives in relation to housing, they make decisions that make a real difference. I did not recognise Sandra White's description of the GHA. One of my first engagements as Deputy Minister for Communities was an event last week. The room was packed with 200 tenants, who were talking about what they would do in their communities as part of local housing organisations. As a famous person once said, there was a buzz about the place that suggested that we were transforming housing in that area. I want to talk about the debate on the impact of the right-to-buy policy on homelessness. There is no simple correlation between the two. Two thirds of homelessness applications are made in areas where there is surplus housing, so the situation is more complex. Shelter Scotland and others have persuaded us that as we legislate we must support  people, rather than just offer them a home. There is a clear commitment to review the right-to-buy policy and we will do so. However, we must be clear. The brass neck of the Tories never astounds me too much. We all know that in the context of Tory cuts, underfunding, rises in rents and repairs problems people were driven by economic logic to buy their homes. However, we must also be honest and recognise that there was no golden age of council housing. Not only did people in some circumstances feel forced to buy their own homes, but people voted with their feet out of a sector that did not match their aspirations.

The member has made his contribution. The problems of the social rented sector are not simply about the right-to-buy policy. However, the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 recognised that the right to buy must be restricted. Because of the right-to-buy policy, the reality in some localised areas might be that there is no opportunity to rent housing and people cannot move from one area to another. The review of the policy can address such matters. It is equally true that, in other areas, the right-to-buy policy has not caused such problems and offers opportunities for communities to enjoy more stability through a positive process, because people are buying into communities for the first time, rather than being sent to those areas because there are no good houses left.

The idea that the right-to-buy policy causes homelessness is simplistic in the extreme. As I indicated, the majority of homelessness applications are made in areas in which there is surplus housing. That is why investment in making communities safer is as important as straightforward housing investment. It is why action on antisocial behaviour is so important. It is outrageous that the Tories talk about problems with public sector tenants in the face of clear and mounting evidence that there is a significant problem in the private sector. Landlords who have no regard for tenants or their neighbours are moving into potentially fragile communities and destroying those communities. Despite evidence of such activity, the Tories refuse to support any legislation that would attempt to regulate that sector.

Linda Fabiani talked about people's aspiration to move into good housing in good areas, so by implication, there must be bad areas.

That is why it was so important that cities such as Glasgow drove investment into all areas so that people would have a say in decisions. People did not have to move to get a good house; they could find one in their own area. That sent a strong signal to people that, as Patrick Harvie said, the public social rented sector is a reasonable housing choice. We are investing in that sector, rather than destroying it. I notice a significant change in Scottish Socialist Party's approach. In the debate around stock transfer, the SSP told us that that would represent privatisation, but now when we talk about the balance between the public and private sector the SSP tells us that housing associations are part of the public sector. Of course housing associations are part of the public sector; the idea that they have anything to do with what happens in the private sector is bizarre.

We want to ensure that the social rented sector is reasonable—

It is bizarre that Tommy Sheridan wants to give anyone a lecture about debating in this chamber. I want to mention a number of points. Pauline McNeill mentioned HMOs. I would be delighted to meet her and people from her area, because one of the big issues that we need to discuss is the law of good intentions and the consequences of laws that might not achieve what we want them to achieve. We need to discuss issues around homelessness. I find it odd that members who argued for tenants' rights complain when those rights become reality. The Scottish National Party's approach is precisely the one to take if we want to encourage Government to be timorous and not to be radical. The SNP says that we should give people rights, but when people, naturally, want to exercise those rights, the SNP kicks the Government that gave them those rights. The reality is that major activity is going on. The homelessness monitoring group, on which Shelter Scotland, the SFHA, COSLA and the Scottish Council for Single Homeless are represented, agrees that making homelessness more visible is a key indicator of success. The Scottish Executive strategy, taken as a whole, understands the complexities and recognises the importance of investing significant amounts of money in addressing how housing problems develop throughout Scotland. The power  of the Scottish Parliament is that it can discuss how housing issues are expressed differently in different places, without calling for a one-size-fits-all policy on housing. I urge members to support the motion in Malcolm Chisholm's name.

The situation is a bit more complex than that. In Glasgow, people can choose to take rented accommodation but they do not want to because that accommodation requires investment. That is an important aspect. It is wrong simply to say that there are no houses.

Will the member give way?

I point out that my obsession with the pronunciation of my name is intended to ensure that nobody thinks that I could have any connection with the Tory ex-Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont.

On the need for truth and for a serious debate, does the member accept that Glasgow, which is the city that is best served for hospitals, also has the poorest health and the lowest life expectancy? The debate should be about not just buildings and services, but how we address ill health, which is often worse the closer people are to a hospital.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute; if my speech is less measured than normal, it is because my time has been cut. I acknowledge that many members who have spoken in the debate know a great deal more than I do about the complexities of the issues, but I want to add some comments of my own. In passing, I commend Wendy Alexander for her speech, coming from where she does. I also commend Margo MacDonald for her measured comments—she has obviously tracked the issue for a long time.  I have very mixed feelings about the Parliament building. First, I would have preferred a different site but given that that site was Glasgow, and in Glasgow Pollok for preference, I did not expect to secure a majority for that view. Secondly, to use a Glasgow phrase, I am mortified by the cost of the Parliament. The issue is consistently raised in my constituency, often with great anger, and I have found it hard to find an answer for those who feel that there is one set of rules for the Parliament and another set of rules for the rest, and who feel that if the Parliament had been anywhere else, such overruns would not have been tolerated, no matter how dear their projects and initiatives were to them. Although I accept the idea of ministerial responsibility, the reality is that it cannot result in avoidance of responsibility by those who were involved as professional experts. There is not a local authority official in the country that, as a matter of course, would be given such protection. In a world of increased specialisation, it cannot be the case that we just have to hope that ministers can know everything and be everywhere. We have to rely on professionals and we have to expect them to be accountable for what they say. I want to comment on the saga of the building causing disaffection with Scottish politics and the Parliament. I do not think that it is quite as simple as to say that one caused the other. If we cast our minds back to the early days of the new Parliament, it seemed as if we were constantly under siege, whether it was about section 2A or the allowances debate, or whether it was the search for headlines by some MSPs making a fuss about medals. I recall my huge sense of frustration at getting a kicking over issues for which I felt we had no control. In that context of being under siege, not only did the building come to encapsulate our alleged uselessness, but the pressure infected and affected decisions surrounding the Parliament building itself, and created an atmosphere that was not the best in which anybody could make reasonable decisions. Equally, I acknowledge that debate about the Parliament itself—when the votes were not whipped—inevitably got rolled up into the general wish of those in Government to defend themselves and the understandable wish of those in Opposition to find a stick with which to beat Executive backs, particularly that of Donald Dewar. I found it unedifying and depressing during Lord Fraser's inquiry and in the debate today that there is a desire on the part of some, in search of cheap headlines, to impugn Donald Dewar's integrity and to attach to Donald Dewar—of all people—personal vanity. I wish to say something about modernisation of the civil service. The suggestion by the SNP that  there should be a Scottish civil service misses the point. While the Sir Humphrey of "Yes, Minister" may be a caricature, there is an essential truth within the caricature that the civil service can hold its own particular view of the world, that it has significant control over the levers of power and that, while ministers come and go, it will be there forever. The current view of the civil service—that we should get clever people to run whatever needs to be run—is not acceptable. The problem is that if those clever people are drawn from a narrow social, economic and educated group—that is not about geography, but other issues—we will find it difficult to get real change, real understanding of the problems and real understanding of what needs to be done. I welcome the fact that the Executive and parliamentary committees have worked hard to draw in different authoritative voices in Scotland, because they understand that there are people throughout Scotland who have knowledge that is shaped by their experience and understanding of how things really work. Members should consider what has happened in women's politics and to our understanding of violence against women because we listened to people other than policy wonks. We need to open up the civil service and modernise it, like the justice system and the other powerful forces in society. We have been given opportunities in our parliamentary committees to scrutinise how those systems work. It is not just about equity and fairness; it is about understanding the real problems in our society, understanding the solutions and harnessing what people already know needs to be changed to make Scotland a better place. I welcome the Fraser report. I note that since it was published it has held far more authority than other recent reports. We need to hold on to that. Generally, what has been said has been accepted. We need to use it positively and we need to be determined that in continuing with our work in the Scottish Parliament we are not overwhelmed by our beautiful surroundings, but instead use them to speak on behalf of the people whom we represent.

I hope that the minister agrees with me that in any future dialogue with the children's commissioner it is important that ministers express the strong view that the needs of young people such as those in my constituency who are chased away from youth  facilities because of the behaviour of a small minority, or who are kept in their homes because their parents are afraid to let them go out as a result of what is happening in their communities, should be discussed. The commissioner should be listening to those young people as a matter of urgency and working with the Executive and other agencies that are trying to make our communities as safe as possible.

I welcome the opportunity to speak for the first time in this Parliament building and to contribute to our ambition for one Scotland. By its nature, this debate is diverse, so I will highlight several issues of importance to my constituents—I am not sure that trees will feature. The strength of the economy is a central issue, but it must be harnessed and given purpose by our social goals. There has been debate about the purpose of enterprise. For some, there have been signals that enterprise agencies are in the business of creating wealth but not in the business of social justice—the wealth is created and then we have to hope for the best that benefit will follow. However, history tells us that we cannot leave that to chance. There is a good example of that in my constituency. There will be massive private sector development, possibly creating 3,000 jobs, partly as a result of the construction of the M77. We have brought together the private sector developer, the unions and all the relevant agencies to consider how such a development, which will have a huge impact on the nature of the area, can be harnessed to create economic opportunities for local people. Reflecting on that, I will highlight some issues in relation to enterprise and enterprise education. In passing, I should say that it is a novelty to see the private sector investing in public sector education given that, thus far, all the traffic in that area has been in the other direction, with public sector subsidies to private sector education. I am certainly looking forward to scrutinising the proposed charities bill and hearing what justification there can possibly be for the  continuation of that charitable subsidy. On enterprise education, we should not allow the commitment of money to our local schools to give the power to determine what is going on in the curriculum. We also have to demand that serious consideration be given to co-operative enterprise, given our commitment to a co-operative development agency and our understanding that co-operative approaches can support economic growth and deliver on social goals. In our discussions on enterprise, we have to be much more challenging about what is deemed to be acceptable and enterprising. For example, we know how dangerous the construction industry is; part of that danger is caused by the way in which the industry is organised and how work is subcontracted down. We must challenge those who define as entrepreneurial risk the consequences that are borne by the people who are working at the bottom in that industry. I welcome the fact that long-term unemployment in my constituency has fallen sharply, but there is still a problem with wage disparities. In my constituency, wages consistently lag behind the national level. We must ensure that measures are taken so that economic benefit is enjoyed evenly throughout our constituencies and that we find ways of bringing high-quality jobs into constituencies such as mine. Given that I represent a disadvantaged constituency such as Pollok in a city that has to deal with serious disadvantage, it would be remiss of me not to challenge everyone in the chamber to acknowledge the importance and cost of a real commitment to one Scotland. Our Scotland is fractured by inequality; that is one of the hardest debates into which we must now drill. We share a general aspiration to encourage healthy eating, to challenge our drink culture and to tackle smoking and the use of illegal drugs. Those general aspirations, when matched by money, can have an effect. However, we also must grasp the stark reality that, even though our young people throughout Scotland experiment with drugs, a disproportionate number of the poor and disadvantaged die. Throughout Scotland there are smokers, but it is the poor and disadvantaged who resist the health messages. While we debate access to local health services, it is the citizens in Glasgow who, despite having close geographical access to sophisticated services, feature most prominently among those who are the least healthy and who die youngest. At some point, we will have to talk more about health and education in their context and not just about the particulars of those services. We will  have to consider unsafe communities, fractured families, poor job opportunities and the structural problems that face a city such as Glasgow. We will have to confront the reality that general spend will not, of itself, be enough. We will have to look at the balance of how we direct our money and how we get real value for that money. In taking ownership of the notion of one Scotland, everyone in the Parliament will have to understand that it is inevitable that there will be a discussion about moving from simply making general provision for everyone in the hope that it will trickle down to the poor and disadvantaged towards targeting and focusing on the experiences of the poor and disadvantaged and examining how those can sometimes be reinforced. I welcome the opportunity to continue in the new Parliament building the debate that we started in our old home about how to put social justice at the centre of the Executive's economic programme. I look forward to playing a part in developing that agenda through legislation in the coming days.

Will the minister take an intervention?

It would be a bad start to this debate to suggest that people in communities who are raising such issues are imagining them. There are issues to do with unrecorded crime and people having confidence in the system's ability to deal with such problems, so it is important that there is a drive to make people feel that it is worth their while to report the difficulties that they face; otherwise people will be led to believe that their difficulties are of their own making.

Does the minister agree that it would be more intriguing to discuss what the Inland Revenue would do if an organisation did not secure Scottish charitable status but continued to be deemed to be a charity in other parts of the country and was therefore still eligible for tax relief? Will she assure me that that issue will be raised in her discussions with the Inland Revenue and others? She will know that the Communities Committee is already engaged in dialogue on the matter with her Westminster colleagues. I trust that she will continue to be robust on the connection between charitable status and tax relief.

Will Phil Gallie give way?

Oh, come on.

My mother would have been deeply distressed, if she were still with us, to be described as middle class.

There might or might not be an issue about recognition of volunteers. I know that citizens in Glasgow are recognised at certain times of the year and that people really value that recognition. However, the real reward for many volunteers whom I know and who work with people with learning disabilities or with women who have survived domestic abuse is when Government policy matches their demands and shows an understanding that they have taken the right approach to services. We have seen particular evidence of that understanding in respect of  women's organisations. I suggest that getting Government to listen to what voluntary sector organisations and volunteers have to say about their experiences is about as good an award as anyone can get.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and I apologise for my late arrival. The Communities Committee was in a video link with our Westminster colleagues to discuss the draft Charities Bill, so that is why I was late. I believe that that link was a first for the two Parliaments. I apologise to the minister for missing a bit of her speech, but if Mike Rumbles agreed with every word that she said, I will have to look at the Official Report very carefully—perhaps I will reserve judgment until I have done that. It is important to celebrate volunteers and volunteering and to recognise their importance. I welcome the continuing commitment from the Executive and local government to work in proper partnership with those who give voluntarily of their time. Like many others, I am surrounded by examples of how I benefit, how my family benefits and how the communities that I represent benefit from the voluntary activities of others, whether through the beavers and the brownies, parent-teacher associations, church-run groups, the localised support for asylum seekers in my community or the gala days in my constituency,  which give me hours of endless fun queuing up for face painting. At a more serious level are the volunteers who make organisations distinctive, such as those who will make Glasgow Housing Association fulfil our dream of a housing organisation that is responsive to local needs, or those in housing co-operatives and citizens advice bureaux who not only deliver a service but are part of shaping that service, telling Government what it needs to be. We need to celebrate the time and effort of those people. When, as a young woman and political activist, I sat about thinking that I was being busy by talking to people like me about how we were going to change the world, such volunteers were just getting on with it. They understood that action is sometimes just as powerful as words. Sometimes, volunteers are characterised as do-gooders who do good things for those who are bereft and poor, but people are not one-dimensional. During the Communities Committee's consideration of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, we went to communities where people had strong things to say about antisocial behaviour, but the same people were trying to solve those problems; they were talking about youth disorder, but were running youth clubs at the same time. People come to voluntary work for all sorts of reasons, perhaps because of their life experience. A young girl whom I taught in Castlemilk was mercilessly bullied, but while she was dealing with the bullying, she worked in her local community, gave of her time and talked to young people who were experiencing the same thing. Volunteers often bring more than simply their time: they bring their life experience. However, in some of our communities, there is an issue over the need for disclosure, which might deter people who have something to say about what happened to them, and we need to be careful that it does not silence them and stop others learning from their experience. I am conscious that I do not give back the benefits that I have experienced from voluntary activity, but I know that I will—at some point in my life, I will go and work in the Marie Curie hospice at Hunters Hill in Glasgow, because I know that formal organisations can never give the compassionate care that that organisation can give. Volunteers and paid members of staff who support families and individuals who are suffering enhance services, rather than substitute for them. They bring something very special. In my community, volunteers often do much more successfully what formal organisations are charged with doing. I am thinking of local youth clubs and voluntary football groups, which reach  out to youngsters in a way that formal groups and formal services never can. I am aware that we do not make it easy for those groups to get the benefit of the investment that we want to put into sporting and youth activities. We need to consider how we can build a bridge for groups that do things for nothing, as we are investing in more formal structures that might not give us as good a service as those groups can. We should recognise that volunteers do not just work in the voluntary sector—for example, people volunteer in health and education. People's motives can vary widely. My mother became a volunteer after she was widowed, because that filled a space: she had been caring before, and was now able to give a bit of time to others. We know that the voluntary sector could not survive without volunteers but, in recognising that, we should not categorise volunteers and put them into boxes. We should recognise the diversity among volunteers, and in doing so, we must not over-organise. There is a danger that, in wanting to work with the sector and to recognise those who volunteer, we wring the goodness out of what is the finest of human instincts. I understand that the balance is a fine one. We know why we need to regulate. We know that there are people who have sought to abuse the system in order to damage volunteering. We must be careful, but we also have to listen when people tell us about being deterred from doing the things that they have always done because they do not fit into the same boxes any more. We must be careful about creating jobs for those who manage the people who do the volunteering. On the issue of charity law, there is an important connecting discussion around the charitable sector and volunteering. Sometimes, we seek to rationalise in a way that is not necessarily rational. I often ask people in my community why they volunteer. I cannot imagine anything more ghastly than taking 20 brownies off to brownie camp, but I am very glad that people do it. There are people who do much bigger things week in, week out. For example, often carers are also involved in delivering voluntary activities in their communities. It is almost as if busy people do even more. We must be careful that, in trying to manage and support those who volunteer, we do not try to do the impossible in rationalising what is an aspect of the human condition that speaks to the good in us all. I welcome the debate and the Executive's commitment. I congratulate and celebrate all the volunteers who do so much for others in my area and throughout Scotland.

On behalf of the Labour party, I welcome this opportunity to support the bill. We must acknowledge the significance of what we are doing today. As members have said in other debates, we should see the bill not as an event but as a process, and we must now work to make enforcement of its measures a real feature of people's lives. I thank the clerks and committee members—Labour colleagues and other members—for making the process easy to convene. I also thank the ministers—Margaret Curran and Mary Mulligan—who played good cop and bad cop. Perhaps Margaret will find that I am nicer to people who disarm me by not arguing with me all the time. It is significant that we have finally received the acknowledgement that antisocial behaviour is a real problem. It is also significant that both the Green party and the SSP have changed their positions.

We have brought out into the open the narrative of people's lives. [ Interruption. ]

I know that it was got up by the media that we stigmatised the people who were strong enough to raise concerns. The reality is that the bill acknowledges their courage. We do not blame victims for their intolerance; we work with them. There is also an understanding that we need to know how the system works and how public policy can have perverse results in communities. We deal not only with individual experience but with general consequences. We understand that if we do not support the bill, nothing will stand still and that if those who complain are not helped, it could empower those who perpetrate problems and silence those whose complaints are not addressed. If the police are not given the powers to work in the community and to carry out their duties, they express frustration. I congratulate the Executive on its willingness to listen to organisations, individuals and MSPs and to make changes to the bill. However, I must reflect on the nature of the debate, in which I was particularly struck by the virtual silence of the SSP and the Green party. There is clear evidence of the Executive's being influenced into changing its  position, with which I did not always agree. However, I was struck by the mismatch between the Greens' and the SSP's noisy opposition to the bill and their scaremongering about its motives, and how they dealt with the responsibility of taking on the hard work of confronting in debate the Executive and those who have supported the bill. I acknowledge that others in the chamber did that difficult job. We dealt with nearly 500 amendments at stage 2. The Green party, which was going to resist the bill to the death, submitted a sum total of four amendments to challenge our position. On behalf of the Labour party, I am proud to have been part of a process that showed the Parliament's openness and the Executive's willingness to listen. As individual members, we have the challenge of dealing not with policies that are dreamed up by the policy wonks, but with Government policy that is shaped and informed by those who will live with its consequences. MSPs have a responsibility to be a bridge between their communities and Parliament. That is what the bill represents and I am proud to support its passing.

There is no more fundamental issue in antisocial behaviour legislation than that of private landlords. There has been consultation. The committee's pre-legislative consultation came up with something that we did not expect. Throughout communities, people raised the problem of private landlords. The Tories seem to be comfortable when they are talking about individual instances of antisocial behaviour and not addressing some of the structural problems that create, promote and feed on antisocial behaviour. We have to focus on that. The proposed legislation is not a threat to the private sector; it is intended to protect it. The Scottish Association of Landlords said that it was distressed by the damage to landlords that is caused by the actions of some individual private landlords. There are some private landlords who  are not in the business of providing homes for rent, but are in the business of making money in the easiest of ways, with no responsibility and affording tenants and their neighbours no rights whatsoever. Some landlords are not known; others are abusive when they are contacted. They must be found and challenged. It is not just about the poor behaviour of individual tenants. In some communities, if we manage to evict an individual problem tenant, the next one who is not being managed causes the same problems because the landlords are not dealing with the problems as they emerge. There are broader problems when people are being driven out of their homes, selling their properties or getting a management transfer if they can because they can no longer live with intolerable behaviour. I do not know why some people in the social rented sector are saying that the proposal is a step too far. The social landlords in my community are saying that they are damaged by private-landlord lets in their areas, which affect their ability to sustain their properties. In such communities, it is destructive, dispiriting and distressing to find oneself in a situation in which one can neither move, because one's property can no longer be sold, nor stay, because one cannot feel safe. Public moneys are feeding the problem. That situation must be challenged. If people are receiving rent, they have an obligation to act—nothing is for nothing. It is vital that we address that connection. The obligation should not be on the person who is entitled to housing benefit, but on the person who is in receipt of housing benefit. I would be concerned if we were to set up a scheme that would not allow landlords to receive rent because they were not registered as landlords, even though the housing benefit system will pay someone money so that they can give that money to someone who is not registered as a landlord. It is important that work is done with Westminster to address that situation. That will concentrate the minds of those people who view the present set-up as being simply a money-making opportunity, to the extent that they stipulate that someone who is in work or is not in receipt of housing benefit cannot hold one of their leases. The behaviour of such people is not in the interests of tenants or communities. Public moneys are working against the grain of the money that has been committed to community regeneration. We must support the proposed scheme, if for no other reason than to address that need within communities. We need to work with the people who have concerns about how the scheme will be implemented on the ground. By breaking the simple connection between owning a  property and receiving a rent without obligation, we will be doing a very good thing for local communities.

Does Bill Aitken agree that there are also landlords who do not take responsibility in that way? Sometimes we cannot find them to make them responsible and if we make contact with them we are subject to abuse. The point that we are addressing is that although not all landlords are like that, some are. The measures that we are talking about will protect good landlords and hunt down those who are not interested in providing any service to anybody in their community.

rose—

I thank Irene Oldfather for her ingenuity in seeking to incorporate an important issue in the bill. I recognise the issue that she has highlighted, as I have had to deal with it in my constituency. Although I acknowledge what the minister has said, it is important that we obtain a commitment that the matter be re-examined. I will provide an example from my area of a problem with private lanes. The fact that the lanes are private means that they are not maintained, lit or kept safe, but the fact that they are lanes means that they are deemed to be rights of way and so cannot be closed off. Local people in my constituency have got together and have managed to secure the agreement of the police, the fire service, the environmental health department and, more generally, the council itself that the lanes should have gates at either end of them, both because they have become a place for people to gather and because a great deal of difficulty is being caused in neighbouring properties, which are being damaged and subjected to graffiti. The difficulty is that, in order to put up the gates, which they are happy to pay for, the local people have to seek planning permission. To do that costs a significant amount of money and there is no guarantee that planning permission will be obtained, because the lanes could be deemed, technically, to be a right of way—even though everyone acknowledges that they are the site of a social problem. The fact that we are asking the planning system to address that situation is nonsense. The minister said that we could use other powers, such as the power to disperse groups but, if we were to put gates at either end of the lanes, we would not need to police them in the way in which they are being policed at the moment. No matter how good the group dispersal power will be, it lacks that simplicity of approach. If a simple, practical measure such as putting up gates could be used, we should make it easy for communities to do that. That is not what happens currently. In another part of my constituency, there is a private lane beside an estate. Although the lane has become a vehicle for young and older people to abuse the residents, it is not possible for the residents to pay for a gate to be put up to prevent the difficulty, even though it would cost them to do something different. I do not agree that, when such situations become antisocial behaviour problems, we should try to find a solution—at the  cost of residents—in the planning system. I understand the technical issues that the minister raised, but I ask for a commitment that the Executive will return to what is an important issue. People are not looking for the police to carry out hard attacks on such problems; they have come up with simple solutions that they are happy to facilitate, but the system works against their doing that.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate on this aspect of the bill. Some of the opposition to it has been overblown, overstated and unhelpful. It is reasonable to talk about giving young people something better to do, but some things are going on in our communities that are simply unacceptable. We should not try to make excuses for that behaviour, no matter how bored people are. I agree with Tommy Sheridan that we need to consider what works, but we should not squeeze our views on what is happening in our communities into a preset view of the world. When I first became an MSP, I was stunned to discover that the police found it difficult to police this kind of problem. We have to confront that issue and consider how to make progress. The problem is that groups gather and cause serious and persistent problems in communities. We are not talking about young people who gather and do nothing wrong and we are not talking about a problem that is exaggerated by intolerant older people. We are not being anti-young. Indeed, the people who have come to me on this issue are mums, dads, grans and granddads, all of whom are committed to giving children a better chance. People talk about stigmatising young people, but we ought not to stigmatise people in our communities who have the courage to raise their voices and say that there is a problem. People are intimidated, silenced and in fear. I accept that such things do not happen throughout the country, but in some places in Scotland we have, in effect, outdoor youth clubs. It is part of the youth culture for people to gather there. They gather in places that are near youth facilities and they do so after they have used those facilities. The reality is that current powers are insufficient and cannot deal with the kind of group disorder that is occasionally generated. Tommy Sheridan says that the police should simply clear those young people away. I have asked the police why they do not do that and they say, "But we can't stop them coming back." We therefore end up in a cycle with the young people going round and round.  The Tories tell us that we already have breach of the peace provisions. However, the groups to my left in the chamber are uncomfortable with the use of such provisions because they do not regard those provisions as being specific enough or as offering enough protection. In addition, the provisions do not deal with the particular issue of group disorder. The police have told me of the problem of not being able to get witnesses. They say that it is difficult for them to identify the individuals responsible. The cumulative group effect leads to particular problems. That is why we are talking about a specific power to deal with group disorder. The Tories also say that there are not enough police. I will fight hard to get sufficient policing into my community to enforce these measures. However, the police tell me that even when they target an area and send in lots of police, they still cannot deal with problems. The difficulty is not just to do with police numbers but to do with the structures under which the police operate. We are saying that enough is enough. The measure that is being introduced is preventive: it will warn people to keep away, giving communities some respite; it will prevent poor behaviour from escalating into something more serious; and it will prevent the exploitation of some young women who are drawn into groups. Do not imagine that if groups gather, there are not some predatory people round about them. We have to send out the message that harassment is unacceptable. Even if behaviour is defended under the guise of youth culture, we do not want to live in a Scotland where young men in particular are encouraged to believe that gang culture is in any way acceptable. In some communities, we are seeing a move from one culture to the other. We have to strive at all times for a balance of rights in our communities. None of us has an absolute right to do whatever we want. I am comfortable with putting the argument to the young people in my constituency that we may have to restrict them a little if we are to protect people elsewhere. The approach that is being taken is a modest one. The bottom line is that it allows communities a clear point of negotiation with the police and other agencies. Where there is a problem, it allows the community to say to the police and other agencies, "There is a power. Can we now work together to deal with the problem?"

I support amendment 49. We simply have to recognise that there are different tenures. We must ensure that there is a balance of rights across different tenures, but do the members who oppose the amendment think that it would be logical to argue that people in the social rented sector should never be evicted, because there is no process for evicting someone who owns their home?

I cannot take an intervention, because I have only three minutes. Equally, if taking action against one person in a family has an impact on the rest of the family, does that mean that we should never take punitive measures against anyone who has a family? That does not seem logical. We must acknowledge that we need to use the levers that are available. I do not recognise Elaine Smith's characterisation of ordinary working-class people as living in the social rented sector and the rich as living in privately owned homes. The reality is that ordinary people bought their own homes because they felt that they were getting insufficient protection when they were tenants. If we are to sustain the social rented sector, we must ensure that the rights of tenants and their families are protected. If my child was being bullied by the youngster next door, I would have the right to ask someone to act.

I am sorry, but I have only a limited amount of time. We are not saying that action would be taken against people who have done nothing. Action would be taken only when a serious problem had been identified. For example, when youngsters in a family in Glasgow harassed vulnerable asylum seekers who lived next door, the only option was to move the asylum seekers or to evict the family. Amendment 49 would allow us to address the problem, to create harmony in the community, to work on the issues that are causing difficulties and to give people a chance. Elaine Smith says that if we are putting in place support packages we should just offer them to people anyway. However, the existence of the provision would concentrate minds.  I would understand the anxiety if we were creating a power to evict people immediately. That is not what amendment 49 would do; it would give a breathing space in which people would be asked to consider their behaviour and the behaviour of their youngsters. That is a protection for youngsters who are in the social rented sector, not a threat. People must be honest about the SSST; it is not a punitive measure, but a supportive one, although it is one step beyond voluntary support. Such measures are recognised in every field that we work in. We should not allow amendment 49 to be characterised in a false debate about equality—it is about protecting those in the social rented sector, not attacking them.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will make a brief contribution on the basis that the amendments cover general  issues in relation to antisocial behaviour orders—I will not focus on the technicalities. I seek reassurance from the minister that the process by which ASBOs are secured and monitored will be kept closely under review. She will be aware that the Scottish Retail Consortium was keen to argue that the police should have the right on their own to promote ASBOs. That proposal was not supported at stage 2, but we want the police to be proactive and to work with others in developing ASBOs where they are necessary. Although I accept that we do not currently want the police to have that power, I seek reassurance that generally the Executive will keep the process under review and consider evidence from other places, such as England, where the police have that power. If, at some stage in the future, it is felt necessary to review the series of mechanisms around ASBOs, I hope that the Executive will be willing to do that.

Does the member accept that people deserve protection regardless of whether the behaviour changes? We should be able to prohibit the person on whom the ASBO is imposed from coming near the individual whom they have harassed even if they decide later that that harassment was unfair. I am thinking of women who are victims of domestic abuse. People have a right to be protected from such behaviour even if it seems that the person has changed.

There is no problem with amendment 40—everyone is in favour of consultation—but it is worth while to say at the beginning of the stage 3 debate that people in my constituency and other constituencies did not wait to be consulted on whether they thought there was a problem. They were determined to stand up for their communities and to say that there was a problem, and they deserved to be listened to. We are having the debate because people in my constituency and elsewhere had had enough. They did not wait for somebody to ask them what would be a good strategy; they said that what was going on was unacceptable and told us that we had a responsibility to address the problem.

I am not against consultation—it has a role—but we should congratulate the people in local communities who demanded that we listen to them. Because we did not listen to people, the problems got worse and worse until we had a crisis, which was a much bigger and more difficult problem. My point is that,  in consulting, we must recognise that people have already expressed strong views. We must ask agencies, police and housing authorities now to listen to what people are saying, and to get people involved at an early stage, so that we do not have more difficult problems later on. I do not have a problem with supporting Donald Gorrie's amendment, because it is important to talk to young people. However, we have to be imaginative about how we consult people. Some consultations manage to get about 14 people in a room, but when communities organise themselves, they manage to get 1,000 people in a hall. We should not simply speak to those people with whom we feel comfortable discussing such issues. If we speak to people, and offer them solutions, we will perhaps have community harmony in dealing with issues, rather than conflict.

I congratulate Kenny MacAskill both on securing the debate and on his speech on a very important issue for us all. I add to his my congratulations to those who have been involved in organising international refugee week. I acknowledge in particular the role of the Scottish Refugee Council. I am aware of the excellent work that is being done in my constituency by the local integration network and I acknowledge the efforts that are being made in my constituency at local level to support refugees and asylum seekers. Before I go on to the substance of my remarks, I bring members' attention to an excellent little storytelling project—the village project in St James' church in Pollok, in my constituency. Members who have not seen the book that was produced as a result of the project should look for it—it is called "Buffalo Horns". The project brought together people from the wide array of countries that are represented in the greater Pollok area, who put their traditional stories and experiences into the book. It is stunning to read about the range of experiences that people in one small area of one city have had. Young people in the community and schools were also involved in the project. I was struck by what the book represents for the area and it made me think about my background and history. So many Scots understand about migration and about having to travel and be distant from their families. That experience is part of the folklore of my family and is an experience that I expect many members share. When I read the  book, it struck me that we do not fear what we know, so if we understand and celebrate difference rather than fear it, we are all strengthened rather than weakened by it. Today, I was privileged to accept an invitation from Amnesty International to visit an asylum seeker in the Glasgow area to talk to him about his experiences. I was struck by his generous and measured comments about his experiences in the city; I will highlight a couple of points that he made, which will inform the work that I want to do on the matter. First, the person whom I met made the simple point that he had fled his country because of political persecution. We should not forget that in this country we are still able to speak our minds—he feels very strongly about that. He also appreciates the services that he has received from Glasgow City Council and from the health and education services. Glasgow City Council is to be congratulated for continuing to develop its programme and for learning from the difficulties of the past. The asylum seeker also said—I was surprised by this—that he has not experienced any real harassment since his arrival and that the people of Glasgow have been welcoming. We have to be vigilant and we have to challenge people who are not welcoming, but we must also recognise that rather than regard asylum seekers and refugees necessarily as a problem, people in communities often welcome them. The man made another important point in describing his first days in Glasgow, when he was looking for security for his family. He welcomed the role of the formal agencies, but said that the informal contacts that he made were much more important. He made accidental contact with the local Catholic church and the informal welcome that he received there helped him to start to feel safe in a place that he knew nothing about. It is important to acknowledge and celebrate the voluntary activities of people, groups and churches, which can have great significance not just for asylum seekers and refugees but for many vulnerable people in our communities. Such activity, which happens simply because it needs to happen, speaks to the good in us all and I urge the Executive to ensure its continued support for such work. The person whom I met raised one issue very strongly. What he said about his need to work was very powerful. In his own country he was a qualified electrician and since coming to this country three years ago he has undertaken extensive training and education and developed his language and technical skills, in respect of which his frustration and unhappiness became most evident. He wants to work, he has the skills  to work and he wants to support his family and to put something back into the community from which he has benefited. He said that if he had one plea it was to be allowed to work. I urge the Executive to continue to work with the Westminster Government to find a way to ensure that that pride and desire to contribute and, by learning and working, to challenge some of the images that people have of asylum seekers and refugees is built on, rather than feared. As I said, the comments of the asylum seeker whom I met were generous and measured. He had sought, and largely achieved, security for himself and his family. We must work with such people and communities to consider how we can ensure that people can make the best of the new life that they start in this country when their status is secured. We must consider how best we can support them so that they can use the professional skills that they used in their homeland for their benefit and for ours. I congratulate all those who are involved in international refugee week.

Does Scott Barrie agree that there is an issue about the protection that we give to certain kinds of workers? As a schoolteacher, I was protected by the decision that people were not allowed to smoke in public places. Local authority workers often had such protection, too. However, people in low-paid jobs in public places may not have that protection. It can be argued that those of us who are in professional jobs are protected, but people in low-paid jobs are more vulnerable, which is a further argument for extending a ban.

I understand the argument about passive smoking and how important it is to make the case against it. However, does Mr Adam agree that there is a strong case for a smoking ban in public places in that it would make smoking unattractive for people who smoke or who might smoke because they might not want to stand outside to smoke? A ban would make smoking a less normal habit that would not be a part of everybody's normal discourse. We can sell a ban  better not just by recognising the rights of those who do not smoke but by recognising that bans actively discourage smokers from smoking and young people from being impressed by those who smoke.

First, I confess that I come to this issue as a sceptic, and a recently converted one. That is a dangerous mixture and I will explain my position. Originally, I resisted the idea of banning smoking in public places because I thought of some of the people in local communities that I represent who smoke and the reasons why they smoke. It might sound glib but, for some people, the fact that they smoke is the least of their worries. Even if that is an uncomfortable fact to deal with, we have to accept that it is the case. We must not dismiss that argument; we must confront it and think about its implications.  We know that there are people for whom smoking is a habit that is woven into their lives and who live in difficult circumstances. I believe that we cannot change those lives by talking about a smoking ban and that we have to confront the reality of the lives of those who smoke and the reasons why they do so. However, in my conversion, I have had to accept the need for political consistency. It is true that there is a need to educate people and to support and work with people in difficult circumstances who smoke, but there is also a need for enforcement measures to encourage a drive in the right direction. The balance between the rights of smokers and the rights of communities and individuals to live and work in smoke-free environments is important. To those who feel able to support that balance of rights and enforcement measures in relation to smoking, I say gently that they should do so in relation to other aspects of antisocial behaviour that impact directly on people's lives. In discussions that we have had about measures to combat that sort of antisocial behaviour, many people say, "We have to understand more," "We don't want to criminalise people" and "We don't want to make it difficult for them." There is a balance to be struck in relation to all of the issues that we are discussing. I support measures to ban smoking in public places, not least because of having seen the ban in action in the north of Donegal in Ireland. I know that we cannot legislate by anecdote and, as an illustration of my suggestibility, I point out that, the last time I was in Ireland, I came back in favour of the euro. However, it struck me that the smoking ban seemed to be accepted without difficulty and with a sort of joking manner in even the most remote local pubs. Only when I saw the ban in action did I realise what is possible and what it is like to be in a completely smoke-free hotel, public house or other public place. Speaking to people who work in those places, I realised what a difference it makes to their lives. The banning of smoking in public places is sometimes characterised as being a hugely radical step, but we must recognise that there has been a huge culture shift over time from the days when I was a smoker. I used to see nothing wrong in not only smoking at the table but smoking between courses. We have to accept that smoking is pleasurable for some people. I stopped smoking not because I did not like it but because it became socially unacceptable. Again, that is why I am in favour of moves towards a ban on smoking in public places. The debate highlights huge differences in some of our communities and raises difficulties of which the whole of Scotland must take ownership. We have to recognise that anyone who smokes has  an individual problem and that our health strategy must support them in their efforts to stop. However, in some of our communities, smoking is a symptom of a far deeper problem. While smoking happens across communities, the reality is that those in poor, deprived communities disproportionately resist the health messages and die in disproportionate numbers. If we do not recognise that, the important issue of health inequality, which the smoking debate could focus on, will not be addressed. The issue is general, but it is also extremely particular. There also needs to be an understanding of why some of the statistics in constituencies such as mine have come about. With that understanding, there must be a commitment to drive money into those communities and to address health issues in their broadest sense and the broader issues that make some people reckless with their health. We need the broadest definition of public health. We need our rhetoric to be accompanied by hard resources. A commitment has to be made to those communities. The Arbuthnott formula needs to be applied more rigorously in health, local government and across the Executive's spending in order to prioritise those communities and people who smoke due to conditions and experiences that do not enable them to prioritise stopping smoking. By using that approach, in parallel with a general approach that makes it difficult for all of us, including our children, to smoke and which makes smoke-free places a pleasure to be in, we will make a real change. That would be the really radical step that the Scottish Parliament could take as a result of the consultation. As well as a general approach to smoking, there should be a specific approach to the communities that suffer most from it.

Will the member give way?

Such bills do not go off to do their own thing—they go into another democratic structure in the United Kingdom. In the House of Lords and, in particular, in the House of Commons, such bills can be scrutinised by people who were elected in Scotland to consider such matters. They do not just disappear.

To ask the Scottish Executive how funds recovered under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 will be allocated in Scotland. (S2O-2603)

I thank the minister and welcome her reply. She will know that my constituency—like many others—is seriously affected by the consequences of drug dealing not just in relation to those who are preyed upon and who become addicted to drugs, but in relation to their families and the local communities. Some fragile communities are becoming more fragile as the physical impact on buildings and the environment, along with the associated difficult behaviour, drives people out and creates a downward spiral for those who remain. Will she assure me that, when she considers the details of the distribution of moneys, those serious community problems will be recognised and that the communities that are most directly affected will be prioritised for funding to be used to tackle, for example, the physical degeneration that I have mentioned?

I welcome what the First Minister has said. I seek his assurance, however, that recognition will be given to the need to clarify whether the problem arises from legislation or elsewhere. Does the First Minister agree that it is not enough to look at legislation alone? Will the First Minister ensure that the action that is being taken by the Scottish Executive will make women less, rather than more, vulnerable and that it will encourage women to report rape and not deter them from coming forward? Finally, will the First Minister ensure that, in examining the issue, the Executive will work with organisations like Rape Crisis Scotland, which has an especially important perspective on how survivors of rape are treated in the legal system, and which also understands the nature of male violence against women?

At his next meeting with the Prime Minister, the First Minister may wish to draw to the Prime Minister's attention the BBC's recent troubling exposé of the private security industry, which is an excellent example of courageous investigative journalism. The First Minister may be aware of my continuing concerns about the impact of the unregulated private security industry, particularly given the significant and welcome construction and regeneration work in the communities that I represent. I ask him to outline when the Security Industry Authority's remit will be extended to Scotland and what action is being taken to work with the police to tackle the culture of intimidation and violence that underpins activities that are little more than protection rackets. I also ask him to act speedily to tackle the increased problem of organised criminals using a range of unregulated private enterprises to strengthen their control on local areas—a development that is in danger of undercutting our shared commitment to safe and secure communities.

Alex Fergusson also asked about the timescale for reporting on the review of cases involving Munchausen's syndrome by proxy and issues arising from the use of expert witnesses who might have given themselves an authority on the issue that they do not deserve. When will the report appear?

Does Colin Fox agree that one of the difficulties is that youngsters with accumulated offences do not even get in front of a panel? The police sit waiting until they are 16 before they move against them. Does he also agree that it is reasonable for communities to judge the effectiveness of the system by how it impacts on their lives, and so it is reasonable for communities to expect the review to be open to all possibilities?

I agree that there is an issue about the weight that is given to expert witnesses. However, does Mr Fergusson agree that there is also an issue about examining what an expert witness's expertise is? In some cases, expertise was claimed but, when the claim was examined further, it was found to have no substance.

The member will acknowledge that although the main grounds for referral are often care and protection, there are also offending issues for some youngsters. That is not the simple division that it is sometimes characterised as being.

Does the member acknowledge that, in some communities, difficulty is caused by lawyers actively hunting for work with families? They say that they are prepared to take on cases on attendance, for example, on the ground that they can win the case—even though the child might not have been at school for 70 per cent of the time—if they can establish that on one of the days on which the child was off, they were not well. Does the member think that that is unacceptable and that it goes against the commitment to look after the child's needs through the hearings system?

I welcome the announcement of the review of the children's hearings system. At one stage, a review was regarded as unnecessary because the system was seen as perfect and it was argued that people who were calling for it to be reviewed wanted to destroy it. I am glad that we have a consensus that a review is necessary and I welcome the opportunity to debate in a consensual way some of the issues that are highlighted in the review. As a consensual politician—and, I trust, not one of the authoritarians to whom Patrick Harvie referred—I would like to contribute to the debate. I wish to highlight the role of volunteers in the hearings system. I appreciate the seriousness of the training that they undergo. From speaking to panel members in my area, I know how seriously they take their role, how much they are troubled by what is happening in the hearings system and how much they worry about the young people who come before them. They have expressed to me a frustration that arises because they feel that they cannot intervene early enough to make a difference and they have talked about how their job has changed over time. We need to consider how their expertise can be used at an earlier stage with young people. In the review of the children's hearings system, it is important that the debate should be open and considered. There is a danger that if a person criticises the system at all, that is seen as being like swearing in church. If we do not allow a rigorous review, the debate will be closed down, although the difficulties will remain and people's attitudes to the hearings system may harden up. It  is simply not enough to say that the system is good, because that does not make it so. Although many people create the view that the system is beyond reproach, many others in communities, the police and schools feel that the system does not work in the interests of the young people who offend, the young people who are at risk or the victims of the offending. When people argue that the system is beyond reproach, they often consistently talk about children, but when they talk about rights, they talk about young people. The danger is that we might infantilise all young people. We must recognise that we can have one system, but that it should be age appropriate. People also talk about self-esteem, but the problem in some of my communities is that young people are bristling with self-esteem that comes from behaviour that creates major difficulties for other people. There is a gap between what some claim for the system and what others feel from their experiences of it. That is why the debate should be open. No matter what the minister's view is, one part of the debate should not simply be closed down as unacceptable. If people are thinking about something, it should be debated and argued out rather than closed down in the way that Patrick Harvie suggested.

I agree, but the simple point that I was making was that we do not help to build faith in the system if we tell people that they cannot discuss certain matters. The fact that people do not have faith in the system is a major problem in communities. The consequences of living in a community in which young people tell others that they are untouchable are that those people are silenced, disempowered and unable to take control of their and their children's lives. That is a major problem in some communities and it is why people begin to move towards the view that they must take matters into their own hands. As I said, there should be one system, but it should be age appropriate. People criticise the hearings system, but, in general, they do not do so out of ignorance or hostility, but because they live with the failure of the system to protect them as victims. It is therefore important not to be complacent or to settle for the view that the issue is about resources alone. There is an issue of resources, to which I will come, but there are  many others. Equally, the issue is not simply about dysfunctional or poor families. The suggestion that poverty is the only cause of the difficulties is an insult to the poor families in my community who are dealing with their problems. Young people whose parents are desperately seeking help for them come into the hearings system, and the system can offer them help. If we simply give them the alibi that only those who have problems are in the system, that statement becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Other actions can be taken to support young people, such as early intervention in schools, employment initiatives and tackling drug problems and domestic abuse, which are all partly about preventing young people from coming into formal systems of justice. Although I agree that teachers are not social workers, I must say that the points that Rosemary Byrne made about early intervention through fairly formalised, rigorous structures in school are important. We should examine how the hearings system uses the information that is gathered through joint assessment teams rather than reinvent the wheel when children come into school. I am not a social worker, but in the job that I did, we put our professional niceties to one side and worked with the young people and their parents. We were successful when the families acknowledged that there was a problem. If they said that there was no problem, that itself created a difficulty, and we had to acknowledge that.

Absolutely. Glasgow City Council took the view that the nurture programme had to develop and I welcomed that. The programme is distinctive and targeted, and if being treated differently stigmatises young people, we must challenge the stigma rather than say that we cannot treat children differently. I will mention briefly an attitude to the hearings system that exists in schools and among the police. I will talk about referrals, particularly non-attendance referrals, being marked "no further action". When I worked in teaching, there was a frustration about that, and I believe that that frustration still exists among guidance teachers who refer youngsters to the system on grounds of non-attendance. I am talking not about youngsters running about on trains all over the place, but about colluded non-attendance—young girls being  kept home to look after younger children, or nobody in a family taking sufficient responsibility to get up in the morning and send a young person to school. If we do not confront such problems early, we have the explanation of why there are youngsters in Polmont who have histories of literacy problems and truancy. We should look at the problem the other way round: if we address truancy, non-attendance and colluded non-attendance robustly and early and say that it is a priority for the young people concerned to get an education, difficulties might not emerge later. The police tell me that not knowing what has happened to young people who have been referred to the system and not being confident that anything will happen to them has an impact on their effectiveness. It impacts on simple local policing and is in no way reassuring to victims. When I worked with social workers, there was among them an interesting, if understandable, culture that we have to confront. They did not necessarily regard the hearings system as a friend, but saw their role as keeping youngsters out of the system. That is understandable because of some of the difficulties with the care system, of which we are all aware, but if home is not a safe place for young people, we have to find them a safe place. That does not mean not putting young people into the care system; it means giving them a care system in which we can have confidence. Social workers often regarded a panel decision to impose compulsory measures of care as a failure. However, in the same way that we expect school to lay down boundaries on behaviour—for example, on bullying—the children's hearings system has an important role in setting boundaries and encouraging young people to think about their responsibilities and be accountable for their actions. When parents have abandoned their role of setting boundaries, how much more important is it for society to set them for young people? The worst thing that we can do for young people who are in homes where nobody cares for them is to have no expectations of them. When we ask for a rigorous hearings system, it is because we have an expectation that young people can change, not, as some Opposition members suggest, because we wish to abandon them. I hope that our local communities will be able to talk about the hearings system, be honest about what its difficulties are and confront the reality of young people's lives through the review and the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. We do neither young people nor anybody else any service if we pretend that the problems are always with us.

Will the member give way?

Does the member recognise that many of the referrals on the grounds of care and protection are made because of the progressive attitudes that the police have adopted on domestic abuse cases? In my area, an automatic referral is made when a youngster lives in a house where such abuse takes place. That makes the figures look as if they are increasing, but the increase is as a result of a greater understanding of the experience of young people in their homes.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this important debate. I am grateful to all the members who signed my motion and that of Duncan McNeil. I am glad that he is more amenable in applying his compositing skills nowadays than he was in the old days in the Labour Party, but that is bitterness from times past. Our motions deal with designated parking spaces and the disregarding of the needs of people with disabilities. Before going on to the substance of my speech, however, I will simply mention two related issues that need to be considered—the blocking by cars of step-down pavements and the abuse of parent-and-child spaces at supermarkets, which can cause a lot of difficulties. The misuse of designated parking spaces and the abuse of people who have been deemed to be entitled to disabled parking spaces reflect the discourtesy, antagonism and intimidation that too often is the experience of ordinary people in our communities. In demanding action on the matter, we reinforce our commitment to the creation and sustenance of safe communities in which people can go about their business free from harassment and intimidation. We should not see the issue as an isolated one; we should see it in the context of action against bullying and intimidation in all its forms. I will focus on designated parking bays outside people's homes, many of which are courtesy bays that the local authority deems to be appropriately placed. Those spaces often do not have traffic regulation orders attached to them, not least because of the nature of the process that is required to establish such orders and the cost of enforcement. As someone who requires a bus bay to park in, I must confess that it had never crossed my mind that an enforcement procedure might be required. In my innocence, I thought that, if a person was deemed to be entitled to a space, they would simply be allowed to use it. I have been shocked by examples not only of spaces being used by people who do not have a disability, but of people who are entitled to spaces being abused, insulted and intimidated by those who resent their having such a space.  It is sometimes argued that, because the system for securing a space is weak, that somehow justifies abusing anyone who has one. Fair enough—if the system needs checking, that should be done, but the fact that some people might be abusing the system does not justify berating others in the street. People with disabilities should not have to negotiate their rights on the street. Some people feel that those who have secured a space have somehow got one over on everyone else and have won a privilege, but the reality is that no one aspires to a courtesy parking space or a blue badge—they are not a privilege, but a recognition of need. As the mother of a disabled daughter said, if people want the parking space, they can have the disability that goes with it. Clearly, there is a particular problem in parts of our cities where parking spaces are at a premium, which can be used as a rationalisation of selfish behaviour. Of course, by definition, areas in which there are more cars than spaces are the very areas where disabled spaces are important. If an able-bodied person cannot park beside their door, all that happens is that they need to walk a little further, but if disabled spaces are taken up, that is much more of a difficulty for people who have mobility problems. Those who seek to rationalise their behaviour need to be confronted and told that the central selfishness of their actions is simply intolerable. What action should we take? As the motion says, we need a hard-hitting, in-your-face campaign to challenge people's laziness and self-justification with clear messages about the consequences of their actions for disabled people. However, as Duncan McNeil said, a campaign is not enough; it needs to be backed up with enforcement. As members will be aware, in other aspects of policy, I am in favour of persuading first and taking hard action afterwards, but we must recognise that there should be consequences. I am all in favour of winning hearts, but I will settle for hitting pockets. Members have been pursuing the issue for some time. I seek direct assurances from the minister that he will not simply reiterate the current position, because that position is unacceptable. I urge him to confirm that hard and creative thinking will be done to address what is a serious problem for people with disabilities. The existence of the problem diminishes us all in a society that claims to be tolerant and fair.

Does the member not agree that it is entirely reasonable for someone who is the victim of a serious crime to want that crime to be marked as a serious crime? Sometimes it is not enough just to establish that the person who committed the crime will not be able to commit it on someone else. Some crimes are sufficiently serious that they have to be marked as such, even if the people who committed them are not a threat to anyone else.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage sport for all. (S2O-02155)

Does the minister agree that an important balance needs to be struck between developing the abilities of individual and elite sport talents and encouraging all our young people to be involved in sport as a means of supporting their physical and emotional well-being? In achieving that balance, will the minister reflect on the work of local sporting organisations such as Hillwood and Mosspark football clubs in my constituency, which are almost entirely sustained by voluntary activity? Such organisations reach out to young people and communities in a way in which more formal and better-funded organisations often fail to do. Will the minister consider how funding bodies such as sportscotland can be further encouraged to support local groups, which make a real difference throughout Scotland?

I draw the attention of the minister and the chamber to the fact that we are debating stage 2 of the bill in committee, and I assure everyone that those debates will be taken very seriously by committee members and others who attend. It would be more helpful to have a productive discussion there rather than in the chamber. Will the minister assure me that she will work alongside the Communities Committee and other members at stage 2 on refining the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill to ensure that the proposals in the bill, including those on restriction  of liberty orders, are developed in a way that meets the reasonable demands of people for peace of mind in their homes, protects the victims of the antisocial behaviour of very young perpetrators and prevents young people from being drawn into becoming the perpetrators of antisocial behaviour? At present, we are not dealing with young people who create problems in our communities, and other young people are being lured into becoming involved with them.

Does Robert Brown accept that one of the pressures on Glasgow City Council is the need to hold council tax payers inside the city boundaries, and that part of the problem is the level of council tax in Glasgow that results from pressures and demands in the city? Does he recognise that another way of dealing with the problem would be to support, through an independent review of local government finance, a more appropriate funding distribution of moneys from the centre, which would properly acknowledge deprivation and release at least some of the pressure that is currently on Glasgow City Council when it considers proposals that will encourage council tax payers to stay inside the city boundaries?

I am grateful for being called early in the debate. I apologise that I will have to leave early. I hope that people will not see that as a discourtesy, but will recognise that my pressing child care responsibilities were not helped by the last vote being taken later than we expected. I congratulate Elaine Smith on securing the debate, on the thoughtful motion that she lodged and on her thoughtful speech. I have been disappointed by the tone of some of the Opposition's contributions. I hope that it will be possible to have a debate that is as measured and dignified as the nursery nurses have been in conducting their dispute. There have already been a number of debates on the nursery nurses' dispute. As we have progressed, things have become more rather than less difficult. Nursery nurses have taken the difficult decision to go on an all-out strike. Once again I acknowledge the dignified way in which they have conducted their dispute. I regret that the media have not covered their dispute in the way that they cover what they obviously consider to be more glamorous disputes. I have always resisted the pressure to debate matters over which we do not have an influence, but I genuinely believe that the Scottish Executive can play a central role in the dispute. The Scottish Executive has the option of securing a settlement in the dispute and it has shifted on the issue over time. Jack McConnell's statement that he recognises the benefits of a national review is a reflection of that shift. We must continue in that vein. The dispute is about women workers and women's jobs. It is about a service that is particularly important to women and that supports women who seek to work. The dispute impacts disproportionately on those who manage child care in communities. It is underpinned by women's inequality in pay and employment opportunities. I understand that all disputes are difficult—I have been involved in an industrial dispute. At some point, it will have to end. I am concerned by the reports that I have received from local nursery nurses about damage being done to their cars as they are on the picket line. Those of us who are not involved in the dispute must be careful about the language we use, because those who are in dispute will have to go back to work at some point. We must do everything possible to ensure that they go back with dignity and that they are not driven back when they do not want to do so because they have not reached a fair settlement. Serious discussions are taking place about an independent review of the sector. However, that  cannot be seen as an escape clause for the Scottish Executive. There must be a real offer. If we ask nursery nurses to settle so that a review can begin, we must ensure that the review is a real one. It will have to be immediate and thorough and the trade unions and employers must have a key role in defining its terms. The fundamental point is that resources must be made available so that if the review recognises the changing nature of the service, better pay and conditions can be delivered for those who provide the service in our communities.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My understanding is that if permission to withdraw an amendment is not granted, we move straight to the substance of the vote.

I trust that the minister accepts that the fear of  crime is often generated by lack of confidence in the justice system, particularly among victims of crime. The minister is aware of the dreadful circumstances around the killing in my constituency of Mr James Mitchell by his neighbour Mr Drummond. That case highlights a range of examples of the failure of the justice system to take proper account of victims' rights. I ask the minister to comment on the most recent example of that failure. Despite assurances about the right of the Mitchell family to be kept informed prior to any parole decision, the family was left to find out from a journalist on the Evening Times that Mr Drummond had been released on 48 hours' unsupervised leave as part of preparation for parole. That news has left the Mitchell family distraught and fearful. Will the minister, as a matter of urgency, ensure that there is a full review of the system of preparation for parole to meet the understandable fears, not just of my constituents, but of victims and their families, that the parole arrangements do not recognise their rights and put them at further risk of crime? In monitoring the fear of crime, I suggest that a useful starting point is the victims of crime.

With regard to the issue of power and multimember constituencies, does the member agree that the situation is not a reflection on individuals who are responsible for a regional area or whatever? After all, if an area is too broad, individual constituencies can come into conflict with the regional interest. In such circumstances, people will drive towards the general position and individual interests—for example, those in my Glasgow constituency—might come into conflict with the regional view in Glasgow. However, those  interests have a right to be represented, which is why the link has to be as local as possible.

Will the member give way?

rose—

I welcome Mr Welsh's recognition that many local councillors, who are elected under the current system, do a good job. However, does he accept that some people are exercised by the issue of the member-ward link because, no matter how intractable a problem is and how few headlines it attracts, an individual councillor, under the current system, has a responsibility to their constituents and is obliged to take up cases on their behalf. Does he accept that there might be a danger that, in multimember constituencies, with that link gone, that sense of obligation to difficult cases might be lost?

Hear, hear.

I thought about intervening slightly earlier when Rob Gibson talked about "giving" women power. The reality of women's history is that women have taken power; they have been in power to make change for themselves. It is great that we have a Scottish Parliament that recognises the importance of listening to women's voices.

I was also a teacher in the past and I accept that there is an issue of equal pay for teachers. The underlying fact is that women teachers are less likely to be promoted. We might think that we have achieved equality, but if we do not address that issue, the gap will continue to exist.

Is the minister aware of the important work that the Scottish young co-operators network is doing to raise awareness of social enterprise in schools in Scotland? Will he ensure that enterprise education for young people throughout Scotland includes education on co-operative enterprise?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. We have debated this subject in the  Parliament before but we have to be honest and recognise the limits of our authority. We have to recognise the difficulties that confront the employers and the union negotiators in this matter and consider what the Executive and the Scottish Parliament can do. That is what the Executive amendment does. The position that we are in has been reached partly because of the decision on the single-status agreement. I do not always automatically argue the trade union case in the Scottish Parliament; I do not see that as my job and I know that every union member who takes industrial action is confident that their position is the correct one. However, in this case, I think that the issues are so important that the Executive and the Parliament must consider what we can and should do to resolve the dispute. I believe that the Executive amendment offers a way forward. I cannot overstate the importance of the pre-five sector and nursery teachers, nursery nurses and other workers in that area. Much of the increase in work and responsibilities in the sector has come about because the Scottish Executive, the Labour members of it and the Labour women MSPs are so committed to the key role of the sector in supporting social inclusion and tackling poverty.

I am happy to debate the issues but I have only limited time for my speech. The pre-five sector is particularly important to women who want to work, especially lone parents. We also acknowledge the crucial role of the sector for children in vulnerable and chaotic families. Every day, nursery staff reach out and support those vulnerable children. The dispute impacts disproportionately on women. It impacts on the women who predominate in the sector and on those who are now juggling their commitments as a consequence of the dispute. One of the issues around the dispute is the fact that the consequences are hidden, which might be why it is not being taken as seriously as it should be. The heart of the issue is low pay and the pay gap that women experience, which is a structural problem. I have asked before whether women predominate in the nursery sector because it is low paid or whether those crucial jobs are low paid because women are doing them. We must grapple with that problem by working with the local authorities and others. It is essential that nursery nurse pay is sorted out, because of the importance of the job, because of our commitment to social inclusion and the best start for all our young people and because of our commitment to closing the pay gap.  We understand that we are where we are in the dispute. The Executive has a role in delivering a national review of the sector. Carolyn Leckie's motion is fine; the Labour amendment adds to it because it creates not an aspiration but a way forward.

Because a national review of the sector would create a national set of pay conditions, which would sort that problem. I believe that there should be national grading for the whole of the nursery sector, and a national review would deliver that. The review would expose the gap between what we expect women to do and what we pay them for doing it. It offers a more serious way forward than the aspiration in the motion. I hope that members and the Executive acknowledge that our amendment will not just get us by today; it is a serious attempt to consider how to resolve the dispute, whether we pay proper respect to those who work in the sector, and how we do the hard job of negotiating how to close the pay gap and give proper remuneration for a central job in our local communities.

Does the member accept that the bill tries to give children and young people messages early, so that they are not lured into serious offending? The bill can be seen as a preventive measure to ensure that that happens before we reach the stage at which the police have to lift young people.

Will the member take an intervention?

I have a serious point to make. We should recognise that we must listen to the people who live with the problem of antisocial behaviour. People are working with and enduring the problem. It does not help them to imply that, because some people are organised and have bits of paper to send to us, what they say should somehow have more weight in our committee system than what those who raised the problem so that proposals could be brought forward have to say.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate, the curtailment of which I regret. Many important aspects of the bill's proposals require full examination. I hope that people have taken the time to read the Communities Committee's report, which is measured and remarkably consensual. I also hope that the minister takes on board some of its points. A feature of this debate has been the glib commentary about people being intolerant or having motives that are wrong. People have to move on and to recognise that antisocial behaviour is a serious and complex problem. As public representatives, we have to wrestle with important issues. I do not speak on behalf of the Communities Committee, but as its convener I would like to thank the clerks, committee members, those who visited local communities and those who gave evidence to the committee. I thank the Justice 2 Committee, the Local Government and Transport Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, all of which played a role in shaping the final report, which I reiterate is a measured and serious response to the bill. The line spun by some witnesses to the Justice 2 Committee received remarkable coverage, which was not matched when the evidence was challenged by the Communities Committee.  I was interested to hear Colin Fox's comments about the problem being exaggerated. I invite him to examine my caseload, in an average week, of problems faced by people. I encountered four intractable problems relating to private landlords on Monday alone, and today I was told about the serious problems that are being caused by an antisocial neighbour.

I would be surprised if Tommy Sheridan did not recognise that serious problems are caused by young people gathering in Pollok. I will be keen to let people in Pollok know that he does not regard such problems as serious, but as a means of making a debating point. I have said that members are welcome to examine my caseload, rather than diminish the seriousness of the problems. There is a fundamental inequality at the heart of this debate. Many of the briefings that we have received on the bill are hostile to the Executive's proposals. Members will not have received publicly funded lobbying material from those who will pay the heaviest cost for our inaction. The inequality in this debate is encapsulated for me in the public denunciations of the bill throughout the media by some of those who attended meetings of the Communities Committee and other committees.

Let me finish. The lack of coverage of the comments of unions such as the Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers is in stark contrast to the evidence that we heard from representatives of one community group, who had to ensure that the cameras were switched off before they could open their mouths in front of the committee.

I would be interested to know whether Nicola Sturgeon agrees with the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, which said that it has no knowledge of any instance of an officer not being able to deal effectively with group disorder situations under  current legislation. At the heart of the Communities Committee's report is a sharp divergence between what the police and other groups said to the committee and what people reported as having been said to them by the police in their local communities. The bill will allow communities to negotiate with the police and other agencies about why they are not using the powers that—allegedly and reportedly—they already have. I recognise that the debate has moved on. We no longer hear claims that antisocial behaviour is not a problem—we have shifted the discussion that far. If one recognises that there is a problem, one recognises that there is a need for voluntary measures, youth facilities and so on. Ultimately, nobody was born believing in the power to disperse. If one confronts a problem in one's local community, one owes it to the community to implement solutions in a logical manner. One should examine the problems rather than address them from a pre-determined set of views that one brings to them. One should work with the local community to see what the solutions are. The bill offers us some hope, which will be dispelled if people undermine its provisions before the agencies are given their new powers.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose  —

On the issue of not being partisan, does Nicola Sturgeon think that we should have some respect for people whose experience of crime is directly as a consequence of young people? In the past, I have identified male violence as a problem. I have never been asked to apologise to all men in the community before I make such comments. An issue arises when it is assumed that people have to be defensive when discussing such issues.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is the Presiding Officer aware of reports in the press today that refer to the Communities Committee's stage 1 report on the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, which will be published tomorrow? The press reports grossly misrepresent the committee's very constructive deliberations. Will the Presiding Officer investigate this clear breach of the Parliament's standing orders, which I believe represents a crude attempt to pre-empt the report, to divert attention from its findings and to shape the context in which it will be considered? Will the Presiding Officer consider referring this serious matter to the Standards Committee?

I am very pleased that the motion on the establishment of a co-operative development agency has been accepted for debate today and I thank members who signed it. I declare an interest as a member of the Co-operative Party and of the Co-operative group of members of the Scottish Parliament. Members might be aware that the commitment to establish a co-operative development agency is in the partnership agreement. It might not be as visible or controversial a commitment as others in the document are—we will perhaps leave those for another day—but its inclusion is an important milestone in the work to recognise, promote and strengthen the co-operative and mutual sector. That work is important in any process of developing and strengthening local economies and the broader Scottish economy. I thank all those people who have worked so hard in a variety of organisations to develop the policy in support of the co-operative sector. In particular, I pay tribute to Joe Hill, who will soon retire from his post as deputy national secretary of the Co-operative Party. He shares his name with a revered progressive figure of international renown, but in the co-operative movement in Scotland and beyond, our Joe Hill is every bit as admired. He was the first to recognise the importance of a co-operative development agency and drove the policy with great determination. When the agency becomes a reality, it will represent a fitting achievement to mark his long years of fighting for the co-operative movement and its values.  There is a growing awareness of the importance of the sector, but there remains insufficient understanding of its diversity—in size, scale, areas of activity and impact. Whatever we do around the sector, it will be important to hold on to what is good and unique to the sector and to recognise that some of the joy of the co-operative movement is its very unpredictability. We do not want to lose that element. Co-operatives provide the most successful examples of businesses that operate for more than profit. Their social purpose is supported by a business model that relies on income generation to be sustainable, rather than one which depends on long-term grants or subsidies. Co-operation, of course, has a long and proud history; it emerged from peoples' experiences and developed from their desires for local solutions. It was not based on an academic model—indeed, academia is constantly catching up with the reality of the co-operative movement. It will be important, as we develop the policy around the agency, to look to the real experts inside the movement, to ensure that the agency meets the aspirations that they have for it. We should talk to and work in partnership with the Scottish Co-op, Co-operation and Mutuality Scotland and the range of organisations that represent the sector. Co-operatives are strengthened by their democratic dimension and stakeholders including customers, service users, employees or the wider community can engage more deeply with their operations through ownership and governance mechanisms. Co-operative businesses benefit from the ability to tap into local knowledge and generate a loyalty to which other businesses can only aspire. The housing co-op movement demonstrates the importance of that dimension and provides us with great lessons on how we shape and deliver services by talking to the people who will use them. There is no doubt that the co-operative housing sector has been excellent; it owes its success precisely to its ability to talk to those who know best what they want their housing to be like. Co-operation is remarkable in its capacity to survive, modernise and find new expression. It can offer real solutions in all the areas that we consider important today, such as health, housing and community services. Co-operation has survived despite the fact that it has received little or no state intervention or acknowledgment. The wish to establish a co-operative development agency is, in part, about redressing the balance in relation to the attention that Government has given to different parts of the economy. The establishment of the CDA would represent recognition that we can have social entrepreneurs and enterprises that can have a huge impact on  the economy and, in particular, on local economic activity. It is important that the agency should identify how best it can support current co-operative initiatives and innovation, so that co-operation is not regarded just as an option of last resort when a business is in crisis, as happens too often currently. We do not seek to make a special case for the sector, but we want its importance to have equal value and recognition within economic policy. I will be interested to hear how the Executive plans to progress its commitment to the establishment of a CDA, what its timetable of action will be and who it will ensure is involved in the process of developing the agency. In making progress on the issue, I want to emphasise the need to take account of the diversity of the sector and of the diverse benefits of its existence. There are economic goals and social goals, both of which are locked together in the co-operative movement. The diversity of the sector means that there is a place for all Scottish Executive departments in ensuring that the CDA is established in a way that it is effective. The involvement of the whole Scottish Executive must not act as a means of putting a brake on development, however; it should be the means of facilitating the development of a body that will do what we aspire that it should do. Although the CDA will need to work with other agencies, I would be concerned if we were to discover that it was to be subsumed in another agency such as Scottish Enterprise. I want to highlight the fact that the agency should not just be about economic activity. The CDA could have an important role in promoting the co-operative ethos and approach, particularly to young people. In that regard, I commend the work of Young Co-operatives, which is supported by, among others, the Scottish Co-op. In Scotland, Young Co-operatives is being offered as a pilot scheme in 10 schools. It is working with more than 150 young people to support young co-operative enterprises. Young Co-operatives also has an added and important focus on fair trade and brings co-operative enterprise properly into the enterprise agenda. It is a good example of the challenge we face in enhancing economic and social policy and in increasing through education opportunities for people who look for co-operative solutions to the problems that face them and their communities. I commend the proposal for the development of the co-operative development agency. I urge the Scottish Executive and the minister to make time to ensure that real progress is made on the establishment of an effective agency that will  support those who are developing, or who could or would develop co-operative options.

Does the minister accept that, although there are successful projects, it is necessary also to contemplate the possibility that some projects will be unsuccessful? Will the minister note Keith Raffan's suggestion that we need consistency? Will she outline how we could have a consistent approach so that every time a funding decision is made on a project it goes before a parliamentary committee for scrutiny? Does the minister agree that the role of the committees is to scrutinise the work of the Executive, but not to take lobbying positions on  individual projects through committees to get a result out on the other side?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does Elaine Smith accept that many of the people who argue most strongly for the proposals in the bill do so precisely because they are driven by the concerns of young people who live in communities where there is disorder? The life chances of those young people are seriously damaged. As long as  there are vulnerable young people who have to deal with that behaviour, as well as coping with school and everything else, we have a duty of care towards them, through our proposals on antisocial behaviour.

Meanwhile, back in the real world, the First Minister may be aware of two serious incidents involving firearms in my constituency in the past week. Does the First Minister recognise the concerns of my constituents about those events? The fact that such violence can happen in their neighbourhoods generates an understandable fear. Does he also recognise the dispiriting impact on the people who carry out very good work locally—often voluntarily—to create active and attractive communities? What action is being taken to tackle the use of firearms by organised criminals? What steps are being taken to deal with the organised criminal elements that may be rooting themselves into communities through businesses such as private security firms, private rented property firms and other local enterprises?

How will the new housing standard be monitored in order that it can be sustained once it has been established? How will the minister ensure that the standard and the system of monitoring will not be unwieldy, given the significant regulation that exists, particularly in the social rented sector, which one could argue might on occasion take away from important work that is being done with tenants? I want to press the minister a little on her plans to extend the standard to the private rented sector, given how important the issue is if the broader community regeneration that she mentioned is not to be undermined. Does she recognise that a first step would be to consider connecting the entitlement of the private sector to publicly funded rental income to the establishment of standards for that entitlement?

Will the First Minister consider how best to explore the central issues for the legal system, for our child protection system and for social services, which are highlighted by some of the controversies around the syndrome, not only on the use of expert witnesses but on the means by which their authority is established? There are concerns not only about cases that are tested in court but about cases such as that of a constituent of mine, in which allegations of MSBP were made early on, but were never pursued or tested in court. However, in my constituent's view, those allegations infected every action of the agencies involved from the earliest stage. Will the First Minister ensure, as a matter of urgency, that the debate around specific syndromes does not obscure the important work of developing secure and robust processes to protect children from abuse, regardless of the motives of those who are abusing? Will he ensure that the voices of constituents such as mine are heard at an early stage when decisions are taken about whether to take matters to independent review?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I have some reservations about the Executive's proposals, but I welcome any debate that seeks to give further attention to the important issues of community safety and how disorder expresses itself in our communities. We must listen closely to everyone in our local communities—those who live in them and those who work in them—on how disorder, aggression and violence impact on people's lives and their ability to deliver local services and create peaceful environments for people to live in. I also commend Paul Martin for the work that he has done on the issue. He has worked assiduously to bring it to the fore, particularly highlighting the needs of vulnerable workers. I recognise the difficulties and the dangerous situations that emergency workers face. In particular, the police, who are our last line of defence, firefighters and ambulance workers face very difficult situations, particularly in urban areas and at weekends, as the norm in their working lives rather than as the exception. It is scandalous that, at the point at which workers are often seeking to save lives, they can come under attack. The problem is not only that such workers come under attack but that a culture of aggression and disorder exists. In my constituency, I have spoken to bus drivers, shop workers, those who work in schools and nurseries, housing officers, construction workers and caretakers, all of whom  tell the same story. Most recently, I visited a prestigious business in my constituency. The Minister for Finance and Public Services will be glad to know that that business had only positive things to say about the economic environment in which it was working and nothing bad to say, no matter how hard I pressed, on Scottish Enterprise or, more broadly, the Scottish Executive. However, when I asked whether there was any other issue on which I should reflect, I was told that that business had a problem with a group of youths gathering outside and attacking its night-shift workers with bricks as they came into work. Even when I do not want to talk about antisocial behaviour, I am driven do so by those whom I meet. We cannot get away from the facts that the issue is one for a broader group than only emergency workers and that it is part of the fabric of communities. It is not a special breed of people who attack ambulance workers and firefighters; they will have form in attacking their neighbours too. We know that attacks on emergency workers represent individual problems and distress, but it is equally important to realise that they have a more general impact on communities. Bus routes are taken off, firefighters are hindered when trying to get to a dangerous situation, and community health workers are unable to deliver their crucial service in some of our most vulnerable communities. That is at the centre of an understanding of the proposed legislation on antisocial behaviour. The individual problem is serious, but it generates community problems that have a devastating effect on our ability to deliver on our policy objectives in communities where people who have fought to get houses now tell us that their only hope is to get out. That gives a strong message about what we have to do to regenerate local communities. It will be difficult to reverse spiralling fragility in communities if community regeneration and service delivery do not include a robust approach to disorder. The issue can equally highlight the broader policing and management challenges of how disorder expresses itself. Controlling groups, identifying offenders, securing evidence and charging individuals are all necessary, regardless of whom the victim of an attack is. In that context, the proposals in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill become even more crucial. They are preventive in identifying early those who create problems, in deterring those who might be impressed by disorder among others and particularly in enabling groups to be dispersed. If members think about groups that regularly go to the same place and wilfully raise fires to bring in and then attack firefighters, they will begin to understand how a policy of dispersal of groups in  particular areas can make a difference. At heart, there is a recognition that adults who throw their weight about in hospitals and in local shops do not emerge fully formed at the age of 25 but have developed in a culture that has not been robust enough, early enough. However, I have concerns about the proposal for legislation to protect emergency workers and, in the time that I have left, I will try to highlight them. It does not include some of the most vulnerable workers who might be identified in the health service, such as women and low-paid workers, or vulnerable workers in the private sector, such as workers in shops in fragile communities, who absolutely deliver a public service. I worry that the proposal feeds the notion of a hierarchy of concerns about crime. In the Parliament, there is a great deal of scepticism among the Opposition about the necessity of antisocial behaviour legislation, but the same people want more action against those who attack emergency workers and tough legislation on hate crimes. I understand the motive of marking out the seriousness of crimes, which I welcome, but there is a danger that if so many things are considered to be an aggravation, we will give out the message that the people who cannot bid up their experience or give their suffering a better name so that we will prioritise it will be left out. We must ensure that any attempts to classify particular crimes as aggravation are rooted in a policing and criminal justice system that gives value to all those who are victims of crime. We must take all antisocial behaviour seriously so that all of us can have confidence in the system that seeks to protect us. The example that Robert Brown gave about being able to understand the young person who throws a stone because they might be bored reflects a desire sometimes to rationalise irrational behaviour in our local communities that we would not rationalise anywhere else. That is a fundamental issue for the antisocial behaviour legislation. My final point is that what is proposed is important not just because of the impact that it will have on people's quality of life and their faith in the justice system, but because of its impact on our ability to ensure that public investment in the regeneration of communities and in the delivery of public services is not wasted by an inability to challenge all the things that tear away at local services and prevent people from doing what they really want to do, which is to live in peace in their communities and to have good-quality services for those around them.

I accept that the social rented sector is important, but does the member not agree that the matter is more complex than that? People's attitudes have changed and young people who we all know do not see social rented houses—no matter how good their quality—as their first choice. They aspire to own their homes and the housing sector has to reflect that. We also have to confront the fact that, in cities such as Glasgow, we have housing in the social rented sector that people do not want. The figures that the member presents do not represent the substance of the debate and they cannot help us to address the difficulties that we have to deal with when developing housing policy.

Will the member take an intervention?

I understand the fact that, as the First Minister has said before, the current dispute must be settled by the employers and the union that represents nursery nurses. Does he agree that this issue highlights not only the importance that the Government and the Scottish Executive place on the pre-five sector in challenging inequality, but the gap between men's and women's pay and the value—or, perhaps, the lack of value—that we place on work that is predominantly done by women? Will he reflect on how and at what stage a full review of the role, responsibilities and conditions of those in the pre-five sector could be carried out, because such a review would be in the interests not only of those who work in the sector,  but of the families and communities that they serve?

There are different interpretations of the levels of attainment in S1 and S2 throughout Scotland. Is the member seriously saying that those figures are being affected by the way in which the buildings in which the students work have been paid for? Does he not recognise that there is benefit in having buildings that match the talents and abilities of our young people?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given the precedent that has been set by the SNP today, would it be in order for me to lodge an amendment to amend the Opposition's choice of debate on its days? If it is in order to lodge such amendments, does that not contravene the consultative steering group principles, which allocate time across the parties and allow the Opposition to decide for itself what it wants to debate?

I shall be very brief—certainly by my standards. I congratulate Trish Godman on securing the debate and I congratulate members on the speeches that they have made. The debate gives us an opportunity to mark the important work of an organisation at local level that does the job not because it is going to be marked in the Parliament but because it makes a significant difference to people's lives. The jobs created by Unity Enterprise are jobs that need to be done—they are real jobs. Although Unity Enterprise is a charity and a social enterprise, the people who do those jobs deliver a real service and should be recognised on that basis. Unity Enterprise does the slightly more difficult job of involving people in work who perhaps find it difficult to get into work. Due to various circumstances in their lives, they have faced barriers to getting to the stage of working and participating in the things that go with work, such  as the social side and the opportunity to mix with other people. I particularly welcome Unity Enterprise because of the important work that it does for people with learning disabilities. We want to see initiatives such as Unity Enterprise rolled out elsewhere, but Unity Enterprise also gives a strong message to other employers—in the private, voluntary and public sectors—about the importance of having diversity in their workplace and employing people with, for example, learning disabilities, who have proven to be as good workers as anyone else when they have the proper and appropriate support. It might be that if we look imaginatively at how that support can be delivered, we can provide a service and create real opportunities for people in the workplace. There is a broader issue to do with involving people. The issue of learning disabilities is close to my heart. I am involved in the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament for learning disability and the parallel transport liaison group in Glasgow, which works with people who use the internal transport service delivered by Glasgow City Council that takes people to day centres and special schools. That experience has taught me several things. One of the lessons that I have learned is how important it is for people with learning disabilities and other disabilities to be in the main stream and to be part of society, because they have as much to give as we have to give them. If they are at the centre of the delivery of a service, it will, from their point of view, be an awful lot better. It is important to see people. Trish Godman talked about invisible people; it is important to give visibility to people. They have the right to make demands on society and the right to make their contribution to society. Although it is not a matter for the Parliament, there are issues to do with the barriers that prevent people, particularly people with learning disabilities and other disabilities, from going into work. We must look imaginatively at working in partnership with Westminster to establish how the barriers can be overcome. We are all enriched by the kind of work that is done by Unity Enterprise and by opportunities to have as diverse a work force as possible in all sectors of the economy. I congratulate Trish Godman again. I thank Unity Enterprise for all the information that it provided for us today and commend it for all the hard work that it has done and will do in the future.

I hope that the member agrees that, in certain circumstances, some groups would be opposed to pre-court diversion. Women's organisations have made it very clear that, although they understand the arguments in favour of diversion, for some victims of crimes involving male violence against women it is important that cases are dealt with in the court system.

Will the proposed review of legal aid include consideration of the provision of legal advice to asylum seekers in Scotland?

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate. There is a recognition that the debate on women's rights has progressed, even if we accept the caveats that Elaine Smith put forward about its success. An understanding of the reality of male violence against women must be at the heart of any understanding of the inequality that women suffer. Male violence continues to deny women and children their rights to peace and hope for the future. We should underline the fact that all the support for women—the refuges, the sad, discreet taking down of phone numbers in such a way that no one notices—and the welcome developments in women's aid services overwhelmingly revolve around the fact that men create the need for such services. We must be clear that we are dealing with the consequences of men's actions and we must focus on those actions. Violence against women—in particular, domestic abuse—has no international, religious, racial or class boundaries. Shocking statistics have been highlighted by the 16 days of action campaign for the elimination of gender violence. It is a fact that in the United Kingdom, a woman is murdered every three days by her partner or ex-partner. It is a fact that a woman rings a Women's Aid project somewhere in Britain every two and a half minutes, every day of the year. It is a fact that violence against women worldwide kills or incapacitates more women aged between 15 and 40 than cancer, malaria, accidents and war combined. Recently I had the opportunity to attend the 25 th anniversary of Glasgow Women's Aid, which was a great occasion. The increased support for the organisation was visible in the increased number of workers. We had an opportunity to celebrate and pay testament to the women who fought to develop the service and to make people recognise that domestic abuse was—and remains—a problem. Their achievement did not happen by accident and it was not easy; there was a long-term campaign to persuade people that there was a problem. We should never forget that women were at the centre of that campaign. The scale of the problem is indicated by the fact that the people who suffered from the problem organised and fought for change. If violence against men in the home is increasing, the development of men's aid organisations will probably be the first indicator of the problem. At the Glasgow meeting we also had an opportunity to hear the stories of women who had survived domestic abuse and for whom the lifeline of Women's Aid had offered strength and hope—far more than just refuge space. The meeting was  also tinged with the bitter regrets of people involved across the range of women's organisations—Say Women, Rape Crisis Scotland, Scottish Women's Aid and others—that their services are still needed. We must acknowledge the work that is going on in education and training across the agencies. The work to give a voice to young people who are experiencing domestic abuse is particularly important.

I am saying that not one policy wonk, no matter how good they are, in the Scottish Executive thought, "It's a good idea for us to talk about violence against women and to address the problem." It was women who brought it on to the agenda and women who made the connections between the punches and what causes the violence. I understand that there are problems with males' role in society, and the debate that women generate about violence against them creates an opportunity to challenge such stereotypes. I hope that there is recognition of joined-up working, particularly in work with young people. That is why I am driven by the legislation on and the broader strategy to deal with antisocial behaviour. I accept the points that Frances Curran made about vulnerable young people out in the streets, but as a society we must mark clearly that male aggression and the way in which young men on the streets conduct themselves with the young women who are with them are unacceptable. I shudder to think of some of the things that happen to young girls who perceive such behaviour as being acceptable, and to think that those young boys, if not challenged at that age, will grow up to be the men who terrorise their communities and their own families. We must acknowledge that male perpetrators of violence do not pop up at 25—we must challenge that perception. I will finish by reflecting on the broader issue of violence against women. I acknowledge the important work in my area of the Glasgow violence against women partnership. I was recently at an excellent launch of Glasgow's support for the 16 days of action for the elimination of gender violence, and draw attention to the definition that was used: "Male violence against women includes stalking, rape and sexual assault, domestic abuse, child sexual abuse and prostitution." There is, of course, a contentious argument about prostitution. I congratulate Glasgow City  Council on its courageous approach to prostitution, which acknowledges that women who are involved in prostitution are also victims of male violence. The council has sought to turn the spotlight on those who use prostitutes, rather than harass the women who find themselves in such circumstances. There are, of course, consequences to the broader development of such work. We need—and I urge the Executive to seek—improvements in immediate and follow-on responses to survivors of rape, sexual assault and domestic abuse in Scotland. The greatest hope of those involved in the work against male violence is that they will make themselves redundant. The Parliament and the Scottish Executive have a role to play in naming the crime, because only when we acknowledge the overwhelming statistic that 90 per cent of those who suffer domestic abuse are women do we begin to understand what causes the abuse and to challenge it. We should not be frightened about acknowledging that, as doing so can make a significant contribution to the safety of our communities.

Does the member agree that one of the key strands of the antisocial behaviour legislation is challenging some of the behaviour of young men against young women in the streets? Does he agree that if we tackle the notion that a culture of disorder and violence is acceptable, that will have repercussions for the quality of relationships that young people have when they are older?

It is often said that that is an explanation. How can one explain the fact that a man drinking in a pub will not beat up the person who is standing beside him—the crime is not exacerbated in that form—but can control himself until he gets home and abuse his partner when he reaches the house?

I am grateful to the Presiding Officer for taking me next. I again apologise for not being able to stay until the very end of the debate. I acknowledge that views on this issue are not split along party-political lines and that some of my colleagues take a different view from me. Equally, I have to say that some of my colleagues have not taken a fully-formed view on the matter. I thought that it was important to make some points that perhaps have not been given the same airing as others and to bring some balance to the debate.  I also acknowledge that this is a very emotional matter that causes some concern. Clear, authoritative and professional voices have expressed views on all sides of the debate, and we are in the difficult position of hearing different professionals' opinions on the same issue—opinions that profoundly disagree with one another. However, unlike Greater Glasgow NHS Board, we also have the luxury of not having to square many circles. We have to confront the issue. If we keep the Queen Mother's hospital open, we have to close the Southern general hospital. Such a decision is not a free one; it will have consequences elsewhere. There is also a genuine concern that we need two maternity centres. However, even if we had all the money in the world, we should not tie up our increased funding for the health service in keeping wards closed. We must ensure that every penny we put into the health service addresses health needs. If we are going to have more than two centres, how many more will we have? If the issue is all about locality and access, how many more centres do we need? What should the provision be in other parts of Scotland?

I will let the member in soon. I had my own children in Rutherglen maternity hospital and was deeply distressed when I heard that it was closing. However, I was even more distressed later on in life when a professional informed me of the risks I was taking in giving birth in a free-standing maternity unit. As a result, I now understand that there is not necessarily a connection between one's emotional feeling about a place and the reality of the medical advice that one receives. At the centre of this debate is the requirement to balance the needs of women and babies. I have been told that although women who fall ill in childbirth require immediate attention, neonatal babies are not operated on within the first day. As a result, the issues of travelling or of where care should be provided are slightly different in such cases.

I understand that. As I have said already, I appreciate that many voices out there that are raising difficult points that we have to listen to.  Provision by the sick children's hospital is Scotland-wide. The logical conclusion of the argument that the Queen Mother's hospital must be beside the sick children's hospital is that everyone should have their children in the Queen Mother's hospital. If the provision is Scotland-wide, it is only natural that people will have to travel to use it.

Members should let me make progress for a minute. If the ideal position is that all services should be located on one site, the Southern general hospital is logically the only site that allows for a long-term solution. I think that, as in the debate on the acute services review, it is unhelpful to focus on buildings instead of on real health needs. Everyone knows that the issue is not about cost-cutting, but about using moneys to address health inequalities. For example, we need to maximise the amount of money that is allocated to vulnerable women, women with drug problems and so on. Such women do not have healthy living conditions and might not even be able to access antenatal care or the care that they need to support their children once they are born. Indeed, those children are sometimes at their safest when they are born. We need to find services that address the needs of those mothers and their children before and after birth. As a result, I seek reassurance from Greater Glasgow NHS Board that it is accessing money for genuine community provision and antenatal and postnatal care, because those services will most benefit the vulnerable women in my community. Although I acknowledge the point about centres of excellence, I return to my point that excellence and expertise is about people and funding, not about sites. The sites are random; instead, we have to ensure that provision exists across the service.

Like my colleague, I may have to leave before speaking in the debate. I apologise for that. Ironically, I am going to a meeting in my constituency about school closure proposals caused by the falling birth rate. Does the member agree that the issue of expertise is not about buildings, but about the people who have it, and that the discussion surrounding the Queen Mother's hospital has consequences for the Southern general hospital on the south side of Glasgow, or does she intend to argue that we need three centres in Glasgow?

Although I am the convener of the Communities Committee, I am not speaking on behalf of the committee, given the fact that the committee agreed not to report on the matter to the full Parliament. However, I think that I bring a particular perspective to the matter as someone who sat through the committee meeting. The committee was asked to consider the issues in relation to the memorandum that is attached to the Sewel motion, not whether it was appropriate to use a Sewel motion: it is important not to mix the two things up. I echo some of the points that have been made about the usefulness of Sewel motions. It is a matter of regret to me that we did not take the opportunity of using a Sewel motion when the legislation to regulate the private security industry was going through Westminster because we are now awaiting a legislative vehicle in Westminster that will allow us to do that. Members will note that it has taken since 1992 for an appropriate legislative vehicle for the planning provision that we are discussing today to appear. Thank goodness for devolution, because it means that in many cases we do not have to wait for such legislative vehicles. We should think of Sewel motions as being a positive option that is available to us, not as a threat.  As has been said, it is important that substantial discussion was held in committee on all the issues that are relevant to the proposal. Anyone who knows how I chair meetings should take comfort from the fact that, although the item was scheduled to last 10 minutes, it ended up lasting 54 minutes. I would not lightly allow such slippage in any debate, even if it were a matter of life or death. Members should take that as a sign of how seriously the committee took the issues that were being highlighted. We were grateful to the minister for the time that she gave the committee that day. We went into a significant level of detail and there were a number of votes on issues that have been commented on today and which the committee might have wanted to highlight to Parliament. I point out that the committee as a whole found none of the concerns to be compelling: indeed, the concern that was raised by Patrick Harvie was defeated by six votes to one, with two abstentions. I do not think that a compelling case was made for a report to be made to Parliament. I understand that the SNP is reluctant to leave the little comfort zone from which it makes points about Sewel motions. I find it bizarre, however, that SNP members have indicated that they will support Patrick Harvie's amendment and abstain on the main motion. Surely, one either supports the Sewel motion process or does not. Those who support the process might want to reflect on why Patrick Harvie's amendment did not win support in the committee but is now being supported by the SNP group in the chamber. I genuinely do not understand why the Green party has felt the need to push for a short debate in the chamber on the matter when the Official Report of the Communities Committee's discussion does exactly what Patrick Harvie's amendment calls for. In our discussion, we highlighted issues that are of concern to him and to others. The Official Report of that discussion reflects that broad general debate and details what people thought one way or another and, in the committee, we clarified that the Official Report of our discussion—which is in the public domain in any case—would be made available to those who are considering the matter in Westminster. We have to be cautious about assuming that if we do not ask a question, a question will not be asked. We have to be careful that we do not degrade others' democratic commitment—whether at Westminster or in local authorities—to asking the questions that are being posed today. We should welcome the procedure that has been brought forward and the commitment of the Scottish Executive to participate in it, and we should reflect on the fact that the committee did not feel the need to report any matters of concern to Parliament.  I urge members to support the Sewel motion so that we can ensure that we can apply a more accountable decision-making process to Crown lands as speedily as possible.

Does the member mean all families, or will she give a definition of the vulnerable families who would be targeted?

On the issue of corporate responsibility, I heard Robin Harper's comments about small being beautiful, but is not the  significance of what the Co-op has done that it is a mainstream business that has recognised that it is possible to have a real impact by making such decisions? The issue is not about persuading the already persuaded among small groups who operate on fair trade principles, but about offering a challenge to those who wish to be seen to have corporate responsibility—the gauntlet should be thrown down to them.

Murdo Fraser might be attempting to make a compelling case for compassionate capitalism, but I ask him to explain this to me. The Co-operative movement, in particular the retail sector, operates as a business. The Co-op recognises that it has cut its margin in order to live by its principles. He is talking about choice, but there is no evidence that any other retailer has gone down the same route. People in the Co-op have demonstrated the importance of the co-operative and mutual sector, as they live beyond mere raw profit and understand that there is a broader social objective to what they do. Would he not commend them and urge those who operate in a more crudely capitalist market to follow what the Co-op has done?

Does the First Minister agree that a central and welcome element in the tackling of poverty and exclusion in our communities has been the willingness of the Labour Government and the Scottish Executive to invest in child care and pre-school education? Does he agree that, as a consequence, the sector has expanded, putting increased burdens, responsibilities and training demands on the people—predominantly women—who work in the sector? I accept the obvious position that it is the responsibility of COSLA and the trade unions to negotiate a settlement to the dispute, but does the First Minister agree that there is a compelling case for a full review of the sector, which, in my view, would reveal the sharp contrast between the level of responsibility that is being placed on the sector and the level of pay that is awarded? Will the First Minister consider how such a review might be established?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate and congratulate the previous Justice 1 Committee on its report. I acknowledge the substantial amount of work that has been done by those who were involved at every stage in the process—some were involved throughout. There is sometimes a false division in such debates. That division has not appeared today, but people can often be characterised as being tough or soft on alternatives to custody, or alternatives to custody are said to be good or bad. It is as if custody is always better or is never effective. If we are to progress, the key test seems to be that alternatives must be shown to be working, but the hard question relates to what the definition of "working" is. Nothing operates in a vacuum. Any action that is taken or any approach that is promoted has consequences. It is clear that there is no perfect answer, but it is also evident that doing nothing is not an option. For me, what works will be determined by our ability to challenge offending behaviour through rehabilitation and to divert from and deter offending behaviour. It will be determined by our ability to deter potential offending, which is particularly important among young people for whom a pattern of offending behaviour has not yet been established.  Early intervention is needed. We must understand the power of the peer group in that context as well as we understand it in other contexts. We must get messages out to young people about what the consequences of offending behaviour are. Finally—and perhaps most important—what works will be determined by the support and confidence that any action or disposal gives to the victims of crime and by the capacity of punishments to mark the seriousness of particular crimes. Margaret Smith spoke about key players' being basically in agreement. The challenge is that significant key players—those who have experienced crime in our communities—are often not signed up to the approach that we are discussing. The challenge is to persuade people that alternatives to custody are a reasonable approach. Alternatives to custody must be robust and thorough and they need to be monitored. Support for criminal justice social work programmes is rising from £44 million in 2001-02 to £88 million in 2005-06, but we need to ensure that we get value for money. We need to have a sense of authority from the programmes and a belief that they matter. People need to be assured that there is close scrutiny and follow-through and that we are not simply ticking a box. Police in my constituency told me that they sent out 100 letters to parents of young people who were caught gathering in a large group and causing a bit of disturbance. That was an extremely low level of intervention, but not one parent responded to the police in any way. Some of them might have been too embarrassed to do so, but others might have thrown the letter in the bin. Knowing which proportion had which reaction would allow us to decide whether that action was effective. Equally, if alternatives to custody are not visible and monitored and do not register on a community's radar, they can become discredited. That will affect offenders and potential offenders and, most seriously, it will undermine the faith of victims in the system. That impact must be understood. Worryingly, it might result in people taking the law into their own hands or, more likely, in a reduction in the reporting of offending and an increased feeling of powerlessness among those in our communities who already have little power. If those who have bullied their local communities are seen not to suffer any consequences when their behaviour is reported, they become much more powerful. They do not have to do anything; they simply have to be. In my constituency, someone went around bragging to those who had  complained about their behaviour that they were "untouchable". How much less powerful must someone who experiences such behaviour feel? The issue is linked to the broader issues of bail, bail conditions and their effective enforcement, and a real understanding of how intimidation works in communities. For example, in relation to issues such as domestic abuse, we hear that we need to have more anger management courses and deal with people's drink problems. However, men with drink problems who abuse their partners often do not cause trouble in the pub, where they manage to control their anger, but only do so at home. Sometimes, their drink problems are used as an excuse for domestic abuse, not an explanation of it. Annabel Goldie talked about effective policing. I understand the need for visible policing and argue for it in relation to my community. However, I would argue that effective policing is undermined every time nothing happens to someone who has been charged with a crime by a police officer and has been found guilty in court. That makes it less likely that people will report crimes again and makes the police less confident when they go back to the communities. We have to address that. Work is being done in Glasgow in relation to community reparation orders. We have to be wary of fads and fashions. The policy has to be hard-headed. The orders provide an opportunity for damage to be repaired but there are limitations: offenders can take the graffiti off a wall but they cannot rebuild a school that they have burned down. That is an important point because fire-raising and vandalism now account for 23 per cent of all recorded crime and the number of such offences has risen by 15 per cent in the past four years. We need to examine who is committing those crimes and involve the voluntary sector more. It is interesting to see those who advocate alternatives to custody picking away at those alternatives, on the ground that they are too restrictive. We can convince people that alternatives to custody are credible if they are robust. It is odd that electronic tagging, which is a community alternative to custody and, therefore, less harsh, and the extension of tagging to under-16s, so that it can be used to target individuals in a way that does not stigmatise a group of people as a youth curfew might, are criticised as being unacceptable because they are too tough. It is easy to find fault. Perhaps those who take the argument down that road need to be more honest. If they were, we would be able to have a debate about the balance of punishment, deterrence, the rights of victims and communities in the justice system and the right of our society to mark out particular crimes as serious and to have peace.  Alternatives to custody are a legitimate part of the system, but they must be robust.

I am feeling particularly stigmatised, as someone who used disposable nappies. If I had a child tomorrow, I would probably use them again. I do not think that we should be guilt-tripping women when they are doing their shopping. I wish to ask the minister about a separate point. Could he comment on the Executive's view of the urban environment and the importance of sustainability issues to cities? Too often, the focus in such debates is entirely on rural areas, but the issue is significant for people in communities in my constituency.

On thriving businesses in Glasgow, does the member agree with my constituents, who feel that there is something unjust about the level of wealth that is generated in Glasgow, in that it is not retained within the city to benefit the citizens, who are currently not benefiting from Glasgow's economic boom? Is he in favour of addressing business rates so that Glasgow can benefit from the hard work that it has done on the economy?

An excellent example of cities meeting need far beyond their boundaries is the Clyde tunnel. I ask the minister to reflect on the fact that the Executive is currently funding the 1,000m of the Clyde tunnel to the same level as 1,000m of a rural road with light traffic. I urge the minister to meet representatives of Glasgow City Council and to talk to the Minister for Transport about addressing the important need for improvement to the Clyde tunnel so that the burden does not fall unfairly on the citizens of Glasgow.

The issue is difficult. I ask Robert Brown to consider a situation in which 30 or 40 young people gather outside his garden, drinking and causing mayhem and vandalism. When the police are called, the young people disappear; when the police leave, the young people return. People in communities are distressed and find such situations difficult to cope with. It is also difficult for the police to identify the crime that has been committed. Surely the problem of causing public fear should be an offence. If so, the dispersal power could be used to address it. The issue is not one of moving the young people on but of keeping them away from the community in which they are causing distress.

Will Rosemary Byrne give way?

Is not one of the big advantages of electronic tagging that it identifies the offenders who cause most harm, keeps them away from where they previously caused mayhem and prevents them from wielding influence over other young people? Tagging means that, rather than stigmatising a whole group, individuals are targeted.

Will the member comment on the power to disperse groups? For example, in my constituency there is a gathering point to which 30 or 40 youngsters come. If the police do not come in until a serious incident has taken place, the youngsters may have fled. Good community policing might identify that spot as a place where there are likely to be problems and youngsters are likely to be drawn into antisocial activity. People who want to prey on vulnerable young people who are drinking may also be attracted to such areas. In those circumstances, is it legitimate to consider using the power to disperse crowds, because of the danger that the situation poses to youngsters and its impact on the local community? That would be good community policing, rather than something reactionary, as has been suggested.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in the debate. If today we can at least agree that we have an antisocial behaviour problem, we will have reached first base, even if we disagree about what we should do about that. People who are living in the most difficult circumstances deserve to have their problems considered, not dismissed in the rather contemptuous way in which that has happened over previous months, although thankfully not in the chamber today. I am convener of the Communities Committee, which will have the interesting role of exploring the issues in depth and teasing out some of the difficulties surrounding the proposals. As has already been indicated, our first action has been to decide to go out across Scotland, to hear the experiences of people both young and old—people who are committed to their communities and want to do something for them. We will then reflect on what those people have to say. Debates about crime and justice are always difficult. We must reflect on the balance between prevention and punishment and the importance of victims' experience. If there is no faith in the system, that is a major problem for us all. In those circumstances, some will continue to be afraid and to be silenced, but others will take action. We will have in our communities—literally—the survival of the fittest. Like Scott Barrie, I am amazed that people who say that bullying in schools, racial harassment and bigotry and insult should stop, should argue that to describe antisocial behaviour in communities as unacceptable is to stigmatise youth culture. Colin Fox should talk to the leader of the party to which he belongs, who, because of his direct experience as a local councillor, has accepted that antisocial behaviour is a problem. Colin Fox mentioned the firefighters and so on. We recognise that firefighters, nurses, shop workers and bus drivers often face attack in local communities, predominantly from young people. Many members from all parties have been clear about the need to protect those workers.

One problem in our communities is that very vulnerable young people, including young people with learning disabilities, are the first target of stigmatisation, bullying and offences. We agree that it is unacceptable that firefighters should face attack in local communities. Why do we not recognise that it is unacceptable for someone who simply lives in a community to be attacked? Surely we can agree on that much. Much is said about the way in which we talk about young people. Do we imagine that the adults who are causing mayhem and wielding knives in our communities pop up fully formed at the age of 25? Do they start to develop their attitudes when they turn 20, or does our communities' failure to confront those attitudes early enough allow for the emergence of adults who create problems at a later stage? The issue here is prevention. It has been suggested that this matter has been got up because we have nothing better to do. When thinking about what I should say today, I considered spending six minutes reading from the case notes of the work with which I deal every day of the week. However, I realised that even in six minutes I could not begin to give members a flavour of the problems that some of the people in my community face. I recognise that anecdote alone cannot determine legislation, but it provides us all with a reality check. When I was first elected to the Parliament, I had no idea how much time I would spend on this issue. I have made it a priority because my constituents have come to me to demand that I take action. I am driven on the issue not by the theory of youth disorder and antisocial behaviour, but by the despair that has been expressed to me by elderly people tormented by young people who have taken over a children's play area for their gang battles; by people who have had to move their cars streets away from their homes because they have had the audacity to complain about others' behaviour; and by four or five families in one street  in my constituency who have had either to sell or to abandon their homes and to declare themselves homeless because of the assaults and oppression to which they were subjected by unruly and unacceptable neighbours. Most tellingly, I am driven by the despair of a woman in one part of my constituency who fought for 20 years to turn the constituency round, is proud of the physical changes to it and was for years part of a tenants group, but who told me that she had had enough and that she would get out if she could. We cannot ignore those people. Antisocial behaviour is not funny. Prevention and punishment are not mutually exclusive: we must have both. We talk about the need for more policing and recognise the value of high-visibility policing, but we have a general problem. If people behave only when they see a police officer, what chance is there of our having a decent, safe community? We need to say to young people that boredom is never an excuse for spitting in an old woman's face or for rattling a window at 3 o'clock in the morning. The vast majority of young people whom I know would be deeply insulted that anyone should suggest that that kind of behaviour is part of their culture.

We must consider what happens when the role of the police is undermined because nothing happens when a person's name is taken or action is demanded by the local community. The police have said that there is a danger of their being alienated from the community, but in some parts of my community they are held in contempt. People have no faith that the police will do anything for them. Precisely because all our young people matter we must tell both young and older people what is acceptable in our communities. The Executive's proposals are part of that process. We should tackle the causes of crime, but we should not ignore its consequences for our communities.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

What should be done when, even if physical violence is not involved, the perception of intimidation and harassment is real?

I agree that we have to consider the causes of crime. Let us consider the example of domestic abuse. While it is interesting to discuss why somebody behaves in that way—we address that through questions of attitude and so on—we still want the behaviour to stop. The big shift in relation to domestic abuse is the  recognition that, while we might wonder why somebody abuses, the first priority is to ensure that the woman in that situation is protected and that the abuse stops.

Does the member agree that one reason why the old lady may be frightened of the young person is that she may have seen half a dozen other young people who were intimidating without anything apparently happening to them?

There is an issue about off-licences selling alcohol, but does the minister recognise the problem for shop workers, who are often put under considerable pressure? Indeed, adults who go into off-licences can be subject to intimidation if they do not purchase drink for others when asked.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that organisations within the social economy play a key role in community regeneration. (S2O-470)

I thank the minister for her second reply on the subject. I am sure that she is aware of the social economy's potential to deliver—and its actual delivery of—community regeneration and, in particular, employment opportunities for those in local communities who might be at most disadvantage in the job market. I press her on how she envisages developing the role of Scottish Enterprise and Communities Scotland in helping the growth of social economy organisations.

I will try to be brief. I congratulate Carolyn Leckie on bringing this important debate to the chamber. Not long ago, I had direct daily contact with the pre-five sector; my children benefited from a pre-school education and were cared for by committed professionals. All societies should ensure that such central jobs are properly remunerated. Recognition exists of the important work that is done by the Scottish Executive and local authorities in supporting early-years learning, and of the increased emphasis on child care. That prioritisation is the result of a long period of campaigning by women in the labour and trade union movements. Those women have clarified the importance of such a strategy in tackling poverty. Increased emphasis on child care allows parents to manage their working lives better or to take up opportunities to work, but such emphasis is also important because of children's needs. It means that children are given a good start and it is especially important for children from vulnerable or chaotic families, which form a central part of our strategy for social inclusion. To make a difference at the pre-five stage can make a major difference to our children's later lives. I want to be absolutely clear that, even in a world of hard choices, such an issue must be a priority. Sometimes, there are difficulties relating to intervening in individual pay disputes and there is an essential relationship between employers and  trade union representatives, who must ultimately sort out negotiations. However, broader issues are highlighted by the dispute. From discussions that I have had with nursery nurses, it is clear that pay levels and responsibility levels simply do not match. The jobs are predominantly done by women and we know that women predominate among the low paid. There is a structural problem relating to women's pay, which is highlighted by the work of women in early-years education and child care. We will not close the pay gap if we do not address that problem and give priority to the issue of women's work and low pay. Women's earnings will not increase by a trickle down from settlements that have been achieved in other sectors through trade union disputes. There is a conundrum: are women's jobs low paid because women do them, or do women end up doing low-paid jobs because those jobs are low paid? There is a pressing case for an independent review of the pre-five education child care sector across the range—public sector, voluntary sector and private sector—because such work is so important to the life chances of children, especially the most vulnerable children, and because women's caring work does not seem to be properly valued. I urge the minister to explore, in partnership with COSLA, the trade unions and the staff who are involved, how a review might be carried out. I am absolutely certain that any objective review that considers the jobs and responsibilities in the sector will lead to greater remuneration for those jobs. Of course, I urge the minister to recognise that the employers need to be given a commitment in respect of resources that would follow the conclusions of such a review. I cannot underline too strongly that the matter is of grave importance, although it can be sorted. The sector is so central and so diverse that we must address low-pay issues; those issues do not exist simply by accident, but are in the structures. I hope that the minister will give us a commitment in that respect today.

Does the member agree that some children are vulnerable because of difficulties at home or what they get up to outside school and that a class of even 15 or 20 can be a difficult place? Does he also agree that we should be seeking flexibility in schools to allow for very small groups to be organised at certain times and for bigger groups to be managed elsewhere? We have to be careful not to be too prescriptive about  class numbers, although I acknowledge the important points that he makes about how people get on in class.

Will the member give way?

The minister will appreciate that, in the first session of the Parliament, the Social Justice Committee pressed hard for early action to deliver effective legislation in this area. It is therefore good to see the matter being progressed. I note what the minister has said about involving the charitable and voluntary sectors. Following Des McNulty's point, how does the minister intend  to involve the co-operative sector and the co-operative movement, which have a distinctive voice and position on public benefit and on how they are placed in relation to that?

Does the deputy minister agree that the abuse of alcohol is sometimes used as an excuse for intolerable behaviour? We must be careful when talking about issues such as domestic abuse, because we can allow the image to be created that domestic abuse happens because people have drink problems. Very often, people who are very controlled in the pub are totally out of control when they go home. Sometimes there are other underlying problems for which alcohol is a cover.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I disagree slightly with something that Christine Grahame said, but agree with the general drift of what Nicola Sturgeon said. It is possible to see the review as helping us to challenge some problems, but we will not solve many problems relating to drinking. What we have to hope for from the licensing regime is that it does not exacerbate the problem. Nicola Sturgeon made the point that we must see our action on the matter in a broader context. Where I disagree with her is that I believe that a lot of progress has been made in recognising health inequality. It has been recognised that the kinds of things that people do in their early life set up patterns for later life. I had the privilege of attending the big day out in Pollok and the open day in Queen's Park at the weekend. The local council, the social inclusion partnership and the local community are working together to get across a message to people in some of our unhealthiest communities about the importance of lifestyle, in addition to the narrower issue about health needs for which we go to hospital. I will focus much of my speech on the difficult issue of off-licences. If I have time I will make some general points about the review that have been flagged up to me by local people. I welcome the report and the announcement by the First Minister that an urgent review will be established on the regulation of off-licences.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to endorse the aims of the freedom from fear campaign, which focuses on an issue that people are not aware of and that I will refer to later in my speech. We know that off-licences can be a focus for young people to gather for chaotic, under-age drinking that can often lead to chaotic drug abuse. Such gatherings often involve very young people. Research suggests that half of all 15-year-olds have purchased alcohol illegally in the past year. I do not want to damn off-licence premises out of hand. In fragile communities in particular, off-licences are often the only shop; the drinks licence gives them an opportunity to trade viably. We must also consider the good practice of the Co-operative Group. I should declare an interest as I am a member of the Co-op, which has led the industry in putting sensible drinking on the agenda by referring to it on their labels. We must try to set a standard for some of the rogue off-licences in fragile communities, although I do not want to lay the blame on the licensee, as if it is only about a failure of management. The freedom from fear campaign highlights the intimidation of shop workers and, in particular, those who work in the communities in which they live. A separate issue is that of adults acting as agents for young people. That is clearly a crime and we have to ask why those crimes are not being pursued. In some circumstances, adults are intimidated into buying alcohol for under-age drinkers. The issue highlights the problem that has been identified of groups gathering in certain areas. Some folk want to dismiss the discussion of such gatherings as a reflection of a culture of intolerance of young people. They make the point that, as many young people grow out of offending behaviour, we should not be too heavy-handed. That might be true, but there is a deeper problem for communities. If a place gets a reputation as a gathering place and an off-licence has a reputation for selling drink, although the individual personnel of the group may change over time, it remains the case that a group of youngsters is causing harassment and creating difficulties for others. Such a gathering place effectively becomes—as it has in my area—an outdoor youth club where youngsters are dropped off outside an off-licence. We cannot overstate the degree of harassment that takes place. People cannot let their children  out to play because of the problems that such gatherings cause. Nicola Sturgeon talked about self-respect and we must respect what people in our communities tell us. Some people dismiss this discussion as being about stigmatising young people. I challenge them to respect communities that feel that they are under siege. I welcome the fact that the review will examine the scope at community level for better engagement and consultation on the granting of licences. Communities should also have an input on the monitoring of licences when there is any suggestion that they should be withdrawn. There must be effective management and enforcement to prevent off-licences from becoming the focus of antisocial behaviour. In particular, I hope that attention will be given to the anomaly whereby someone who has their licence withdrawn can put in a trivial appeal and trade while the appeal continues. It should be emphasised that sometimes the problem arises when the matter reaches a sheriff who does not take local concerns seriously. We must address off-licences in dealing with the Nicholson review. That youngsters of 12, 13 and 14 years of age think that they have nothing more to aspire to on a Sunday afternoon than to harass people outside an off-licence to buy them drink is a problem that we must grasp in every way that we can. The Nicholson review plays a small but important part in that.

Will the minister ensure that, in any discussions around the development of sports and arts facilities for young people, the crucial issue of access to those facilities is kept in mind? At a meeting earlier this week, my constituents expressed concerns about that issue, reporting to me that they could not let their sons and daughters out to play or to go to clubs because of the intolerable behaviour of some young people and adults in their communities. Does the minister agree that our approach to antisocial behaviour, far from stigmatising young people, gives us the opportunity to liberate those young people and their families from their current situation?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

On the issue of joined-up working, the minister might be aware of a University of London report that pointed out how successful integrated community schools are in supporting vulnerable young people in mainstream education. Will the minister indicate what work her department is undertaking with the Scottish Executive Education Department to build on the community school model? I am thinking of the opt-in initiative in my constituency, which keeps young people in mainstream education, thereby maximising their chances of benefiting from that education.

rose—

The issue is complex. There is a difference between making somebody eligible for a nutritious meal and making them eat it. Improving nutrition is more complex than simply providing it free. If somebody could get my daughter to eat a nutritious meal, for a start I would bless them, but I could afford to pay for that meal. The free school meal might help her nutrition, but it would necessarily trap resources that could help children who are in poorer circumstances than my daughter's. The only point that I was making is that the issue is complex and not as simple as is sometimes suggested.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I should say that I am suffering a bit with a sore eye this morning, so I hope that members will be sympathetic towards me. It is not that I have had another argument with one of my colleagues. I hope that the debate can be about more than swapping statistics, even if the statistics do show record levels of investment, with moneys being strongly directed towards communities and areas of concern, and to initiatives that address inequality. I heard a great thing on the radio yesterday: the interviewer said, "I know record levels of investment have gone into the health service, but—". It is that "but" that we must address when we are considering our strategies. We recognise that money is going in, but we have to look at how that plays out. It is important for the Executive to listen, to monitor and to be willing to change as things progress. It is also incumbent on those who seek to criticise the Executive to take a mature approach. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation report is mentioned in Tommy Sheridan's amendment. It would be fair to say that, when that document was published, the way in which it was represented in some quarters was not the way that the authors themselves had represented it. That report was a challenge to us all, but some people would be as well lifting it up and hitting the minister over the head with it, because they have not focused on the report's key messages about how initiatives play out on the ground. There has been some discussion about powers. As far as I am concerned, it is not a question of where power lies, but of how it is exercised. I do not understand the relevance of saying that in order to tackle poverty we must somehow do so in Scotland, as if there were no issues that could be  addressed at UK level—issues that have an impact on us all. "Closing the gap" cannot be a slogan; it needs to be the hard grind of strategy. When it comes to equality issues, we could talk about everything in the world, but we cannot simply wish for change; we need to resource it and understand its complexities. Fundamentally, poverty and low income are central in creating and sustaining inequality, so it is important that we develop good jobs and good working conditions for people. We must work alongside the UK Government to examine the benefits system and the national minimum wage, and we must consult with the trade unions to monitor how our initiatives are playing out. Some people who lived in poverty needed a chance to have the jobs that the Tories denied them; when they got those jobs their lives got back on track. However, we must recognise that, for others, poverty and exclusion have brought other burdens that require a focused and targeted approach, through social inclusion partnerships and other agencies—public, voluntary and private—to supporting people. That is why I have always argued for the needs of my city to be addressed in a more focused way, because the concentration of poverty in our communities is a problem even for those who live in those communities but who are not themselves poor. We must address how that cumulative effect of poverty can hit ordinary people's lives. We know that poverty affects different groups differently. Women have more care responsibilities, are more likely to be lone parents and are more likely to be poor pensioners in their old age. We have to graft that into our strategy. We must understand that people with disabilities will be affected differently by poverty, as will black and ethnic minority communities. Even if they are comfortably off, however, women, people with disabilities and the black and ethnic minority communities face other aspects of inequality that have to be addressed. The key issue in tackling inequality and closing the gap is the involvement of individuals, groups and local communities in making that change. We have to understand how policy plays out on the ground. My opposition to free school meals is driven not by contempt for the organisations that support such a policy, but by my understanding, based on 20 years as a schoolteacher—

Tommy Sheridan should let me finish. I spent 20 years as a schoolteacher working with some of the most excluded young people, who told me how they were stigmatised by  their poverty, their disability and their inability to do their work. They never once said that their stigma was caused by having a free school meal; if only we could get rid of stigma in our communities by doing that. I would prefer to spend money giving the children who are not even in school a free school meal than give free meals to my daughter. Here is a reality check: it is easy to give somebody a free and nutritious meal, but if Mr Sheridan will tell me how we can make them eat it he will be a friend for life.

Not on that issue—I would like to move on.

I am not frightened to debate free school meals with Tommy Sheridan. There are a number of other initiatives that I would like to touch on briefly. In my constituency, the Sanctuary Scotland Housing Association gives people power over their own housing, which some would characterise as privatisation. Pollok Credit Union Ltd is a great success, because it is visible and credible in the community. It urges young people to save and plays an important role in addressing financial exclusion. I urge the Executive to ensure that there is joined-up thinking on the co-operative development agency, so that the potential of co-ops and mutuals in local social and economic development can be realised.

That matter has clearly been addressed through the prudential programme. Mr McFee's party ought to address the issues surrounding the possibilities that co-operative and community housing strategies can afford us. Last, I would like to say something about antisocial behaviour. There is an attempt to separate that problem from poverty. Addressing antisocial behaviour is sniffily dismissed by some commentators as being populist, which probably means that it is popular but they do not agree with it. We have to understand the frustration and depression of those who live in communities that are broken by antisocial behaviour. We must  recognise the reality that there are people in our communities who are aggressive, intolerant, abusive and vindictive to their neighbours, to their communities, to firefighters, to shopkeepers, to bus drivers and to everyone who crosses their path. Yesterday, we heard the bizarre phrase, "national self-esteem". I do not know what that means, but I know what it means for a community to have so little self-esteem that the people who live there are ashamed to bring people into that community. If we want to address poverty and inequality, we must support people who are living with the consequences of that behaviour in their communities. We must also recognise that life chances are lost to children who are pulled into youth disorder and who are involved in behaviour that makes them vulnerable and exploited. That is the challenge of antisocial behaviour; we must address the inequality that results from it, not just for those who suffer it, but for those who are involved in it and who desperately require support to get away from it. I urge the Executive to continue to recognise the importance of monitoring what it does, and to respond to the challenge that has been laid down by those who want it to go further.

I wonder whether Tommy Sheridan will explain how his policy of free school meals for children like my own—who would not eat them—will somehow help the situation that he has just described. Does he agree that there is a case for targeting and focusing our money much more thoughtfully instead of on the kind of gesture politics that free school meals represent?

Shona Robison will be aware that some people argue that the big issue is the concentration of poverty in communities such as those in areas of Glasgow. If she thinks that relative poverty is so important, surely she agrees that we need to target more and not less moneys towards those communities. Is the SNP in favour of targeting more of those moneys to close the gap? Is it in favour of changing the balance in the way in which we spend money?

I welcome the minister's announcement that the Nicholson committee will report soon and I urge her to act speedily on its recommendations. The minister will be aware of the impact that poorly run off-licences have on communities, given that they are both a cause of, and a focus for, disorder. I urge the minister to consider legislation to tackle the problem of a licensee being able to continue to trade—even though a licensing board has withdrawn their licence because of problems that their premises have created—simply because they have lodged an appeal, no matter how frivolous that appeal is. That situation causes immense frustration and continuing difficulties for local people.

Does  Tommy Sheridan agree that there is a serious issue to do with stigma in some of our secondary and primary schools, and that we have to challenge that stigma, rather than fantasise that having free school meals will somehow hide the problem, because that area is often not where the problem is expressed?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the minister refute the notion that only those from difficult and troubled backgrounds are involved in youth disorder? That notion insults the many young people who, no matter what difficulties they face in their lives, do not feel the need to bully or intimidate those around them. The notion also disregards the hostile and unacceptable behaviour of some young people from prosperous backgrounds. Does she agree that our constituents do not seek a semantic debate about how to describe behaviour; instead, they seek respect for their demand for peace in their communities for themselves and their children?

Does Rosie Kane think that the constituents who come to me in tears about their difficulties and experiences of youth disorder, or the young people who feel that they cannot reclaim the streets to play in, are making it up? The issue is a serious one for them. Does the member accept that, while respecting young people, we should also have the respect to acknowledge that in some of our communities we need to challenge their behaviour as we would challenge the behaviour of bullies in schools?

Does the member agree that many young people suffer great difficulties because of what their parents have done to them through neglect and abuse, and that some youngsters who go into care are  already deeply troubled and damaged? Although many things can be done to make the care system much more sensitive and sympathetic, we cannot say that that system has created such problems. We must confront the fact that, from a very early age, some young people have their life chances severely diminished because families and parents do not support them appropriately, but neglect and abuse them.

I welcome the First Minister's comments on the importance of strong and safe communities. Does the First Minister agree that there are serious concerns in our communities about the impact of drug dealing, not only on those who are drawn into the misery of drug abuse, but on those who have to live with the misery of having drug dealers as neighbours? In developing further action in relation to drug dealing, will the First Minister examine in particular ways in which private landlords whose tenants are involved in such activity can be made to take their responsibilities seriously?

Does the minister acknowledge that the size of classes is not the sole factor in determining educational achievement in our schools? In my constituency, the schools with the biggest classes are often those that are highest achieving. Given the minister's commitment to addressing the central issue of inequality in education, will she support initiatives such as the nurture initiative in my constituency, which allows for intensive and close support for some of our most vulnerable children whose broader social needs have to be addressed so that they can access education?

As somebody who comes from a profession in which people cannot wait to get a package and to get out early, I find the notion of people wanting to work beyond their retirement age a bit strange. Does the minister agree that some of the issues around employment beyond the age of 60 relate to the fact that people have poor pensions and do not necessarily have the resources to do the many interesting things that people wish to do in old age? That is why work might offer a better alternative for them. Although we should argue against age discrimination, we should also talk about people having the right not to work after 60.

Does Linda Fabiani agree that one of the big issues around the right to buy was that it made logical sense for people to buy their council house because rents were so high because they were not appropriately supported? Does she agree that people who bought their council houses did not think about how they would maintain and repair their houses after they had bought them? The problem was not that people were stupid, but that council housing and the right to buy operated against ordinary working class people. Linda Fabiani accepted that point in committee.

The minister mentioned stereotyping older people. Does she agree that the experience of older women can be very different from that of older men? Given their work patterns when they were younger and their lack of a pension, older women are more likely to be low paid and are certainly more likely to be carers. In my constituency, there are many grandmothers looking after the children of drug-abusing parents. Does the Scottish Executive have a strategy to address the specific needs of women pensioners, who may be among the most vulnerable of our older people?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie on bringing the debate to the Parliament. I had been looking forward to it, but then we heard from Tricia Marwick and Donald Gorrie—being so cheery must keep them going. I thought that the Parliament had put the voluntary and charitable sector at the heart of its programme and debate. The Social Justice Committee has and so has the Parliament, and we need to consider how to progress in that context rather than taking the view that we do not have an understanding or commitment to the voluntary sector. Any constituency MSP could have nothing other than huge admiration for the role of charities and the voluntary sector.

If the member lets me finish my point. In its deliberations on the voluntary sector, the Social Justice Committee said that there had to be progress on charitable law. I am sure that the Executive will take that on board. I want to make a few points before I move on to the substance of what I want to say. The issue is not just about legislation; it is about respecting and understanding the sector, and the Executive has an excellent record on that. We should also not be over-legislating for the sector. I was speaking to a constituent who, for the past 25 years and because she wanted to, ran a lunch club for a group of local pensioners. She has now stopped running the club because of the level of regulation and the lack of respect for the expertise of the women who ran the club out of the goodness of their hearts. They have simply stopped running the club. We have to be careful about that. I welcome the work done by Jean McFadden and I recognise the degree of commitment that the commission has shown and the body of evidence that it has provided for us to use in moving forward.  As Jackie Baillie said, many organisations are charitable that we might expect would not be, and others are not charitable that we might expect would be. Given the perceptions of what a charity should be, which we might or might not share, that is central to the debate. We want to make the decision based on principles that have been developed through discussion and debate rather than through the deliberations of the Inland Revenue. That is why we need legislation. The discussions will not always be easy, particularly for organisations that imagine that they are charities, and which might currently be charities, but whose benefit to the public might not be evident to the rest of us. The role of co-operatives highlights the importance of that debate—and I declare an interest. The co-operative movement is broad and encompasses a range of groups and organisations. Because co-operatives often provide dividends to their members, they would be excluded from charitable status under what is being proposed—the McFadden commission considered the issue. However, co-operatives genuinely benefit the public in their communities, not least because they offer work opportunities to people within local communities and often provide a service that no other organisation would be able to provide. Co-operatives are rooted in an understanding of what their local communities need. Their position would be tested in the debate surrounding a charities bill, and discussion of such interesting and challenging issues could be developed. We would be kidding ourselves on if we thought that there was a lack of will simply because the issues that have to be addressed are complex. We want charities legislation that can add to the support for the important work of charities and voluntary organisations in our communities not just because of what it concludes and what is enacted, but because of the legislative process, which allows further discussion and acknowledgement by all who are involved in making decisions of the key role of charities, organisations and people within our communities who genuinely provide a public benefit for us all. I congratulate Jackie Baillie again. I am sure that the debate will put down a marker that this is one of the important jobs that must be done in the next Parliament, to build on the excellent work that has already been done and to recognise the key role of the voluntary and charitable sectors in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is giving to credit unions. (S1O-6637)

I acknowledge the important and increasingly effective role of credit unions in my constituency and elsewhere. What support has been given to credit unions to play a role in the important money advice function that the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Act 2002 created? What support is given to school initiatives, such as the one in my constituency, that aim to develop good saving habits in our primary school children?

The serious point that I was trying to make is that, within those countries and in the chamber, people take different views, which are all credible and serious. The views are not for or against war, but about how to deal with Saddam Hussein and terrorism.

Will the member give way?

Like many people throughout Scotland and the United Kingdom, I am deeply troubled by the current international situation. We know that there is a variety of views, ranging from outright hostility, to the view that Blair is a warmonger or that another United Nations resolution is needed, or to the troubled view that we must deal with Saddam Hussein. The division in the debate is reflected in what I am told by people in my party or my constituency or by my friends and in what I am told in my own home. It is ironic that the one division that does not exist, which some would like to see, is a division between the peoples of Scotland and England on the issue. Indeed, as I reflect on our troubled world and on the divisions that our international community faces, I wonder how much more irrelevant it can be to have a party that is based entirely on the desire to seek further division within our country. The decision will not be made in this chamber, but we have an opportunity to explore these serious issues, perhaps with a freedom and space that is not available to those who are weighed down with the burden of making that decision and recognising its limitations. I will express my views on the matter, as I have always done freely to constituents who have come to me. My view is serious and troubled and is not taken lightly. A consensus exists in this country around the role of President Bush and the American Administration. One of my constituents told me that he was troubled about the war and sometimes thought that we should go one way but that at other times he was anxious and wanted us to step back. However, that man Bush, he said, is not helping. Bush is seen as a cowboy who is gung-ho and desperate for war. On the previous occasion on which we debated the matter, when there had been no debate in Westminster, we had the arrogance to say that only we could speak for the people of Scotland.  We should reflect on what people said on behalf of the people of Scotland in that serious debate in Westminster. Even if there is a mistrust of Bush, who is characterised as the cowboy, we should not crudely divide the debate into goodies and baddies. It is far more complex than that. However, that distrust of American motives is what makes the role of the United Nations so central. If we do not have international structures, where will we be? What will happen if those structures are seen to exist only to be manipulated or disregarded? Indeed where will we be if, as Mr Swinney would have it, not only the Security Council but Mr Swinney himself must be persuaded? We must argue for the importance and centrality of the United Nations. I understand the debate about the legality provided by resolution 1441 but, no matter how compelling that case may be, if we are unable to persuade the majority of the United Nations, we must reflect on and respond to that. I believe that the six tests are at least a movement by our Government in that direction. People mock the idea of Saddam Hussein going on television, but I wonder what message ordinary Iraqis might take from hearing that man admit that he will bow to the will of the united international community. There is a hunger to know that we are not being duped by Bush and that Blair has driven down the United Nations road because he believes that to be proper rather than because he wants to provide a cover for the United States. Even if we do not trust the motives of the American Administration, we must acknowledge that there may be serious reasons why we must go to war. Unlike some, I do not have a Pooterish self-importance on this matter. I ask people to reflect on what was said in Westminster by Ann Clwyd, who is not a Blair clone or a Johnny-come-lately to the debate but someone who has reflected on these serious issues and who says that we must go. We know that the country is anxious and troubled about what is happening. I urge a key and central role for the United Nations, which should be seen not simply as something to be won round but as something that is central to building a safer world for us all to live in.

Does the member agree that there is a lot of evidence of the Americans exercising an unreasonable veto, which has created great problems for people whom we would wish to support, particularly in the middle east?

I am asking the member whether he regards what the Americans have done in the past as using an unreasonable veto, which ought to be challenged. If it were challenged, he and I would be able to address the serious issues in the middle east.

Does Mr Swinney accept that there are serious people on both sides of the argument and that people in Scotland do not speak with a unanimous voice on the issue? The Westminster debate reflected the fact that people on both sides of the argument take the matter seriously and have come to different conclusions. We should give them the respect that they deserve and listen to what they have to say.

Does the member therefore agree that the concept of an unreasonable veto exists and does he accept that those of us who are concerned about the Palestinian problem question the United States' will in that matter?  Does he agree that there is an issue relating to people taking responsibilities inside the Security Council and the broader international community's acknowledgement of that?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to deal with the selling of alcohol to under-age young people. (S1O-6572)

Will the minister reflect on the serious impact that the selling of alcohol to young people has on the peace of mind and security of many of my constituents who have to live with the subsequent disorder, vandalism and aggression? Does he agree that it is urgent that we adopt a more rigorous approach to dealing with those who knowingly sell drink to under-age young people and to adults who pass alcohol on? In particular, will he examine how the use of young people in the test purchasing of cigarettes and solvents might be extended to alcohol so that shopkeepers who are willing to bolster their profits in that way can be exposed and dealt with effectively?

Will the member say whether Scottish Conservative members intend to vote for the bill?

I have spoken to some housing officials in rural areas who regarded the amendment that was passed at stage 2 as extremely urban focused. There is an issue to do with the quality of bed-and-breakfast accommodation. We know that far too many people in some of our cities have awful experiences of being placed in entirely inappropriate circumstances, but I have also been told of families, particularly in rural areas, choosing to stay in bed-and-breakfast accommodation in the  village or area in which they live rather than having to go elsewhere. I would imagine that the appropriate test would relate to what is best for individual families rather than to a prescription that comes out of a particular experience in urban areas. Nobody in the chamber wants to corral anybody into inappropriate bed-and-breakfast accommodation and I do not know any housing official who wants to do so either. There is an underlying assumption that there are people who work in housing in our local authorities who do not share our concern for the needs of families and what will happen to young people at school and in the rest of their lives. We need to support legislation that allows flexibility and puts faith in local authorities to act in the best interests of the vulnerable families whom they are dealing with. There is no monopoly of concern on this matter. We have to have rigorous regulations that allow people to work to the best standards. The way in which Linda Fabiani, in particular, has attempted to characterise this debate is unhelpful. The existence of the bill alone speaks volumes about our commitment to supporting vulnerable families.

I am sure that the minister is aware that many homeless people do not require any support at all; they simply need decent houses to live in. However, many people who find themselves homeless have support needs that go beyond housing. How will the minister work with local authorities to ensure that the support offered to vulnerable people and families is not all driven through their housing needs and by a housing approach when, in fact, a much broader approach that includes education and social work is required?

I should like to make a brief point about something that Linda Fabiani said. I think that she used the word "recalcitrant" to describe the work of local authorities. If we go into this process, I would be concerned if we were to work on the assumption that we must beat a stick over the backs of local authorities. The process will work if it is done in partnership. If local authorities have problems, we must listen seriously to what they tell us. We must listen equally seriously to those who may have problems getting support from local authorities. Recalcitrance implies reluctance, and the use of such a term is inappropriate to describe the delivery of such an important local service. That service will work only if there is a genuine partnership with and commitment to local authorities; it will not work in the hostile environment suggested by a word such as "recalcitrant".

What would Mike Russell do?

Does the member agree that the problem for a lot of our children is their experience at home, which has led to their being in the care system? She seems to be making a false distinction between the experience of children who are looked after and the experience of those who are not. Some of our most troubled and damaged children are those who are not fortunate enough to have been recognised as having a problem, taken out of their circumstances and put in a system that meets their needs. There is a danger in implying that it is the care system that damages the children—what brought them into the system in the first place is what damaged them.

I welcome the opportunity to welcome the passing  of this important bill. I, too, congratulate the Justice 2 Committee—in particular the convener—on its hard work and on its rigorous and diligent approach to such an important piece of legislation. That work gives the lie to the idea that we sit here and do as we are told, because it shows that we are actively involved in the process of improving and changing legislation. The bill is important. We all understand the importance of the people of this country having faith in the criminal justice system. There are serious consequences for us all if that faith is broken down. We all have stories from victims of crime of their experience of the crime and of the courts system, which seems—perversely—to compound the distress that people have experienced. The bill's commitment to improving the rights of victims is significant as it will make a real difference not only to victims' experience of the system but, I hope, to the attitudes of those who are charged with running that system. As others have highlighted, there is frustration that the bill has been characterised as being about smacking, or sending 16 and 17-year-olds to the children's hearings system or sectarianism. I understand that those who report on our work must sometimes use shorthand but, given that we all abhor spin, it would be good if there were a little more depth to the scrutiny and analysis of substantial pieces of work such as this. The Parliament has wrestled with significant issues, but I believe that our focus has been on what will work. The concerns about the smacking provisions were not because people want children to be beaten. The concerns about the sectarianism provisions were not because people are in favour of sectarianism. We need to recognise when we make legislation that we need the space to be able to ask whether or not something works, instead of being concerned about how our position might be characterised elsewhere. I congratulate the Executive on its willingness to listen and to change. It has certainly listened to Labour back benchers on the issue of 16 and 17-year-olds. I am pleased that the Executive has listened so hard, especially to those who wanted more action on anti-social behaviour. It is profoundly depressing that, when the Parliament's committees and back benchers do their job, people settle for lazy language about U-turns and humiliating defeats. The bill has been strengthened rather than weakened by the Executive's willingness to listen. The Executive's work has been strengthened rather than weakened by its willingness to respond to the points that were raised. I congratulate the Executive and all those involved in the nitty-gritty work on the bill. I look  forward to the bill enacting a real difference in people's lives.

I want clarification of the issues around, for example, a march that might attract violence. Does that mean that if a group said that it would disrupt a march and cause bother, such a march would have to be banned because it would be perceived as being part of the problem? That would be a troubling road to go down in relation to these sensitive issues.

If my street credibility were to be destroyed by Bill Aitken commending me, it  would have been destroyed a long time ago. The Labour party and Labour members have fought long and hard on the issue of crime and disorder in our communities. It is a matter of justice, social justice and equality. In representing my community, I would not be able to do anything other than fight on that issue. We need to consider the expense that is involved in ASBOs. Even if ASBOs were pursued only by local authorities, the housing associations would continue to have to do the work to gather the information—there is no change in the situation. I hope that the minister will look at the operation of ASBOs in practice to make it as easy as possible for those who wish to use this means of addressing the problem.  Amendment 4 agreed to.  [Amendment 93 moved—[Mr Jim Wallace]—and agreed to.]

I rise to speak to and move amendment 4 in my name, and to speak to Executive amendment 93 and amendment 109, also in my name. I cannot overstate the importance of this part of a bill that is of central importance to improving the quality of life of people across Scotland. I acknowledge the key role of ordinary constituents who have fought to have their voices heard and for recognition of their experience of anti-social behaviour. No longer is such behaviour dismissed as just a neighbourhood dispute. We now acknowledge the huge impact of anti-social behaviour on people's health and well-being, and the impact that it can have on the quality of life of  ordinary families. In the worst cases, people are forced to move from their homes.  In this Parliament, we have the opportunity to express an opinion on many things, but we have a great power to listen as elected representatives to what ordinary people are saying, to draw general conclusions from that experience and to act to address the problems. I am grateful to have that privilege. The problem of anti-social behaviour has been recognised in the development of anti-social behaviour orders. However, there is a recognition of the weakness in the way in which the orders have been implemented. They have not been as effective as we may have hoped. I seek to address that with amendments 4 and 109. I start with a couple of caveats. We know that anti-social behaviour is not the province only of those in council housing or, more broadly, in the socially rented sector. It is a problem across sectors, including the owner-occupied sector, and therefore needs to be addressed not just through good housing management, but through the work of the police and local authorities, and by changing the attitudes of the courts and the judicial system. However, the vast majority of ASBOs that have been implemented have been against council house tenants, and we have to recognise that that is a weakness. I am glad that the Executive has lodged an amendment that seeks to address that by giving power to other social landlords to promote the use of ASBOs, but equally it has said that they must do that in conjunction with the local authority, so that we will still have a practical approach. In the past, I have highlighted the problem of the private sector and I seek an assurance from the minister that that will be addressed. We may not expect the use of ASBOs to be promoted, but good housing management and management of complaints by private-sector landlords can inform the work of local authorities in promoting the use of ASBOs in the private sector. Amendment 4 addresses one weakness in the development of ASBOs. One problem that has been identified is the length of time that it takes to implement an anti-social behaviour order. That problem undermines the confidence not just of those who need the protection of ASBOs, but of those who are considering their options in tackling anti-social behaviour. It is a problem if that delay acts as a deterrent to people using the tools that are available to them. That has been addressed in the bill through the establishment of interim anti-social behaviour orders, but there is still an opportunity to create delay. My amendment 4  seeks to address the potential to delay that is created by section 38, which states: "after considering any representations made by or on behalf of that person". That does not identify a time scale, and would allow someone to simply not turn up or use other means of delaying. Interim anti-social behaviour orders can be speedy and effective without reducing people's rights. We should view them in the same way that we view interim interdicts. Such orders will not diminish the rights of alleged perpetrators of anti-social behaviour, since cases will still have to be made and determined, but they will allow for offending behaviour to be halted while a determination is being made. Members may wish to compare that with how we respond to domestic abuse cases. The other amendment in my name—amendment 109—addresses the persistent problem, which was identified to me, of the police, local authorities and all relevant agencies sharing information. The issue is about taking a varied approach to having responsibility for addressing anti-social behaviour in a local area. Sharing information will clearly help. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities argued in favour of that at stage 1. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations is in favour of it. The Auditor General recommended in an Accounts Commission report that appropriate systems must be developed to enable information to be stored and transferred between all agencies involved in youth justice. It is clear that that is also true of anti-social behaviour. There is a need for more uniformity. Action in this area should not be dependent on the good will of individual police officers and officers in housing departments. The amendment would allow for proactive work, looking at issues such as acceptable behaviour contracts, and it is important to develop local strategies that include information sharing. That is what amendment 109 seeks to do. By supporting amendments 4, 93 and 109, the Scottish Parliament can send out the message that we take anti-social behaviour seriously, and that we are giving the agencies that are trying to reduce or prevent such behaviour adequate tools to do their job. I move amendment 4, and urge support for amendments 93 and 109.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Am I right in thinking that there is nothing to preclude any party in the chamber from publishing its own document to stand beside the Parliament's budget document?

I must point out that the successful high-visibility policing campaign in Pollok has reassured my constituents that those questions are being addressed at a local level.

Will Mr Rumbles give way?

It is on another issue.

I am sure that the minister is aware that a significant majority of low-paid workers are women. That is partly because of their need to be flexible to meet their disproportionate care responsibilities and partly because of job segregation, which means that women's jobs are less valued and therefore lower paid. What steps are being taken to address the underlying inequality in the work force that creates the pay gap? I seek the minister's assurance that any strategy to address the problem of low pay will recognise the particular and pressing needs of women.

In congratulating Tom McCabe on securing this evening's debate, I recognise the important work that is being done both in his area and in my constituency. Across Glasgow, there are excellent examples of efforts to encourage young people to be active and involved in sports. One important example is the free swimming and free swimming  lessons that Glasgow now offers to all its young people. We now need to consider who is taking up that opportunity to see whether more needs to be done. Two voices can be heard when we talk about a sports strategy. One discussion concerns how we promote excellence and how we get our young athletes to represent Scotland and the UK on the international stage. In that regard, I am sure that many members would share my regret that some young sportspeople, who would have done Scotland proud on the international stage, have been denied the right to participate in the paralympics because of the bizarre decision to exclude people with learning disabilities. That is a matter of regret. Achieving excellence and representing one's country is important, but I will concentrate my remarks on the importance of sport in encouraging the involvement in and take up of activities. Our health statistics clearly underpin the importance of exercise and of being involved in sport. We know that tackling ill health is not just about buildings, no matter how important they may be, but about addressing lifestyle issues. As the motion says, sport can also offer an important lesson about community spirit and involvement. I have a friend whose son is a young footballer, whose talents are, I am happy to say, currently being used in the east end of Glasgow. In discussing that with his parents, I made the point that they must be very proud of him. His mother, as wise as ever, said, "Yes, I am proud of him and, if he doesn't make it, I will at least know that, for the next five or six years, he will be doing something positive with his life rather than perhaps taking some of the dead-end options that might be open to him in the city of Glasgow." If for no other reason, I am sure that that is why many people welcome the importance of sport. We need to consider how we support activity locally, particularly in disadvantaged communities. We need to consider the groups that are more reluctant to be involved in sport. We also need to consider how people get access to sporting facilities. Not every young person has a mum and dad who can run around in a car to take them from one place to another. We need to consider that issue imaginatively. Before mentioning Euro 2008, let me say that we perhaps need to recognise that, sometimes, when we talk about sport, we talk too much about sports that encourage only the passive spectator in us all. In my view, football can be particularly troubling, given the fact that the closest that people get to activity is not even to go to the game but to sit and watch it in the pub. Here I make a plug for participation in sports such as running, in which the elites run with the poorest and lamest,  such as myself. That is perhaps an important egalitarian principle that we should consider. I want to ask the minister where the moneys that have been released from the Euro 2008 bid are going. A number of local initiatives in my constituency would benefit from that money. For example, Hillwood boys club and Mosspark boys club—which run teams for boys and girls—serve an important community need, but their only resources are the people who run them, so their means are extremely limited. It is important that we consider initiatives to support young girls in sport. Again, we should consider the models that have been developed in Glasgow through initiatives such as the women's 10K and the Glasgow women's jogging network, which recognise that girls are less likely to take up sport than boys. Finally, I ask the minister to address the lack of access to funding for organisations such as local sports clubs. Sometimes, as in the case of Mosspark boys club in my constituency, such organisations are encircled by social inclusion partnership areas but still cannot get access to funds, despite the fact that they are meeting the same needs as are being met by other groups in the SIPs. I welcome the debate. I urge the Executive to examine the anomalies in funding and to address not only the delivery of sports initiatives but the factors that will improve access to those sports initiatives for youngsters in my constituency and elsewhere.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The member asked what the Executive has done in the past four years. I invite her to Pollok to see the new Rosshall Academy, the new St Paul's High School and the refurbished Lourdes Secondary School. We now have an environment to match the talents of the young people in my constituency.

Alasdair Morgan seems to suggest that when people choose to vote in a particular way, they are not able to choose to vote in another way. The fallacy is being promoted that under the first-past-the-post system people cannot kick out elected representatives with whom they disagree. Unlike some proportional representation systems, people can always do that under first past the post. If Alasdair Morgan does not know of any examples of that, I will give him plenty from throughout the country.

I urge the minister not to reinforce a false division.  The fact that we are prosecuting young offenders does not mean that we are failing to support services to tackle youth offending. Does the minister agree that taking such behaviour seriously and listening to our vulnerable communities sends out a strong message not just to young offenders, but to those young people who surround them and who are impressed by them? It sends out the message that there are consequences to intimidating and bullying local communities. Such a strong message will stop youngsters on the fringes of problematic behaviour going down that road.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Where is the accountability to the electorate in relation to the members who were elected to the Scottish Parliament on the list system and have been sacked by their party before the electorate have had the opportunity to give a verdict? Does the member agree that there are flaws in all systems and that we must identify which flaws we can live with?

Will the member give way?

For some youngsters, drinking may be a result of boredom. However, in my constituency young people gather to drink behind the swimming pool that provides them with free  swimming lessons and free swimming time. They do not engage in such activities. This is not a simple issue of resources. Youngsters need to value themselves, so that they would rather go swimming than stand outside the swimming pool causing bother to those who are going in.

That is the best excuse that I have heard.

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing this debate on a very important issue. I acknowledge the work of Renfrew Council on Alcohol and I hope that the lessons of its work are being disseminated throughout groups and organisations far beyond its area. I am aware that important work is being taken up by groups in my constituency and I note the important work that Glasgow City Council has done on the issue. The starting point for me is that we know that young people might experiment with drink, but we also know that a lot of young people are damaged by adults' drinking in their homes. They are not strangers to drink, regardless of whether they drink, and there is a broader issue of how we address the problems. I will focus my comments on two areas and flag up to the minister, and to the Executive more broadly, the importance of giving further consideration to those issues. It is important that there is serious, joined-up thinking, of which the previous speaker gave us an example. The impact of under-age drinking on the safety of our communities is an important issue in my constituency and, I am sure, elsewhere. The police tell me that it is difficult to manage under-age drinking, never mind eradicate it. Gatherings of young people drinking cause disorder and create fear for many people in our communities. My constituents often highlight problems to me in relation to off-licences that become a magnet for  young people. There is a problem with people who, knowingly or unknowingly, sell alcohol to under-age teenagers, but a more difficult problem, for which I do not have a solution, is adults who buy alcohol on behalf of young people. Our communities know the off-licences that are involved in such practices and are often in despair at the regularity with which they happen. We need to have an education campaign among adults and to challenge the off-licences that act in this way. Some off-licences have developed codes of conduct, but more work must be done in conjunction with the police and the licensing authorities to tackle the matter. Being involved in such a culture can have a terrible impact on young people; young girls are particularly vulnerable. Parents have to be aware of what is involved. We know the connection between chaotic drug abuse and drink abuse and the impact that that abuse can have on the community, in terms both of young children seeing older people acting in that way and of the health and well-being of the under-age drinkers. Schools and people who work with young people must keep in mind the fact that, sometimes, poor attendance, lack of attention and bad behaviour might be connected to a young person's drinking habits. Once, I was trying to get a young person to attend school, but he kept saying that he did not like French. Finally, his mother came to a meeting and told us that he was a lot better since he had got off the drink. His problem was that he was an alcoholic, but, because he was 14 years old, we had been treating him as if he had a simple problem with attendance. I tell that story to emphasise that, even when offending behaviour is not evident, the pupil's problem might be related to alcohol. People who work with young people should be aware of that fact. I wish the Executive, the police and local authorities the very best in the important work that they must do to address the broader consequences of under-age drinking.

If Tommy Sheridan thinks that I was shouting, he has obviously not been in my company often enough. I want to make a serious point. I agree that there are serious issues about the selling of weapons in the middle east, which has created problems. However, that does not mean that, now that the weapons are there, we do not have the right to say that they ought not to be used against the Iraqi people or their neighbours. We can have a debate about what the Americans did in Iraq, but we will still have to deal with the current problems and with Saddam Hussein. People are troubled about how we can deal with and sort out the current situation. Tommy Sheridan does not have faith in the United Nations. What does he have faith in that would sort out the current problems?

Will Tommy Sheridan give way?

I am pleased to have secured tonight's members' business debate on the private rented housing sector. I am grateful that the motion has been selected and for the cross-party support that has been shown. I must be fairly high up on the league table of people who have been successful in securing members' business debates, so if anyone wants advice on how to get it done, they should come and see me. A key responsibility of MSPs is to take action and to work with constituents who are experiencing problems and who bring cases to us. It is also our responsibility to analyse the underlying issues that create individual difficulties. The ability to see a direct link between speaking to an MSP and a development in legislation or practice is one of the things that can build credibility for the political process. I will outline the case of a constituent of mine to illustrate the problem and then I will highlight the challenges that the case raises. Members might be aware from previous contributions that I have made that constituents often come to me about anti-social behaviour and disorder, particularly in our more vulnerable communities. The case that I am about to describe has had as huge an impact on me as any that has been brought before me, and I cannot overstate my strength of feeling that the problem must be tackled.  My constituents own their own home. They have lived in the area of their choice for 17 years. They brought up their family in the area, and wish to stay there. They are public-spirited people—the very people who strengthen communities. The community where they live is struggling a little and, over time, as owner-occupiers have sold up, private landlords have bought the properties. In this particular case, a private tenant moved in above the family. His behaviour began poorly and deteriorated: there was fighting, aggression, violence and damage to property. My constituents are reasonable people. They sought to make a complaint to the landlord—a logical thing to do. It is absolutely scandalous that they had to go to the Land Register of Scotland and pay for the privilege of establishing who the landlord was. Having succeeded in getting hold of the landlord, they could not get him to take action. During my meeting with the landlord and the police, I discovered that he did not see that he had a particular responsibility. Indeed, he seemed bemused at the suggestion that he might take some action. On being asked by me for a point of contact where neighbours could complain to him and let him know the seriousness of the issue, he replied, "I only have a mobile phone. Would you give out your mobile phone number or private house number?" He was none too happy when I pointed out to him that responsibilities went along with the job, and that a mobile phone was perhaps not a sufficient way in which to manage those responsibilities. The family, who were harassed and targeted because they made a complaint, had to move out. They had to walk away from the investment that their home represented to them because of the impact of the situation on their health, well-being and peace of mind. The community must now be more vulnerable for the loss of those people, who at least had some fighting spirit. It is shocking that a private landlord's lack of responsibility can do that, and that shock is compounded by the fact that public money, allocated through housing benefits, can fund that private landlord's rental income. I recall a distressing meeting with my constituents. I had agreed to phone them the next day, but they indicated not to phone during the day, as they would both be out working. Then, the wife lifted her eyes to the ceiling and said, "And, yes, I feel like I'm going out to work to pay for the mayhem that's making my life a misery." It cannot be right that landlords can receive public funds in that way without addressing their public responsibilities. I am currently in dialogue with Ian Davidson, the MP for Pollok, about whether some of these matters can usefully be addressed  through the benefits system at a Westminster level. Cases such as the one that I have described create challenges for public policy. I underline the importance of the private sector. I have spoken at length to representatives of the Scottish Association of Landlords, and wish to emphasise that the private sector has an important role in housing provision. The Scottish Association of Landlords is in favour of regulating the sector, as the good practice that has been adopted by some landlords is diminished by the appalling behaviour of the bad. I thank the Scottish Association of Landlords for taking the time to discuss the issues with me, as well as the Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland and Shelter Scotland for their briefings and information on the matter. It is significant that Shelter, the CIHS and SAL are united in their support for action in this area. I turn to the issue's impact on our strategy for community regeneration. In the case that I highlighted, the local area is benefiting from public moneys to create economic regeneration, but at the same time, public moneys are feeding the monster that makes the community vulnerable and fragile. In order to address the problems, I urge the Executive to examine seriously the possibility of an accreditation or regulation scheme, or, as SAL suggested, a licence-to-let scheme. At the very least, there must be a system whereby only houses that meet proper maintenance standards can be made available for publicly funded renting, and whereby landlords, too, must meet standards for tenant management. I further urge the Executive to continue the important work on making anti-social behaviour orders—ASBOs—effective. Between 1999 and 2001, only two out of the 210 anti-social behaviour orders that were sought came from the private rented sector. We need to consider how to place obligations on private landlords to provide the relevant information to local authorities, so that they can address and promote ASBOs. Let me summarise my very strongly held views on this subject. My constituents showed great courage and paid a heavy price for being willing to stand up for themselves. Their courage in highlighting their situation must be rewarded with action. I am appalled to discover that public money can be paid to landlords but that landlords have no reciprocal responsibility to provide a decent service to tenants and no obligation to deal with anti-social behaviour by their tenants. I am disturbed that landlords are under no obligation to be accessible to neighbours whose lives are being made a misery by anti-social tenants and that they are under no pressure to act consistently and  appropriately against tenants who cause problems. I am deeply troubled that, at the same time as significant public moneys are being injected into areas to create economic and social regeneration, public moneys are going directly to private landlords, in whose interests it might be to depress house values and who have no incentive to deal with anti-social behaviour, which is creating fragile and fearful communities. I emphasise that I am not attacking those who are entitled to housing benefit or the many reputable private landlords who provide an important housing service. My target is clear: private landlords who accept public moneys but do not accept their public responsibilities. Anti-social behaviour is a problem throughout housing tenures. We are entitled to demand that private landlords play their part in tackling it. The debate offers the Executive and the private sector an important challenge. I trust that they will rise to it.

I am privileged to sum up on behalf of the Labour party, and I confirm on behalf of members of my party that we are anxious for the Presiding Officer to deal with the question of which amendments will be voted on. It is important that we have the  opportunity to express our views clearly on the amendments that have been lodged. No one in the chamber underestimates the seriousness of the position that our world is in or the hard issues that we are all confronting. I recognise that, across the chamber and far beyond it, people are debating and wrestling with all the elements of concern that make the situation so difficult. In a world where we all want certainty and straightforward answers, we are confirmed when we consider the current situation in the view that there are no easy answers or quick fixes. I find myself troubled by the degree of certainty that some people have expressed on the motives of other people in relation to those matters. It is almost impossible to encapsulate in one motion the conflicting feelings and views that we all have on the matter. My view of the Liberal amendment is that it is far too prescriptive in setting down in clear detail what should happen in a very difficult and fluid situation. I will deal with the constitutional issue, because that is important. Our constitutional settlement is one in which power is shared. In the Labour party, like everywhere else, I have sat on committees and been in places where we have had debates, and everyone has thought that where they are is the most important place and that everything that matters must therefore be debated in that place. The reality of power sharing is that we must accept that some debates are for some places and that other debates are for other places. It is important to understand that and not to hide behind the constitutional argument. We should not accept the nationalists' view that only this chamber can speak for Scotland on everything to do with Scotland. We cannot create the impression that, unless we have a debate, the people of Scotland will not have a voice. The SNP may wish to retreat from Westminster, but we do not. I have to say frankly to John McAllion that his argument is an argument for independence and not for a devolved settlement. It is in the interests of nationalists to argue that this Parliament is the only place where Scotland's voice is heard, but we know that there is a significant reproach to that argument. If one listens to the voices on all sides of the debate at Westminster—whether it is Tam Dalyell or George Galloway, Helen Liddell or John Reid—one cannot say that Scotland's representatives are not being heard. I may wish to ask, "Where are the SNP voices in Westminster, arguing for Scotland?" I have to tell George Reid that, in a contribution that was thoughtful, serious and challenging, I found offensive the suggestion that only we can act as the conscience of Scotland. Westminster is where the decision will be taken and where decisions will  be interrogated. I have confidence that those who represent Scotland will ensure that that interrogation takes place.

I have spoken to my colleague in Westminster about the matter and I understand that Westminster MPs are in the position to make that decision. Any such decision is obviously so serious that the place where the decision is taken is where the decision must be interrogated. My colleague told me that, if demand for a debate would actually put our forces under threat, a decision would obviously have to be considered. If the SNP had been serious about seeking a serious debate, it would have chosen words that would allow members to reflect on the issues and support it. The SNP's motion is gratuitous in its assertion that the Westminster Government is driving an inevitable path to war. Donald Gorrie's argument that we should act only if we are under threat would preclude taking action on a humanitarian basis; indeed, one of the most serious criticisms of American Governments through the ages has been their willingness to act only in their own interests. In Britain and Scotland, there is a long and honourable tradition of pacifism. I respect that tradition and understand that many people in this country do not believe that war is ever justifiable. However, I do not take agree with them. In certain circumstances, military action is necessary. It is not comfortable to believe that, but if I was ever in doubt about that belief, the upheavals in central Europe in the 1990s confirmed it. A criticism that has been made of the American Government is that its motives are cynical. We are told that if it had been serious, it would have dealt with Saddam Hussein last time. During the Gulf war, I remember arguing hard against military intervention, as sanctions had not been given time to have effect. Later, I was struck by a contradiction in my position in that, once the forces were there, we condemned the fact that Saddam Hussein was not acted against. We must be honest about our positions and reflect on their consequences. John Swinney would not acknowledge that the threat of force got the UN inspectors into Iraq. There is a serious lesson in respect of North Korea—it is much more difficult to deal with a country when it has nuclear capacity. For those who accept that military intervention can be justified, we need to ensure that the case is made and that no alternative is possible.

That is such a serious question that it is impossible to answer it in 30 seconds. However, I will try to encapsulate my position in one sentence. I think that what happened in Kosovo was justified. The issue that we are debating is serious and troubling. We must be honest and recognise that much of the outcome hinges on the UN. I recognise the important role of the UN. The UN is not perfect, but we have a responsibility to bolster and uphold the role of our international institutions, which are our best hope. The Government has made a clear-cut commitment to work through the UN and has worked hard to hold the US to doing so. If members were honest with themselves, they would have to ask themselves whether we ever thought that an American Government would be willing to work through the UN after 11 September. Those who attack the Government as unwilling to go through the UN reserve their position should a second resolution at the UN be passed. Tommy Sheridan's amendment is explicit on that matter, whereas John Swinney is at best equivocal. I welcome the Government's action on international issues, not just in respect of Iraq, and welcome its commitment to dealing with the international situation, particularly in the middle east. The Government is also addressing issues relating to third-world debt. I welcome its commitment to international development and to discussion and dialogue throughout the international community. I know that my Labour colleagues in Westminster who are charged with the responsibility of speaking on behalf of Scotland will put Scotland's case. Our people have the right to campaign and argue for positions in which they believe and our Labour colleagues and other colleagues in Westminster are responsible for taking serious decisions at the appropriate time.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does Tommy Sheridan agree that the troubling lesson from North Korea lies in the dangers that result when a nation has developed a nuclear capacity? The lesson that we should take from the North Korean situation is that we must act against Saddam Hussein now if he has weapons of mass destruction, as a time will come when Iraq's having such weapons will create a danger for the entire international community.

I thought that we were discussing a non-controversial matter this morning so I was amazed to find myself on the point of intervening on Fiona Hyslop. I welcome the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Labour party in this debate on the draft Scottish Parliament (Disqualification) Order 2003. I note that the SNP is so enthused about constitutional issues that Fiona Hyslop has been left to be enthusiastic almost on her own. Her attempt to make a connection between a technical order and the broader arguments around independence was, perhaps, a jump too far for most of us. Members will appreciate that I have had to fight hard to secure the privilege of speaking on this issue on behalf of the Labour party and I am honoured that I have been allowed to do so. [ Laughter. ] We all realise that, even though not all debates in the chamber are glamorous and attract attention, they are all important and have to be taken seriously. There are some things that just simply have to be done. At the heart of the order is an important issue that relates to our wish to strive for the highest possible standards in public life and to ensure that MSPs do not have any conflicts of interest. I accept that technicalities relating to that issue must be worked through and I believe that any contradictions that arise can be worked out in this Parliament or Westminster. It is important that MSPs can focus on the various elements of their responsibilities. It is particularly important that they have the time to work on behalf of their constituents, who need a voice in the systems, institutions and organisations that are often insufficiently responsive to people's concerns. The Labour party is fully committed to achieving those standards and is happy to support the order, which updates and clarifies the situation. The order deals with technical issues but, obviously, the principles of democratic accountability, probity and commitment to providing the best possible service to our constituents go far beyond anything that an order can deliver and we need constantly to reflect on how we operate. The Labour party is committed to being part of that important process, as are all  members of the Parliament. I do not believe that there is dispute in the chamber about those principles. Occasionally, during policy debates, it is tempting to impugn the motives of those against whom we are arguing even though they simply disagree with us. We have to be cautious about the language that we use when we debate with one another. If we imply that members of the Parliament are operating deceitfully, the Parliament will be damaged. The Labour party supports the order and I hope that the rest of the Parliament will do so as well.

Does Bill Aitken agree that there are two separate issues? One is to do with the availability of housing, but another is to do with housing being desirable and people being supported to stay in that accommodation. It is not simply a question of how many houses are to be built; it is about how people are to be supported and how communities are to be regenerated as places where people will want to live.

Does the member accept that one of the concerns about anti-social behaviour orders is that they are not being promoted and they are not seen as effective once they get to the courts? There is a danger that even if an anti-social behaviour order has brought about an eviction, but there is an obligation to re-house, the community has a sense that nothing has happened to the person who received the order. I am not saying that that feeling is right, but it might undermine our approach to homelessness and to anti-social behaviour.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate as the convener of the Social Justice Committee. As ever, I will be mindful of the burden of controlling my tongue. I want to record my thanks to all those who have been involved in the report's preparation. In particular, I thank the clerks, who again worked to a tight timetable with their usual efficiency. I am sure that the other members of the committee will want to add their thanks for the support that the clerking team gave them. I also thank my committee colleagues for their work in producing the report. There was a remarkable degree of consensus around the key issues that were highlighted. I thank all the witnesses and those who gave written evidence to the committee and I acknowledge the important work of the homelessness task force. There is no doubt that there was significant consensus among those who gave evidence to the Social Justice Committee and that the committee is willing to embrace the general principles of the bill. However, it would also be fair to say that the committee was troubled by the bill and wished to interrogate the issues further. We desire to flag up concerns so as to ensure that the legislation is robust and achieves the aim of eradicating hopelessness. I welcome the response that the minister has already given to some of the questions that have been highlighted. Raising such hard questions about an area of legislation that is as important as that on homelessness can be rather difficult, because the issue is charged with a degree of emotion and concern. However, it would be unfortunate if a climate were created in which we could not ask those hard questions for fear of being branded as heartless or as people who would wilfully throw other people on to the streets. I am disappointed that some of the response to the committee's report has been couched in such terms. In my view, we have nothing to fear from a robust debate from which better policy can perhaps be developed. The danger is not that there might be robust debate, but that the debate  be closed down so that it becomes impossible to explore the real difficulties that arise in this area. For the record, the committee's report is the product neither of a lack of grasp of the issues nor of a lack of compassion for some of the most vulnerable people in our communities. The report is not a strident effort at electioneering on the issue of disorder, but a genuine cross-party attempt by committee members who are doing their job by interrogating some of the key issues. If I do not manage to cover all the committee's concerns, which fall into several areas, I am sure that other colleagues will flag them up, but let me start by making one point. The homelessness task force and others have made it clear that homelessness policy and legislation must be placed in the context of broader housing policy to ensure that homelessness is given proper attention and brought from the margin into the centre of the debate. We cannot discuss housing without paying attention to homelessness, but equally we cannot divorce action on homelessness from our broader agenda on housing policy, community regeneration and community safety. It is essential that we speak with some consistency on those matters. There are crucial concerns about the financing of the bill. Evidence ranged from the view that the bill had no financial resource implications to the view—expressed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others—that the bill was doable provided that the appropriate resources were available. I take the view that anything is doable with the appropriate resources. However, when we explore the issue further, we need to have the harder discussion about where the priorities lie. The needs of vulnerable people need not simply be met through their housing needs. There must be an explicit debate about how best resources should be used, even if those resources were unlimited. We need to have such a debate if we are not to get into a position in which other supports that are provided for vulnerable people whose problems are not expressed through their housing needs might be left to the side. I wish to explore the bill's impact on hidden homelessness and on allocation policy. If the priority list is to be extended and then abolished, two questions come to mind immediately. First, if there is no priority, who will prioritise when all are a priority? Secondly, what happens to those who are not homeless but who wish to move to different accommodation? Central to the credibility of social housing as a real housing choice is people's ability to move inside the sector. We need to ensure that whatever we do about any aspect of housing does not work against such movement.  Perhaps the most contentious response to the committee's report concerned anti-social behaviour. I agree with the argument that anti-social behaviour cannot be tackled only through homelessness legislation. That is why I have been considering appropriate amendments to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. However, equally, we cannot disregard anti-social behaviour if we are to tackle the question of homelessness. Let me make it clear that very few homeless people have problems that are caused by their own anti-social behaviour. Indeed, my constituency has striking and very difficult examples of people who have had to declare themselves homeless precisely because of the anti-social behaviour of others. There is no hierarchy of distress that needs to be recognised, but the tensions and demands of the difficulties that are experienced by people in their local communities need to be acknowledged. All those needs must be addressed in our approach to housing. We need a strong message about safety and security. People should have a right not only to a home but to a safe home and a safe community. People who display anti-social behaviour must show a willingness to work to address those problems. They need support, but we have the right to say that that support must be robust and challenging. Otherwise, we are saying that individuals who are under siege in their homes and in their communities do not deserve a real response. There must be participation from those who create the problems, unless we want to say that we should just dismiss such people as being beyond help and that they can only be tolerated. However, such tolerance is easier for those who do not have to live with the problem. The committee made an important point about the need to review and monitor the policy that will be introduced once the bill comes into force. It is not enough to have sufficient resources; we have to be open to the possibility that the policy will develop on the ground in a way that was not intended. I seek a commitment to a rigorous approach throughout the legislative process, and a rigorous approach once the legislation is being implemented. There needs to be openness on all sides to reflect what is happening, so that our policy does what we want it to do rather than what we thought it was going to do when we started out on this road. I commend the stage 1 report to the Parliament and I urge support for the general principles of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Bill.

Will the member give way?

Does the minister agree that, despite his rhetoric, most of Tommy Sheridan's proposals on issues such as free school meals would export money out of Glasgow rather than give money to the city? Does she acknowledge the importance of factoring in deprivation in distribution of moneys throughout Scotland, which is activity from which Glasgow certainly benefits? Given that only one out of every three jobs that are created in Glasgow is taken by a Glaswegian, will the minister work with the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning to ensure that Glasgow citizens are fully able to benefit from the economic regeneration of the city?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am concerned about equal opportunities issues in relation to this matter. Could you clarify whether the people who participated in the interview panel understood beforehand what the process was and that, in involving themselves in that process, they would accept the result, whatever it was? If the SNP was not content with that procedure, it should not have become involved with it in the first place. I presume that, before the process started, it was explained to the SNP members of the panel but that, as they did not get their own way and were party to the discussions, they decided to bring the issue to an interview panel of 129.

On a point of order, can I have clarification on whether everyone who was involved in the interview process understood before they went into that process how it would work?

Is Bill Aitken saying that we should not invest £700 million in Glasgow's acute services?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to today's important debate. I share the desire that has been expressed by members throughout the chamber to provide improved school and hospital buildings and investment opportunities in our local communities. I do not recognise the rather false and lazy dichotomy that was posed by Tommy Sheridan, but I acknowledge that there is a serious debate and that there are a number of models for investment. We need to balance one thing against the other, but I concur that there is a need to develop a best-value model. I declare an interest, in that I am a member of the Co-operative Party and am supported by the broader co-operative movement. I remind members that the co-operative movement has a long and honourable, radical and challenging history. There is an important role for the co-operative and mutual sector. I am sorry that Keith Harding has left the chamber; I found his comments about what he described as the not-for-profit sector insulting. Social enterprises can be successful and offer interesting opportunities through businesses that can be effective without necessarily distributing profits. We should not allow the proud history of the co-operative movement to be truncated into the description that we sometimes hear from the SNP of a not-for-profit trust. I will come back to that point in a minute. We are all aware of the important and difficult issues on which we are focused. I am disappointed that Tommy Sheridan did not welcome the important dialogue between the STUC and the Scottish Executive on the question of staffing, because it is an issue that has troubled people. I welcome the movement that there has been. Another issue is the implications of long- term funding and whether it represents value in the long term.

We have to continue the dialogue. I am committed, whether somebody works in the private sector or in the public sector, to them having a decent wage with the right to be represented by a trade union. There is a continuing dialogue. When we consider value for money in the long term, we have to factor in more than the straight financial deal. In my constituency there are a number of excellent examples of new schools and refurbished secondary schools. They are excellent resources, not just for young pupils to learn in, but for regenerating and sustaining local communities. The head teachers report the enthusiasm of interested young people. Indeed, the young people whom I spoke to mentioned that. We cannot ignore the importance of the message that is being given to young people. The fact that the schools exist now, two years after they were first planned, shows how the pupils are valued. When I was young, a new secondary school started to be built beside me when I was in primary 4. It took until I was in fourth year at secondary school before it was finished. We have to recognise the significance of the speedy movement and the message that that gives to young people. How can we quantify what has been done in marking the capacity of young people to achieve? How can we quantify the fact that, instead of people voting with their feet and going away from them, schools are becoming magnets? I taught in Springburn Academy. When I left—I hope that it was not my fault—the school had 300 pupils, and the number was falling. The number is now 800 and rising, partly because we are putting money into the buildings and valuing the young people. When I met youngsters at Ross Hall Academy, I was struck by their enthusiasm, their courtesy and the fact that they were bubbling over with pride in themselves and their school. It is clear that those existed before the buildings existed, but the children now have surroundings that match their talents and the talents of their teachers and parents. With regard to best value, we cannot underestimate the importance of the fact that that school exists now rather than in five or 10 years' time. The dynamic is important to our communities. On other options, I welcome the openness to new ideas of the Minister for Finance and Public Services. Indeed, the minister was willing to come  to a meeting with the Scottish Co-operative and Mutual Forum and Mutuo to discuss the co-operative and mutual sector's capacity to contribute to this work. There is a challenge for that sector to produce ideas that the Minister for Finance and Public Services can work on. I hope that people look for credible responses on that. The Scottish Executive needs to draw on that expertise. We have to recognise the distinctive issues of social enterprise and the social economy and—I say to the SNP—not just the not-for-profit element, but the democratic accountability and transparency elements. The co-operative movement is good in those areas, because it links issues to local communities. We do not hear about that from the SNP. If models are presented as community models, they have to be developed as serious community models. I end with a challenge to the Scottish Executive to harness the expertise that exists in the co-operative and mutual sector in particular. I know that the social economy is being reviewed, but I ask the minister to seriously consider establishing a task force charged with developing a strategy for social enterprise, because social enterprise has a role in this debate and a broader role in our local communities. Social enterprise is much more successful at employing local people than other enterprises can be. I hope that the minister will consider seriously the broader issue that has been highlighted in this debate, so as to see that model as significant not just in procurement, but more broadly in terms of local community and economic regeneration.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Mike Rumbles was summing up on behalf of the Liberal Democrat group and I seek clarification of whether his position is the position of the Liberal Democrat group on the motion.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate, which has been a little more honest than some of the debates that we have had on the  subject. We have sometimes settled for feeling sorry for victims of domestic abuse, instead of focusing on the harder issues that we must confront in relation to domestic abuse and the broader context of violence against women and children. Although we always look to do more, we should recognise that acknowledging the problem is a good place to start. We should reflect on the fact that it was not always thus. At one stage, people would not even have acknowledged that there was a problem. Women who went to the police for help would have been turned away. Before we can challenge the problem, we must understand exactly what it is. Domestic abuse is about more than people not being pleasant to each other in their houses. There are significant patterns to domestic abuse, which we must understand if we are to confront them. This week, I met with the police in part of my constituency. I was told that, in one month, the police attend, on average, 36 incidents of domestic abuse. That represents an average of more than one such incident a day in one part of my constituency. When I asked the chief inspector whether any of those incidents involved men being abused by their female partners, he not only said no, but looked stunned that I would even ask such a question. I find it remarkable that the police, who are not regarded as the most radical force in Scottish society, have an understanding of the reality of domestic abuse that seems to be lacking among Liberal Democrat members. In the overwhelming majority of cases, domestic abuse is perpetrated on women by male partners or ex-partners. In anyone's language, that constitutes a pattern. The actions and attitudes that shape that pattern must be addressed if the pattern is ever to be broken. I want my children to understand the pattern, so that they can challenge the attitudes in society on which it is based. A softening in that respect will never effect the change that has been suggested. We must reflect on the meaning of incidents of domestic abuse for the women concerned, for their children, for our health services and for schools and housing. Above all, we should consider what such abuse means to those who experience it. We should be mindful of the social exclusion that results from their being terrorised and isolated by the man with whom they live, while that man continues to go about his daily business unchecked. We must welcome Scottish Women's Aid's listen louder campaign and the statement on working with children. Whether they are teachers or health visitors, workers must be sensitive in whatever context they work with children. They must be  sensitive enough to ask the right question at the right time, so that women and children can seek the help that they need. Our children are often silenced in school because no one draws the right conclusions or asks why they do not come to school. If that question was asked, families could receive the support that they need. I am interested in the issues relating to domestic courts and so on, about which there is much debate. I am concerned that the simplicity of what is happening in homes is lost. A man is being violent to a woman. That is a straightforward criminal action, which should be addressed as such. I would be anxious about anything that implied that there are complexities that we do not understand and that would divert those men from the punishment that they could expect if they did the same thing in the pub. I am not suggesting that that is what has been said, but it is a concern that could arise. The consequences of domestic violence might be complex, but the reality of the action is often fairly straightforward. A division that is occasionally unstated underpins the debate—although there is a willingness to discuss the what of domestic abuse, there is a reluctance to reflect on the why. That must be dealt with. Much of the Scottish Executive's action is important, as is campaigning by groups to get appropriate support for victims of domestic abuse. However, we must challenge the why and the overwhelming pattern of male violence against women. Some would have us believe that domestic abuse is a figment of the imagination of some mad feminist; the reality is very different. Discussing domestic abuse is not an indulgence of politics; it represents an effort to address what happens in the real world. Scottish Women's Aid and Scottish Rape Crisis did not come about because local government officials or Scottish Executive officials thought that they were a good thing. They came about because there was a need in communities that had to be addressed. Women went about organising to meet that need and it is to their credit that we are in the position that we are in now. I hope that those organisations will be put at the centre of shaping future strategy to deal with a serious problem in our communities.

There was a time when women were afraid to go to the police because of the response that they would get. Women organised themselves, got support and set up local organisations to meet their need. Is there evidence of male organisations in local communities addressing the circumstances that John Farquhar Munro described? That would indicate just how much of a problem exists.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the important issue of the regulation of private security firms. I am grateful to all those who signed the motion and recognise that there is significant cross-party support for action. I understand that we are under pressure for time. This is a unique timing for a member's debate, and I am grateful that despite pressure on parliamentary time, members' debates have secured the time that they deserve. I will try to keep my comments brief, although it is tempting to go on longer because I am leading off the debate, which is unusual for a back bencher. The role and activities of private security firms is a serious matter in my constituency, but I am aware that it is also a concern throughout Scotland. The lodging of the motion was prompted by particular events in my constituency, although I am sure that members will understand my caution in discussing the specifics of those events given that a police investigation is continuing. However, I would like to put on record my gratitude to the local police for the way in which they responded when the events occurred. A series of incidents, including graffiti and wilful damage to cars, caused some distress on a housing estate in my constituency. That distress was compounded when the disorder was followed by the delivery of leaflets throughout the area,  offering the services of private security wardens for a payment of £3 a week per household. There must be anxiety about such a conjunction of events—the malicious disruption of a community and the offer of help by private security firms. It is understandable that we should be anxious that private security firms might seek to play on the fears of households about disorder in their communities. Indeed, it might be argued that it is only a small step from playing on people's fears, to generating disorder to create a demand for such services. It must be unacceptable that we may create circumstances in which private security firms might promote a service that could effectively be viewed as a protection racket. Broader issues are highlighted by the experience of my constituents. What kind of security and peace of mind can be offered by private security firms? How will private security wardens enforce their promise of security? What training will be offered and, crucially, who would do the work? The case for regulation is evident and compelling if we are to have confidence in the process. Private security firms need to be open and transparent. We need to know how the businesses are run and who runs them. There must be a serious fear that some of the private security firms, unregulated, could be run and owned by people with criminal convictions and operated as a sideline to their criminal activities. Regulation poses no threat to those who operate legitimate businesses, and I trust that legitimate private security firms will embrace any proposals for regulation. Crucially, regulations should provide protection for communities vulnerable to predatory business tactics. I do not believe that it is overstating the case to say that the problem has the potential to pose a serious threat to our society. Much of the activity of private security firms is generated by and thrives on a lack of confidence in the police. If our communities feel under siege and believe that the police cannot take effective action to stop disorder, the market for the unscrupulous activity of private security firms will grow. We must redouble our efforts to ensure that the police and the justice system can act effectively in response to the anxieties of local communities. As I have said before, the first step is for us to acknowledge that such anxieties are real. I welcome the announcement by the Minister for Social Justice, Margaret Curran, of £20 million towards neighbourhood community wardens. I am now seeking a meeting with the minister to explore how that approach might help my constituents. It is important that that work, with that of the Justice Department, reinforces our commitment to peace and security in our communities. I am aware that there has been a consultation on the regulation of  private security firms, and I urge the minister to act on that consultation as a matter of urgency. I look forward to hearing what plans are in place. As I said, the debate was prompted by a particular problem, but one that illustrates issues of general concern. The challenge for the minister, the Scottish Executive and the Parliament is to find solutions that, in particular and in general, will make our communities safer, more secure and free from those who would seek to exploit them. I urge action on the minister and welcome the opportunity to hear his response.

Does Donald Gorrie accept that the committee got an important commitment from the minister to the effect that the regulations will be subject to affirmative procedure? That means that the bill, as enacted, will be monitored and that the time to address concerns will be when they develop. The bill, rather than being what some people have represented it as being, offers a huge challenge to the Executive.

I have been called to speak as the convener of the Social Justice Committee. I am therefore conscious that, as I rise to commend the bill and support its passing by the Parliament, certain constraints are placed on me against my engaging with some of the wilder fringes of the debate thus far. On behalf of all members and the Social Justice Committee, I record our thanks to Jim Johnston and his clerking team for the difficult job that they did. They worked with great efficiency, courtesy and good humour at all stages, no matter what pressures were brought to bear on them. I also thank the staff of the Scottish Parliament information centre for the support and back-up that they offered to members. I thank the staff of the official report, who managed to follow the debate  and make sense of it for the broader public. In particular, I thank all those who gave evidence—both written and oral—and I thank the minister for his willingness to engage in dialogue with the committee. I believe that all those people made an important contribution in allowing the committee to give thoughtful consideration to the bill at stage 1 and stage 2. In addition, I thank the Social Justice Committee's members. Regardless of what has been said today, all the committee members approached the job at stage 1 and stage 2 in a serious way. They took seriously their role to undertake independent scrutiny of the bill and when we agreed or disagreed, we did so based on what was said to us, rather than on who said it. The true independence of the committee was in its listening rather than in members' expressing their support for any individual who took a position on the bill. The bill is important, and we are at the end of a long and considered process that began long before publication of bill, which sought to introduce a humane and workable alternative to poindings and warrant sales. I believe that the bill offers significant help to those who have been lured into unaffordable debt. It is important that a degree of consensus—which I believe exists throughout the Parliament—was apparent in the committee's desire that real money advice be provided as early as possible in order to prevent people from getting into multiple debt and to help them to sort out the problem if they have got into that position. During the course of the debate, I re-read some of my speeches. The main charge against the old system was that it allowed those who could not pay to be humiliated, thereby putting pressure on those who could pay. However, we must recognise equally that we cannot allow those who can pay to hide behind the difficulties of those who cannot pay. Throughout its stages, the bill has sought to make that distinction; I believe that it has achieved that and that it separates those who cannot pay from those who can. There is a broader issue of irresponsible lending and an issue about encouraging sensible borrowing. There must be an important confidence-building process of encouraging people to seek help at an early stage by using, for example, money advice groups and credit unions. We must consider the issue of affordable credit to prevent people from getting involved in the extremes of money lending. We might be brought back to those broader issues in another place. However, I believe that the bill's substance addresses the distinction between those who can and those who cannot pay, and that it maintains the important provision that those who cannot pay will not be used as they were previously, which  was to persuade those who could pay to pay. There are anxieties about regulation and I welcome the ministerial commitment to involve Parliament through the use of orders that will be subject to affirmative procedure. I believe that that important commitment and concession by ministers will allow the monitoring protection for which people have asked. The debt arrangement system will be monitored to ensure that it does what we intend it to do and in effect will express Parliament's will to abolish warrant sales and poindings and support the bill's provisions. Therefore, I will welcome the passing of the bill. The challenge thereafter will be to ensure that the bill's provisions and regulations work effectively for people in our communities.

The issue that amendment 34 touches on was raised  in the committee and was one of the few issues on which there was real disagreement among committee members. The Parliament must always be aware of issues of subsidiarity and the responsibility that lies with local authorities to make decisions. We would not want to draw up powers from local authorities on such matters. Amendment 34 implies that local authority workers who are charged with the responsibility of giving money advice cannot be independent. I am sure that many local authority workers doing that job would not be happy with that implication. I am certainly not happy with it. It is perfectly possible for advice that is provided by a local authority to be just as independent as advice that is provided by the voluntary sector and—most important—for it to meet just as fully the needs of the person who is seeking that advice. That is not to say that there is not an important role for the voluntary sector to play—clearly, that sector does play a role, as we recognise. However, we must oppose amendment 34 on the ground that it implies that somebody who is given the advice role by a local authority cannot carry out their duty in a responsible way. We may wish to consider how that work is regulated and monitored and what the local authority's role is in that work, but my experience is that local authorities are not uncomfortable with working in partnership with the voluntary sector. Amendment 34 might create an unnecessary division and an unhelpful implication in relation to the important job of money advisers, wherever they are carrying out the responsible and important role that the bill gives them. I oppose amendment 34.

I refer to the minister's comments about the private sector. The minister will be aware of the anxieties of some owner-occupiers of properties that were bought under the right to buy about the implication for them of Glasgow's housing stock transfer and of the significant investment in Glasgow's council housing that will follow from that. What assurances can the minister give that the new grant system for the private sector will be targeted at those owner-occupiers and will be substantial enough for them to gain from housing improvements? Can she also assure us that such households will not operate as a local barrier to those important developments?

On a point of order. I wonder whether it would be of assistance if, as the convener of the Social Justice Committee, I informed the chamber that stage 2 of the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill was completed on 30 October and it was known what we would need to amend thereafter. Therefore, it has been possible to prepare amendments from 30 October.

The First Minister may be aware of the recent concerns of people in my constituency about the activities of private security firms. When he next meets the Prime Minister, will he discuss with him how we  might best be able, as a matter of urgency, to regulate those private security firms in order to sustain the confidence of local communities in the capacity of the police to keep those communities safe?

Would not the member hope that the commissioner would investigate why the care home or whoever regulated it did not respond before six youngsters got to the stage of going to the commissioner? The issue is reinforcing the procedures rather than the direct link between individuals and the commissioner.

Does the member accept that young people sometimes end up being looked after by their local authority or in care precisely because of their experiences in families? There is an issue of balance. It must be recognised that sometimes the safest place for a young person is away from their family and in care. The member is almost in danger of suggesting that the care system is the problem and not addressing the broader reasons why young people end up in care. That probably undermines good work that is done with young people who end up in care and rely on people who are not from their family to support them in a way that their family has been unable to do.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I am aware that many of the members present—probably most of them—know a great deal more about the detail of the proposal than I do. However, I recognise that it is an important issue and I declare an interest, as the mother of two young children, who sometimes feels that the world is far too child-friendly and not sufficiently mother-sympathetic. I was also a schoolteacher for 20 years and was tested, on occasion, on my willingness to feel the pain of the child as I tried to manage the other 29 in the class. I support any initiative that protects children from abuse and encourages them to see that they can play a positive role in their communities and in broader society. Too many young people—particularly vulnerable young people—are told about citizenship at school, but see precious little evidence of their rights as citizens in their own lives. There are mixed messages about children, not just in the chamber but more generally in our communities. We should avoid trying to see policy making in boxes. When we talk about children participating, the message is soft and gentle and says that we must listen to them. When we talk about crime, we wonder how big the poles will be that we will put heads on in order to deter others from crime. As Kenny MacAskill said, we are aware of the levels of anxiety and distress that we all experience when we hear about some of the dreadful things that happen to children, and we fear that our own children and those of other people might also suffer such abuses. We also know that, as we speak, children are suffering abuse and neglect, and we know that they pay for that not just as children but in their adult lives. I  may be the only member who watches "Kilroy", but we hear evidence every day on such programmes of adults living through the pain of the experience of being neglected and abused as children. It is not just about what children suffer, but about what they will bring with them into their adult lives. We also know that children and young people can cause great harm and problems within communities, and much of our recent debate has reflected that. There are many aspects of childhood and of society's attitude to young people. That creates a complex picture of the experience of children and young people and presents us with a challenge as to how those issues can be addressed. I accept the need for a children's commissioner, but I would like to raise a number of questions that other members might be able to respond to. Indeed, some of the points that concern me have already been referred to. I am interested in why the age limit has been identified as 18, or 21 for looked-after young people. There is a serious debate about when childhood ends and adulthood begins and what we should call the bit in the middle. That is reflected in much of the serious debate surrounding the proposals for pilots in the children's hearing system for 16 and 17-year-olds. There is a contradiction and a mixed message. There are people who would argue for increased responsibilities for young people of 16. The right to vote is a good example of that. At the same time, those people want everyone who is under 18 to be treated as a child in relation to the commission and children's legal rights. It is important to reflect on that. Perhaps the commission will have to do more work to differentiate between age groups and levels at which young people operate. It is self-evident that a child of four has different needs and capacities from someone who is 17. In developing policy, we must reflect the fact that children at different stages have different needs, that they must be protected in different ways and that they have different abilities to articulate their concerns. We must be aware that, on occasion, the actions of some young people can directly impact on the experiences of other young people. The commissioner will provide an opportunity to get young people to reflect on that. I hope that one of the commissioner's roles will be to encourage young people to focus on that debate. It is important to realise that children are not a single, coherent group—I am speaking about not only age, but access to the work of the commission. That access will depend on children's level of vulnerability and disadvantage. Those who most need to be heard might not be heard at all. Some parents do not have the same power as others in the community, some children do not  have parents who will fight on their behalf and others have parents who are part of the problem. How will the commissioner prioritise his or her work? How will the breadth, range and diversity of voices be heard? The loudest, best-resourced voices should not receive the best hearing. My fear is that the capacity of children and young people to access the power of the commissioner will depend not on their needs, but on the capacity of the adults around them to access that power. The danger will remain that inequality among children will be reinforced rather than challenged. I am anxious about how we deliver for children. I often mention the example of young people who do not attend school. When, on occasion, a local authority education department challenges through the legal system parents who do not bring their child to school, there is a shift in the discussion from why the young person finds it difficult to attend school to a legal debate about whether the evidence that the young person attended only 22 per cent of the time is true. The discussion moves from why the young person does not go to school to whether it is possible to prove that some of the absences were real. Such cases against parents often fail. In that situation, the focus on the young person and their problems is lost. Only in the most extreme circumstances should we move into the legal system, which focuses on proof and lack of proof rather than on young people's needs. Children have basic rights. Among many others, they have the right to basic security, warmth and peace of mind and the right to be well parented. Children have the right to be heard when they are in dangerous or abusive situations and the right to an education. Many of those rights would be properly established if those who have responsibility for protecting children—parents, social services, schools and local communities—took that responsibility seriously. It has been suggested that the commissioner should have a great personality, but in my view, children do not need a saviour. They do not need teachers who do back flips. They need someone who knows how they ought to behave and who acts on that. I hope that the commissioner, who will never on their own deliver an integrated service for young people, will have plenty to say about those who do not pursue their responsibilities rigorously. One of my fears is that we will simply satisfy our need to be seen to do something for children and young people who are vulnerable and who have difficulties. I am afraid that, if we do not set up the right systems, we will leave many children vulnerable and abused and unable to tell anyone about it. Robust dialogue with young people is important. We should not say, "Yes, you are absolutely right," and then create systems that do  not listen at all. I support the establishment of the commission, but it must not be a substitute for establishing rigorous procedures and practice for all those who work with and for children and young people. I hope that those who claim to speak on behalf of young people and who seek to represent them are challenged to ensure that they listen to the quiet, disadvantaged and excluded voices when they go to the commission. Those people must ensure that the representation is real. In that way, our young people will receive the protection to which the committee's proposals aspire.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I accept that Linda Fabiani was not a member of the working group. Indeed, I suspect that, if she had been, she might have stayed on and fought her corner. I am curious as to why she is now arguing that exceptional attachment orders are just warrant sales by another name. After all, she signed up to a report that contains the unanimous recommendation that "The Committee was of the view that if the safeguards which were to be introduced by the Debt Arrangement Scheme were followed, then it was disingenuous to suggest that Part 3 of the Bill amounted to poindings and warrant sale by another name." The committee reached consensus on the view that we should try to sort out warrant sales, rather than simply say that we oppose them on principle.

The paragraph says that "it was disingenuous to suggest that Part 3 of the Bill"—

As convener of the Social Justice Committee, I will outline the committee's position on the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill. My responsibility is to outline the committee's position, so I shall resist to the best of my ability my natural inclination to express what are more properly my own opinions. It would be advisable if people did not provoke me. I thank all those who were involved in producing the committee's stage 1 report. In particular, I thank the clerking team for its help and efficiency. I thank all the organisations and individuals who spoke to the committee and who provided written responses. We took seriously the importance of making the broadest call for evidence. Many organisations and individuals responded and we paid significant attention to those who wrote to us, as well as to those who spoke to the committee. We were keen to have the broadest scope of  views, but we also acknowledged that the key question is whether the mechanisms that will be put in place can do what they claim to do: provide a humane alternative to poindings and warrant sales. That question was the focus of our oral evidence. It is remiss to suggest that the committee wished to disregard the powerful voices that drove the Parliament's decisions on the issue in the past. The committee's report was unanimous and Robert Brown has talked about the divisions. I am therefore slightly bemused by some of the SNP's comments, particularly those on exceptional attachment orders. It is also not unusual for a front-bench Labour spokesperson to say something different from a Labour committee member, but when a front-bench spokesperson is the committee member and says different things, as with the SNP, perhaps that sends out a more confusing message. One of the key objections to poindings and warrant sales was that they humiliated those who could not pay, to encourage those who would not pay. I have said that in debate. The case must be made that the proposal takes the can't-pays out of the system. The opposite is also the case. Those who will not pay cannot be allowed to use the dreadful circumstances that face those who cannot pay as a shield to avoid taking responsibility for their debt. In earlier debate, it was recognised that people want to pay back debt. That is often the principle that drives most of the poorest in our communities. We also acknowledged that people in the poorest circumstances will be disproportionately affected by the non-payment of council tax. It is also acknowledged that a system is needed that does not prevent people who are on low incomes from having access to responsible lending, because the danger is that people are driven to irresponsible lenders. The Social Justice Committee has concerns about the extent of access to the debt arrangement scheme and about exceptional attachment orders. We welcomed the proposal to introduce a national debt arrangement scheme and acknowledged that that proposal is widely supported by Money Advice Scotland and other interested organisations. However, the committee notes a lack of detail in the bill and expects the Executive to consult on all secondary legislation that will introduce the necessary regulations.

I will talk about that, because the test for the bill is whether the debt arrangement scheme can work. That is not an issue of principle, but of the practical delivery of the principle, which can be dealt with at stage 2. Several organisations told the committee that many debtors may be excluded from the scheme as proposed. For example, the committee would be concerned if the scheme were open only to debtors who could pay their debts in full, including interest if demanded by creditors, in three to five years. The committee invites the Executive to reconsider freezing interest while a debt is being repaid and to reconsider composition in favour of the debtor. The committee would welcome further details from the Executive on how the bill addresses the circumstances of debtors who might be on means-tested benefits and unable to afford to pay their debts in full within the prescribed time under the proposed scheme. The committee seeks the test and reassurance that the debt arrangement scheme can be accessed by people in the poorest circumstances. On exceptional attachment orders, the committee's unanimous view is that if the safeguards that the debt arrangement scheme introduces are followed, it is disingenuous to suggest that part 3 amounts to poindings and warrant sales by another name. However, the committee also notes the concerns of organisations that have practical experience of the current system and would be required to implement the proposed procedures. In particular, members are concerned about the provision for the immediate removal of any article that is attached. The committee invites the Executive to examine closely the evidence of the organisations that will be responsible for implementing EAOs. The committee welcomes the Minister for Justice's announcement of an additional £3 million and we acknowledge the extra central support that has been announced. However, the committee would welcome assurance from the Executive that it has addressed equality issues in the provision of advice and it recommends that the Executive should consider finding effective, innovative ways of communicating the advantages of the DAS to debtors. The proposal's strength is that it rewards willingness to be involved in the process of managing debt repayment, so it is essential that money advice and information is not tokenistic and that real work is done to engage with those whose first instinct might be to put the problem away from them. That was a feature of the evidence that we heard. The committee agreed that, for the necessary  bond of trust to develop between the adviser and the debtor, a distinction is needed between the roles of the adviser in enforcing and supporting. The committee recommends that the Executive should consider lodging an amendment to clarify that distinction. On balance, the committee thought that it was possible for money advice to be delivered in the public sector. People who work for local authorities can still give independent advice. The committee obviously looks forward to the Scottish Executive's response to the concerns that I have sought to summarise in my speech and which are set out in the committee's stage 1 report. I emphasise the fact that the committee will take seriously at stage 2 its responsibility to raise the issues that have been flagged up in today's debate. Nevertheless, the committee recommends to the Parliament that it agrees to the general principles of the bill.

rose—

I think that John McAllion will agree with me that the context for the Debt Arrangement and Attachment (Scotland) Bill was the acceptance that warrant sales and poindings had to go and that ordinary working people who were burdened with debt needed help. Our job was to establish whether the mechanisms in the bill met those aspirations. The voices of the community groups that Mr McAllion talks about were so powerful that the Parliament had already taken them into account. The Social Justice Committee wanted to challenge those who had to deliver support for those people as to whether they could do so or not.

The Social Justice Committee highlighted that problem as an issue. Does the member accept that the problem is not to do with the principle of exceptional attachment orders? If we could establish that exceptional attachment orders would apply only to those who can pay but who choose not to, would the member support the orders? The kind of people who decide not to pay when they can pay are often the kind of people  who are hostile to ordinary working-class people, rather than being such people themselves.

If citizens advice bureaux acknowledged that the debt was recurring, it would be logical for them to recommend that it be addressed first, so there would be no distinction between the advice given by citizens advice bureaux and public sector money advice. The point that Robert Brown made about independent advice would be valid only if the citizens advice bureaux and the council gave different advice.

The point that I made was that, often, what the courts regard as minor is very troubling and serious for an individual community. Will the member define what he considers to be a minor offence?

While welcoming the Justice 2 Committee's report, I have been disappointed in recent days about the speed with which the hard debate about the rights of victims, the needs of young people who are involved in disorder and the effectiveness of different means of tackling crime and disorder has been lost as the focus has fallen on other, rather less serious issues about how coalition partners work together and whether or not individual ministers are under siege. It is ironic that those who often applaud the role of the Parliament's committees are so quick to jump to say that the minister has caved in or done a U-turn—whatever language is chosen. That is trivial language for another time and another place  and we deserve something a little more mature. We are told that, if the minister listens to the committee and others, he has lost control. However, I am sure that, if the minister did not listen, the same voices would be raised to denounce his arrogance and his willingness to deny the Parliament's voice. Would it not be better to celebrate the process through which Executive and Parliament work together to create good law to protect individuals and communities? Another criticism that is sometimes raised to obscure and diffuse what is a difficult debate is the charge that Labour back benchers are cranking up the debate and identifying problems that do not exist in order to create division. Personally, I have learned to be philosophical about who any Executive minister is; I am far more concerned with what ministers say than with who they are. Indeed, as someone with a reputation of arguing with her granny about sucking eggs, I am sure that no one ever takes it personally if I have an argument with them. Apart from the fact that the conspiracy apparently involves me luring more than 1,000 people to a meeting in order to discuss a problem that does not exist, the charge belittles the experience of too many of my constituents. I only wish that the problem were a figment of my imagination. Like many members, I am often deeply troubled by the experiences that people describe to me and by the impact of those experiences on their health and well-being. I find it an obligation, not an indulgence, to raise such issues. Over the summer recess, when I met representatives of a whole range of groups, agencies and organisations in my constituency, I was struck by a variety of issues. Regardless of whether I was speaking to people in the fire brigade about safety issues, to the staff of bus companies about bus routes, to church groups about local events or to members of communities about service delivery, the discussion turned again and again to disorder and vandalism. That issue was raised as something that troubled people even when the subject was not specifically instigated. The debate about the solutions to the problem is a serious one and I accept that difficult decisions have to be made. To say that there is no problem is to deny the experience of ordinary people. It is unacceptable to say that talking about the problem creates it. We often hear the argument that there is a youth disorder problem only with a small number of repeat offenders. I contend that that is only part of the problem. Repeat serious offending is indeed a problem, but many people feel that the legal system does not take some offences all that seriously. Even attitudes to anti-social behaviour  have changed in recent years and people feel that their experiences are not taken seriously. Therefore, it is feared that referring young people who are 16 and 17 to the children's hearings system for petty offences would become the norm rather than the exception. I am also told that what many people might describe as petty offences do not even get recorded. I believe that there is another side to the problem. It is what I call the culture of disorder, which prevails in too many of our communities. That culture may, if cases are viewed individually, concern only a number of small offences, but it creates misery for those who are caught up in it. We also have to acknowledge its impact on the youngsters who gather on the fringes of that offending and who see little or no consequence to such behaviour. We do young people no service whatever by implying that we can expect no better of them or that their community deserves no better. Young people who are victims of bullying and who are denied access by other young people to the facilities that are provided for them in their community deserve a system that acts on their behalf, no matter how troubled or difficult the community is. I continue to have anxiety about bringing 16 and 17-year-olds into a system in which the public often express little confidence. A separate job requires to be done to rebuild that confidence. The bill would bring young adults into a system that is designed to meet the needs of children. When is a child no longer a child? I contend that young people of 16 or 17 do not regard themselves as children. Perhaps we can develop a system that acknowledges that there is a stage between childhood and adulthood. If my youngster of 16 offended for the first time, I would want to know that they would not be consigned immediately to a harsh system. However, I am not convinced that putting 16 and 17-year-olds into a system that is designed for younger children will address the problem that exists. I want briefly to highlight the issue of anti-social behaviour orders. We need to be alive to the difficulties that have been experienced in imposing such orders. Work needs to be done to ensure that courts take them seriously. I want to highlight in particular the problem of anti-social behaviour by tenants of private landlords. I ask that work be done to encourage such landlords to take responsibility for controlling the behaviour of their tenants. For me, the key issue is how we ensure that the public have confidence in the justice system. That does not mean devising a system that is a licence for mob rule—we want the opposite of such a system. This is a matter of social justice. Our most deprived communities suffer the most from crime  and they have as much right as anyone else to have their voices heard. It is often said that the trouble with people who raise the issue of criminal justice is that they just want to punish. They do not—they want the disorder in their communities to stop and they want to feel safe. Their children have as much right to be safe as the children of any other community in Scotland. We must consider the consequences for our society and communities of failing to address speedily the loss of confidence in our justice system. People must begin to feel that the system responds to their needs and experiences.

Does the member agree that much of the anxiety concerning smacking comes from a fear about the appearance of action rather  than the reality? Currently, the most serious abuse against youngsters is hidden and this approach would not bring it into the public domain. More important work must be done to address the pressures that parents are under that might lead them to believe that smacking is a satisfactory way of dealing with their children.

Is Mike Rumbles suggesting that my constituents' persistent concerns about youth disorder and the impact on their health, well-being and the security of their communities are a figment of their imagination? Where does that come from? Why do people believe that crime is not being recorded and that their concerns about their communities are not being addressed if, as Mike Rumbles says, everything is hunky-dory?

rose—

Does the minister agree that the children's hearings system is under-resourced to do the job that it is asked to do with children under 16? Does he agree that there is a danger that adding young people who do not regard themselves as children to the system could undermine the integrity of the children's hearings  system and the important role that it plays for younger children?

To ask the Scottish Executive what impact its plans to prioritise mental health are having on the provision and delivery of services. (S1O-5553)

Given that the Scottish Executive has identified mental health as one of its three key priorities for the national health service, what assurance can the minister give that that stated priority will be reflected in delivery at local level? Will the minister comment on how work on mental health is being advanced across areas of ministerial responsibility in the Executive? Many mental health problems arise from people's experience and environment and can best be helped by, for example, providing real support for women who are fleeing violence, or by creating secure communities in which disorder and anti-social behaviour are addressed effectively.

Will the member give way?

I acknowledge the strong feelings that exist on all sides in this matter. It is important to recognise that serious people on all sides have taken different views and come to different conclusions. There is no monopoly of concern for the health of the people of Glasgow, either here or elsewhere. It is therefore not helpful to imply that those who seek to modernise the national health service or the national health service board do so out of malevolence or a reluctance to recognise the problems that the motion suggests. We all take a serious position, having considered the issues. I do not believe that any member will vote out of cowardice; they will vote because they are convinced one way or another by the arguments. We must also acknowledge the fact that the proposed investment is massive and that the potential impact of it, if it is properly directed, would be a huge difference in the lives of ordinary people. The question is how we spend that investment. Like many things in life, there is no black-and-white answer to that, only varying shades of grey. The conundrum in the south side is as follows. It is agreed that the best medical care can be provided by having one centre of excellence in the south side. If someone is ill, the key factor in their survival is the immediate, effective attention of paramedics. The next priority is getting them to a centre of excellence as quickly as possible. Logically, there should be one centre of excellence in the south side to provide such care, but that centre is not in the centre of the south side—and nor is the Victoria infirmary. Furthermore, the development of a new hospital in the south side would eradicate the significant investment that has already been made in the south side. It would therefore be a waste of investment. That hospital provision for Glasgwegians is probably as good as that for people anywhere else in Scotland weighs heavily with me; local access to a hospital in Glasgow is better than the access my relatives in Tiree have. Local access is, of course, relative. Nevertheless, the health statistics for Glasgow remain shocking. We are the sickest, unhealthiest people in Britain. Sadly, the sickest and most ill Glaswegians will, in all likelihood, be living in the shadow of a local acute hospital. While geography, transport and access are all important, we recognise that Glasgow's health problems cannot be solved through bricks and mortar alone. If this debate is about choices, my choice is for money to be used to change the poor diet of many of our children and to drive care and good health into our communities, where health workers can  reach out to families and address the inequality that develops in the early stages of life. I want to maximise efficient, effective service in hospitals. It is logical that the more we spend on buildings, the less money will go into delivery of the service. We need to consider transport links to hospitals and within hospitals and to listen carefully to what people say about them. The acute services review has generated serious debate. The key themes voiced by people who talk to me about the national health service are the time it takes to be seen, how they are treated by those with whom they come into contact and the extent to which they are kept informed about their health care. My recent involvement with the health service raised concerns not about the hospital supplying the treatment but about the ability of those providing the service to deal with us with any compassion. We have to invest in staff and systems as well as in buildings so that people are not frustrated or insulted by the treatment they receive and so that their health needs are met speedily and properly. I support the Executive's position because it moves matters forward. I am encouraged to see that it has written reviews into the process at every stage. As the service's needs and the demands on it change, the systems must change too. For too long the health service has done things because that is how they have always been done and it has not addressed people's health needs in their communities. I seek an assurance from the minister that any commitment to moving forward to address health inequality in Glasgow will be matched by a capacity continually to reflect on and review what is actually being delivered locally.

Is the member suggesting that the Southern general  should close and that the care that it provides should be transferred to a new site? The board's view is based on the fact that the Southern is not an old hospital, but one in which huge investment has been made. The debate is about choosing where investment should be made.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in improving access to public transport for older people and people with disabilities. (S1O-5499)

I welcome the minister's positive response. He might be aware of Glasgow City Council's excellent work in involving the users of the council's internal transport service in shaping the service. I should add that the users and carers grabbed the opportunity with both hands and to great effect. That approach could be considered as a model for use elsewhere in the country. However, given the fact that many older people and people who have disabilities would prefer the independence of travelling on the public service system, what steps are being taken to ensure that those who deliver our public transport service, such as private bus companies and others, take proper account of the needs of the elderly and those who have disabilities in training their staff and in making decisions on timetables, routes and other issues—matters which in turn shape the capacity of people to use those services?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this important debate on community regeneration and "Better Communities in Scotland: closing the gap". I am disappointed that Kenny Gibson and, to a lesser extent, Lyndsay McIntosh, chose to be so uncharacteristically non-consensual in their approaches. When I read the amendment that was lodged in Kenny Gibson's name, I had thought that it seemed a little hyperactive. The main course was obviously going to be his actual speech, however, which met new bounds of hyperactivity—and phlegm. I make a serious point here: we have the opportunity to analyse how effective the current strategies have been, but it is absurd to suggest that we should simply stop and start all over again. When we seek real and lasting solutions to problems, they have to be developed in partnership with the community—as opposed to Kenny Gibson's view—and not on some faraway drawing board in some corner of the Scottish Executive. Some of the accusations that are being made are denying the important work that has been done in communities such as my own, particularly by local people in those communities who are working hard to make the process effective. I will highlight a number of areas that I think are worthy of some consideration. The minister has commented on and acknowledged the importance of economic regeneration and community regeneration, and the fact that the two are intrinsically linked. There needs to be visible improvement in our communities' environment, as well as a visible increase in economic activity. People in communities should have a real say in shaping the decisions that are made. Apart from anything else, if they shape the decisions, the action that is taken is far more likely to be right.  We need to look beyond what public agencies can do in the way of economic regeneration. We need to use imaginative ways to harness the community and economic activity that is going on in our communities to the betterment of local people. Organisations—from the Glasgow Housing Association, which, in building and improving houses, must have at the heart of its work the building and improving of communities, to private sector businesses that plan to do business in our communities—can play a part in training people and supporting them as they enter work. They should view themselves—and we should view them—not just as being sited in communities but as playing a part in shaping them. In particular, I highlight the Scottish Council Foundation's report on Glasgow, "Full Employment City", which revealed that, of every two jobs that are created in Glasgow, only one goes to a Glaswegian. I ask the minister to reflect on the report's recommendation that more be done to support social enterprise and the social economy. There is real evidence that jobs that are created in that sector are far more likely to be taken up by members of the local community. In relation to social enterprise, I make a particular plea for attention to be given to the co-operative or mutual sector, which often brings together commercial effectiveness and democratic accountability, a connection that delivers for communities and that gives appropriate regard to them, drawing on their talents and experience. I emphasise the importance of joined-up working, particularly in relation to the cities review. There is no point in supporting local economic regeneration in Glasgow if we do not address the logic of the economic imperative and what happens when people become economically active—they move outside the city boundaries. We have to acknowledge a range of local solutions and initiatives. I do not have time to make a lengthy point about this, but I ask the minister to address the question of community transport and remedy some of the important gaps in provision. I refer in particular to the initiative taken by the Community Transport Association. I also wish to reflect on the importance of the process of community regeneration, which brings together agencies and the local communities. They must, however, be brought together to a purpose. There are two challenges before us: to facilitate the involvement of the community—I welcome Glasgow City Council's recent initiative in giving extra support to community councils—and to ensure the accountability of those who represent communities in various organisations. It is essential that this process is a living and challenging one, which we engage in not for form,  but because we seek to make a real difference to those communities that most desperately need regeneration.

I find myself in fine company today. To ask the First Minister what progress is being made by the ministerial group on youth crime, with particular regard to persistent young offenders and the effectiveness of the children's hearings system. (S1F-2013)

Will the First Minister note—I do not say this lightly—that I regard the action plan as what is known as "getting a result"? The action plan acknowledges the central concern of my constituents that youth disorder is a grave problem that deserves the attention of the Government and the judicial system. It also shows a willingness to look beyond what is claimed for the system to the reality of that system. Will the First Minister comment on the view that I share with many members that, by taking persistent offenders seriously we can challenge what might be described broadly as a culture of lower-level offending among some young people? That offending is often unrecorded, but its cumulative effect leads to fear, anxiety and real restrictions—[ Interruption. ]

The cumulative effect of that offending leads to fear, anxiety and real restrictions on the way in which people are able to lead their lives.

I welcome the moneys that have been directed towards youth crime and improving youth facilities. That shows an awareness of local priorities and reflects precisely an understanding that, in order to improve the quality of the lives of our young people, we must reduce youth disorder, from which young people themselves are usually the first to suffer. However, I ask the minister, when directing resources, to reflect on the concerns that have been expressed about how that money is distributed. I ask him to ensure that distribution is more sensitively and sensibly done than simply on a per capita basis. That is a key issue for my constituents and for Glasgow as a whole.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this serious debate. It has been suggested that MSPs are lacking in courage and have been bullied by their party bosses. Sometimes, however, courage is about taking on the hard debates and looking beyond what are apparently easy answers. I tell Mr Sheridan that I am not intimidated by my party bosses and I will not be intimidated by the party boss of the SSP either. This is a complex debate and those who support the bill do not have a monopoly of concern for young people—indeed, it is deeply insulting to suggest that that is the case. We need to examine the issues of nutritional standards, the grounds on which people qualify for free school meals and what can be bought with free school meals tickets. That does not mean that we have to support the bill. The supporters of the bill have consistently conflated two separate issues: nutritious meals and the fostering of good eating habits; and the universal provision of nutritious food. The result is that the debate collapses into a position that states that, in order to provide nutritious meals, they have to be free and that those who do not support the universal provision of free school meals wish to deny children the right to improved nutrition. That is a false and unhelpful characterisation. We are talking about significant costs. As a mother and an ex-school teacher, I believe that, even if we had an unlimited budget, I would always be able to argue that other areas of expenditure relating to schools and communities and the links between home and school have more of an impact on health, social inclusion and the range of issues that make school an unhappy place for too many of our children than school  meals do. A conservative estimate of the cost of the proposal is £174 million, which would pay for about 6,000 teachers and not one brown penny of it would go to children who already get free school meals. It seems perverse to propose to direct that money away from the poorer areas of Glasgow and towards the better-off Glaswegians and away from the unhealthiest city in Scotland towards the healthier areas in Scotland. The bill is predicated on universality, which is what the SNP must confront. In my 20 years in teaching—10 years of which were spent with some of the most marginalised, vulnerable and often ridiculed children—I heard children speaking frankly about their problems but was never told by a child that they did not come to school because they would get a free school dinner. I accept that stigma might still be a problem. Many of my ex-pupils had to deal with differences that made life difficult for them and, along with supportive adults, strove to disguise those difficulties. However, the stigma of free school meals is easy to address and eradicate through swipe cards, through strict rules for staff strictly enforced and through considering what the value of a free school meal will buy. I do not accept that the level of funding that is proposed to go to the better off should be allocated to address a problem that, where it exists, can so easily be sorted. There are those who, in seeking to present free school meals as a universal benefit, disregard the fact that they are not a universal need. I know that to my cost, as my own daughter will not eat a school meal. If I get £500 a year to give her a school meal, she will still not take it. Therefore, the bill will not address the question of stigma for her classmates and for her school. We need to examine children's eating habits and choices. We should not ignore the fact that many families and children cannot cope with sitting in a dining room, which is often a place where bullying goes on. It is possible to address nutritional standards and to consider thresholds for qualification and what can be brought about through that. It is also possible to allocate moneys to address the need to develop a school ethos according to which children are not stigmatised because of their family circumstances, proper home-school links are developed and youngsters are challenged to be more welcoming and open in their attitude to their schoolmates. I urge members not to support the bill, but to carry on the fight to ensure that nutritional standards and the non-stigmatisation of children in our schools are priorities in the Parliament and elsewhere.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made with the mainstreaming of children and young people with special educational needs under the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000. (S1O-5397)

Is the minister aware that some families of children and young people with special educational needs have expressed concerns about the difficulties of securing appropriately supported mainstream places? Will she confirm the Scottish Executive's support for this important aspect of social justice and equality? Furthermore, will she outline how the process is being monitored and the steps that are being taken to ensure that the experience of young people with special educational needs and their families is being recorded and addressed?

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister agree that the key issue in relation to business rates is not the setting of the rate, but the fact that in a city such as Glasgow we see poverty among plenty? There is huge frustration because although Glasgow supports economic regeneration and creates wealth, that wealth is distributed throughout Scotland. We do not feel that we get  back a fair share when the distribution factors do not recognise deprivation sufficiently in determining the moneys that go from the Scottish Executive to local authorities.

Does Robert Brown think that a young man of 17, who bullies and intimidates his own family and his community, regards himself as a child? Does Robert Brown regard him as a child?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that there is a problem of hidden offending in our communities? The police have told me that often cases are not referred to the panel. No matter what the statistics show, the problem for our communities is that the issue is not being addressed.

Does the minister agree that there is a problem with non-referral to children's panels and with cases' being marked "no further action" when they reach panels? Does she agree that there is a huge lack of trust in the children's hearings system, and that it is necessary not just to say that the system is working, but to have a review that proves that, so that where it is not working its failures can be addressed?

Does the member agree that his motion pre-empts the serious debate that is being held in the Justice 1 Committee and that it might be appropriate to reflect on what it has to say on the serious issues that he has to address, particularly those relating to 16 and 17-year-olds?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there are any benefits from direct grant investment in the voluntary sector. (S1O-5298)

Will the minister acknowledge that a key concern is the immense pressure on the voluntary sector to reinvent the wheel to secure funding? Does he agree that our funding strategy should not only encourage innovation but build on existing success? Will he confirm that the Scottish Executive will lead by example in its funding approaches so that, instead of spending time using their ingenuity to convince potential funders that their work is new, voluntary organisations can display in action that they carry out effective work in our local communities?

Will the member give way?

I would be grateful if my colleague could explain how he would make my daughter eat a healthy, nutritious meal. The problem is not the cost. The bigger issue is nutrition, and making meals free will not make a difference. The proposal will export money out of my constituency into constituencies that do not require help with free meals but which do require help with healthy eating.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. Issues relating to crime, disorder and what I describe as community bullying matter hugely to my constituents and to people across Scotland. That should be not just a pious assertion, but a view that shapes and determines Scottish Executive, police and judicial priorities. I will reflect on youth crime and disorder. In any strategy to deal with crime of whatever nature, victims' rights are central. Those rights can be acknowledged in simple ways, such as the way in which a person is treated when they report a crime, the police's response and how people are kept informed of what has happened to those who perpetrate crimes. The crucial first step is acknowledging that a crime has been committed, that the crime is unacceptable and that it deserves a response. The concern is expressed repeatedly that youth disorder is not even recorded or acted on. I would welcome the minister's comments on how such under-recording or non-recording will be monitored and addressed. The debate is often falsely characterised to be divided between those who think and care about the causes of crime and those who are thuggish, who care little about the causes of crime and who want to lock offenders up and throw away the key. I have had discussions with people who wish to characterise the debate in that way and wish to characterise my approach as unthinking. They say, "The trouble is that people just want to lock offenders up." If upwards of 20 youngsters were outside my door, harassing my neighbours and me and intimidating my children, I, too, might want them to be locked up. I think that that would be true of everybody.  If we want to win people round to the argument that non-custodial options are serious, we must convince them that such options will have an obvious impact on their experience. The challenge is to make non-custodial options credible not only in theory, but in reality in our communities. As a teacher, I worked for many years with young people who were marginalised and who often displayed difficult behaviour. A constant balance had to be struck in my classroom, as it had to be elsewhere, between the individual's needs and the broader group's rights. That balance must also be struck in the broader community. We must understand why people offend and, at a point, we must deal with offending behaviour. We do young people no service by telling them that they do not need and deserve that. In addressing youth disorder in our communities, we must acknowledge that youngsters in general are being stigmatised and, more seriously, can suffer violence and limits on their actions. In challenging youth disorder, we often assert the rights of young people. Non-custodial options are important weapons in our armoury, but custody can work for some and a false division exists between the tough and the soft. In some circumstances, prison is the appropriate sanction. When offenders are in jail, work can be done with them. We must ensure that non-custodial options are constantly evaluated and that, like all good youth work, they are seriously challenging. The consequences should be visible for victims of offending and for people who might otherwise be drawn into disorder. Diversion from court and non-custodial options are sensitive issues. We may think that they are rational, but it is important that society marks out serious and unacceptable crimes. That is why women's organisations have argued long and hard that domestic abuse cases should not be subject to pre-court diversion, because society should take such crimes seriously, regardless of their underlying causes. Sometimes, the greatest distress has been caused by a disposal that seems to belittle the experience and feelings of people who have suffered as victims of crime. The biggest challenge that we face is closing the gap between the experience of crime in our communities and the response of those who are responsible for approaches to crime. We have a serious job to do, because victims have no faith in the system and feel that the approaches that are being adopted almost wilfully fly in the face of their experience. We must be open-minded, vigilant about what does and does not work and responsive to what people in our communities say about their experiences.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I presume that I should take that as a compliment. On the question of parental responsibility and parents ending up in jail, could  Lord James Douglas-Hamilton outline his position on parents who do not take the responsibility for sending their children to school, thereby denying their children the liberation that education offers to all our young people?

Does the minister agree that there is an issue about persistent crime? The issue is certainly one that is reported to me by my constituents. I refer to persistent crime that is not even recorded. Will the minister comment on the fact that the police tell me that they do not regard it as worth while in terms of officer hours to refer offenders to the children's panel when no consequences ensue. What monitoring is being undertaken of the police's non-pursuit of offences? How do we record properly the level of persistent crime when we know that the police are not pursuing those crimes through the system? [Applause.]

I am happy to contribute to the debate and I welcome the opportunity to highlight the issues. I am of a generation that probably had a closer relationship with fire than others. I remember our chimney catching fire when I was a young girl because my mother threw her scones on it as they were not very nice. I do not know whether that reflected the quality of her baking or the quality of the housing in which we were expected to live, but she was fined for causing the fire. I also remember St Andrew's Halls being burned down. We lived close by and were in mortal fear of what would happen to our home as we watched the flames coming over the roofs. I am also of the generation that remembers Cheapside Street and other places where homes and factories were turned into death-traps. The tragedies lived on in people's minds. We must acknowledge the huge steps that have been taken in my lifetime in relation to fire safety in our homes and in the workplace, although we recognise that there is still a great deal to be done. It is worth reflecting on past experience of fire tragedies, of which there have been all too many in my home city of Glasgow, and noting the key role of the trade unions and the broader labour movement in fighting to establish the right to safe working conditions for all in their workplaces. That right was not granted, but was hard fought for and won by the struggle of many in the trade union movement. It is important to ensure that, in acknowledging the role of the fire service, we acknowledge equally the role of the trade unions in the fire service. Any modernising agenda must ensure that the trade unions have the opportunity to bring their experience to any development of the service. I have time to make only a few brief points. We must recognise the changing role of the fire service. It not only tackles fires but attends road accidents and other major incidents that impinge on our lives. It is important also that we develop the role of the fire service in our communities and that we recognise the often difficult role of firefighters in our island and rural communities. I have a cousin who is involved as a volunteer firefighter on the island of Tiree. We must also recognise the difficulties and dangers that are faced by firefighters in urban areas in simply answering calls. We have all heard stories of fire engines being ambushed and firefighters being stoned, and there is clear evidence of the significant cost—in human and  resource terms—of arson and malicious calls. Firefighters can be under threat and endangered by youth disorder, and the capacity of the fire service to do its job can be seriously hampered by such activity. There is a challenge to us all to understand what happens to young people who change from loving Fireman Sam and aspiring to be like him to seeing firefighters as another acceptable target of their activity. It is important that people recognise that petty vandalism and what appears to be silly and trivial behaviour have direct and serious consequences. We should reflect on that in devising our criminal justice policy. Fire hydrants have been mentioned. Perhaps there is a challenge to the adults who laugh while their children play under fire hydrants to take responsibility and recognise that they are a serious matter that must be addressed by everyone in our communities if we want to be safe. I have no doubt that the fire service has a great deal to offer in challenging young people's attitudes. A good project in my constituency is a fire-safe house that is under construction at Pollok fire station. It will provide experiential training for 12 to 16-year-olds in the dangers of fire-related crime and anti-social behaviour. Its aim is to educate young people in the implications of fire raising for themselves, their families and their communities and to allow them to experience the way in which smoke can prevent or hinder escape from burning buildings in a controlled experiment that may lead to a reduction in fire-related crime in the area. The facility will be open to schools, community groups, youth groups and similar organisations. The community partnership work of the council, the Greater Pollok social inclusion partnership, Strathclyde fire brigade, the community safety partnership and Siemens Business Services is an interesting and challenging model, which I hope can be developed. I look forward to seeing its results. We need proper health and safety, particularly fire safety, at work. We also need to ensure fire safety in our houses and that work is done so that all new build and housing improvement projects have such safety at their hearts. We are right to recognise that deciding how our most vulnerable can be kept safe and given a right to a safe and secure home like everyone else is an important social justice issue. I welcome the report and support all the work that is being done by the fire service and others to ensure that our communities are as safe as possible.

Does not the member congratulate the Executive on its support for Supporters Direct? As volunteers and people who are committed to their football clubs, those people are the best hope of saving some of our smaller football teams and ensuring that our larger football teams have more appropriate direction in future.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I trust that Mr Rumbles will agree with me that he is making a false distinction. The report specifically addresses rurality. I ask him to reflect on the fact that all the evidence shows that because poor communities do not have the infrastructure and expertise to support applications, they are doing extremely badly in relation to lottery funding success.

I begin with something of an apology. I am suffering from a bad cold this morning. Although I thought that I would embrace the notion of having 20 minutes to speak rather than my usual four, when I have to speak like a steam train to get through the business, I am now beginning to feel rather wonky—I think that that is the phrase. I apologise in advance for any woolly words, and assure members that those woolly words do not reflect woolly thinking on the part of the committee but are entirely my own responsibility. I am pleased to have the opportunity to present the Social Justice Committee's report to the Scottish Parliament and trust that it will provide important information, food for thought and challenges to all those who are involved in and with the voluntary sector. As the Presiding Officer mentioned, we have a new Minister for Social Justice and I take this opportunity to congratulate Margaret Curran on her new role and to congratulate and welcome Hugh Henry as the new Deputy Minister for Social Justice. I look forward to having the same productive working relationship with him that we have had with previous ministers and deputy ministers. I thank the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre, the official report and all those who supported the development of the report. I also thank all those who gave evidence and contributed to the inquiry, both formally and informally. The aim of the report was to establish the key  issues facing the voluntary sector in Scotland in 2001, to examine the response of the Scottish Executive and others to those issues, and to report and make recommendations, as appropriate, to the Parliament. The report of the inquiry was intended to update committee members and the Parliament as a whole on the current position of the voluntary sector in Scotland, to provide a snapshot of the voluntary sector upon which the committee could base future work, and to identify key issues and recommendations to be addressed by the Scottish Executive and key players in the voluntary sector. I trust that people will find that the report matches up to those aims and objectives. I want to say something about the process by which we undertook our inquiry. We did not seek to take evidence from only the key players in the voluntary sector and the Executive—from organisations such as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and key figures such as Jean McFadden—although their contribution was welcome. We also sought to reflect in our evidence taking the diversity of the voluntary sector that we often celebrate. We met a range of organisations throughout Scotland by setting up meetings in each of the eight regions, determined as we were to ensure that that diversity could be reflected in what we heard from people in the voluntary sector. I thank the councils for voluntary services for facilitating those meetings, and all those who were engaged in the process. I acknowledge the consensual approach of committee members, who did not feel it necessary to ensure that all political parties were represented at each of those meetings, but were willing to delegate responsibility to two or three members. It was clear that all the committee members who were involved saw themselves as taking part in those meetings on behalf of the committee rather than pursuing the agenda that they might have pursued at other times. I congratulate all committee members who were involved in that process. I conducted an inquiry in my constituency, modelled on the same approach of going out and contacting local communities. I found that useful and I believe that our approach was very much in line with the vision of an open and transparent Parliament that we often hear about. Reflecting on the evidence that we gathered, particularly at local level, we were struck by a number of things. We were struck by the willingness of all to engage in the process, because of their commitment to the sector and, perhaps more important, because of their commitment to the individual areas of work in which they were involved. We were also struck by the huge energy of those who were represented and by what they had to say and what they wanted  to communicate about the key role that they clearly play in their local communities. The most compelling factor in the evidence gathering was the consistency of comments across the country—in rural areas, in urban areas and everywhere in between—about the sector's key priorities and frustrations. The report is intended to reflect the depth of evidence and, in the priority that it gives to individual recommendations, it seeks to reflect the consistency of comments and concerns. I cannot comment on all the points that are made in the report, but I am sure that all members are now extremely familiar with it. I shall select a few points for comment and I am sure that other members will highlight areas that are of importance to them. I have no doubt that the experience of everyone in this chamber as an elected member will be the same as my own. In going about the business of engaging with our constituents, in pursuing issues in our constituencies and in seeking to represent our constituents, we have made contact with and worked with the voluntary sector in all its splendid diversity. There is no doubt that the voluntary sector is in an important position to deliver a social justice agenda. Indeed, voluntary organisations have proved that they have a key role in developing appropriate solutions to many of the problems that face our communities. We wish to celebrate that diversity and the capacity of the sector to drive policy developments. We want to recognise that the voluntary sector is very often ahead of the agenda in seeking solutions to problems in our communities. Much of our current social justice agenda takes an approach that has been developed from the experience of people in local communities. Child care is a key example of that. Child care provision emerged from what was needed locally and has become the norm in relation to what the Scottish Executive and others see as important. The report highlights key issues. We had an interesting session on charity law reform, when we heard evidence from Jean McFadden. It is the committee's view that it is essential that that matter is pursued, and we would like a commitment from the Executive and a timetable for addressing the points that are made in the report. Important work was done on the social economy review, and again we expect the Executive to identify a timetable for moving that review onward. Our commitment to the importance of the social economy review is reflected in our view that there should be recognition of where the voluntary sector and the co-operative and mutual sector meet. In any review of the social economy, important work should be done on the role of the co-operative and mutual sector. Although that  sector is distinct from the voluntary sector, they clearly impact one upon the other and we would like a commitment from the Executive to consider that relationship in the review. The strength of the voluntary sector is that many groups have evolved directly from an identification of local needs. The process is not top down, and that must be recognised in relationships between the voluntary sector and local authorities, other funding partners and the Scottish Executive. It is very much the view of the committee that those partnerships must be developed out of mutual respect. In our view, it is not appropriate for the Scottish Executive, or any other funding organisation, to use the voluntary sector as a means only of delivering its own agenda. Voluntary organisations should have a role in determining that agenda in the first place, particularly given their track record of being able to understand the key issues in their communities or areas of interest. In acknowledging the role of the voluntary sector, we must ensure that we do not reduce the voluntary sector simply to being another service provider. In embracing the voluntary sector, we must ensure that we do not squeeze the life-blood out of it. For example, in seeking a more businesslike approach from those who are involved in voluntary child care, we may lose the flexibility that made that child care provision work for local communities and individual families. In demanding standards in training and regulations—which we all agree are necessary—it is essential that we do not simply develop a professionalisation of the voluntary sector that drives away volunteers and loses the very heart of what the voluntary sector contributes to our communities. Many groups and organisations commented on the problems of consultation. We welcome the importance of real partnership, but it is clearly important that consultation, too, is real and not tokenistic. There must be an opportunity for feedback and what is said must be taken on board in a real way. If we think that the voluntary sector has something serious to say, consultation is all the more important. Real consultation makes it more likely that what comes out of the other end of the process will reflect what is actually needed in local communities. The committee recognises that we must avoid paralysis by consultation. Organisations that are already stretched and strained may see consultation only as a burden and not as a benefit. It will be no surprise that the issue that was constantly raised and highlighted in our evidence taking and work was funding. There was a desire and demand at the heart of the discussion for honesty on all sides about what can be delivered  with the moneys that are provided. There was a sense that sometimes there was a desire to squeeze a dividend—a wee bit extra—out of the money that was given. There needs to be honesty about the training that is required and its cost implications. It is inappropriate for organisations not to have funding security. If important responsibility for service delivery is delegated to the voluntary sector, it is crucial that security is provided to allow organisations to plan, especially as we have made a commitment to giving the voluntary sector a key role in planning. The sector's opportunity to deliver a service must be built on strong foundations. I am sure that all members have horror stories of organisations that seek to pay their staff through having raffles. If something is unacceptable in the public sector, it should be unacceptable in the voluntary sector. Another key issue in respect of funding relates to the frustration that is felt at the need for voluntary organisations persistently to reinvent the wheel. We must be clear. The importance of innovation is recognised and the voluntary sector can be an important test-bed for trying out new ideas and opportunities—indeed, the voluntary sector has an excellent record in that respect. However, it is nonsense that effective organisations should have to recreate and reinvent themselves and attach innovative approaches to effective work to secure new funding. There must be a means of getting the balance right.

I absolutely agree. We have all experienced the frustration of tackling problems or issues in our communities as if no one has ever tackled them before—indeed, we may have started processes that have been proven to be weak elsewhere. I agree that the communication of good practice must be supported. Perhaps if there were less emphasis in funding on what is new, we could build up confidence around good practice. I emphasise that the voluntary sector is an important sector in which to test out new ideas. One is not absolutely thirled to such ideas at a later stage as a result of committing oneself to an approach. We acknowledge the role of the voluntary sector in rural areas. Other members have more detailed knowledge of such work than I do, but it is clear that there are specific difficulties in rural areas in  sustaining, accessing and benefiting from the voluntary sector. Our report reflects the fact that much work needs to be done in that respect. It also acknowledges that many problems relating to accessibility, isolation and the capacity and confidence to volunteer are replicated in some of our most urban, deprived areas. There are issues relating to ensuring that we can engage as many of our communities as possible. The issue does not involve simply geography, but other exclusion issues.

I do not want to diminish the importance of rural poverty, but I am not sure whether the argument is about the experience of poverty in one community as opposed to that in another. The issues relate to poverty. In urban areas, it might be contended that, where density of poverty, exclusion, problems with transport links and few people who are able to work exist, a different process operates. I agree that there are issues around rural poverty and accessing help, which our report sought to address. I am happy to say that I will finish well ahead of time. The voluntary sector deserves more than cosy words—it deserves our respect. It is not the equivalent of the Women's Guild, or a cosy, let-us-all-get-together-and-have-a-hug sector. Many people who are engaged in the voluntary sector are involved in the hardest work and deal with the most difficult problems. They support people who are in the most difficult circumstances. People who go into volunteering activity do not do so because they think that it might be a good thing. They may do so because they have received direct benefit from other people giving of themselves for no other reason than that something needed to be done, whether in Marie Curie Cancer Care or any other organisation. People are involved for many reasons, which are not always easy. The voluntary sector deserves recognition for the hard job that it does in difficult circumstances. We should acknowledge and celebrate the importance of its work in our communities. We should not patronise those who work in the voluntary sector, but build on the work that has been done and the work that has proven to be effective. We should take seriously what the voluntary sector in Scotland told us in its clear voice in giving evidence, particularly in relation to funding. The sector has a right to stable, realistic and consistent funding, not just for the opportunity  to innovate, but because of its capacity to consolidate. We must build trust and an understanding of the pressures on the voluntary sector that are the result of regulation and training. We agree with the need for regulation and training, but we must acknowledge the problem and listen when what has been decided begins to have an adverse effect on communities. Local voluntary activists in my constituency have reported to me their anxieties that the level of regulation and training may mean that people will walk away. People in my community will be devastated if groups that are supported in that community lose important activists. There must be real engagement with such issues. A voluntary sector that can be a significant engine room for the social justice agenda must be allowed. It should not only carry out our agenda, but develop and shape that agenda. That will benefit all our communities—rural and urban and those that are in between. I thank all those who were involved in the report. I trust that all those who read it with interest will take on board what it says and adopt its points where they have influence. I welcome the Executive's response and commend the report to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament notes the Social Justice Committee's 1 st Report 2002, Report on Inquiry into the Voluntary Sector (SP Paper 531).

Keith Raffan mentioned the importance of direct engagement. I recommend to him the experience I had last week of direct engagement with my constituents on the issue of youth disorder. I recommend it to him as a reality check to some of the discussion that we have had today. I want to talk briefly about that meeting. I have two abiding images of it. One is of more than 600 people inside the hall and more than 100 outside it, who were united in anger, frustration and fear because of their experience of youth disorder. The second image is of a group of young men—school students—who, having returned from a football practice, were bemused and bewildered that they could in any way be identified with or connected to the source of such distress. It is clear that youth disorder is a problem that exists across our communities. We all know of older people in particular whose every waking moment is determined by the actions of youngsters—where they walk when they are out and in which room they sit in their own houses. That experience deserves our attention. It is equally clear that, because of the disorder of some young people, other young people are excluded and prevented from participating in the lives of their communities. We know that most young people are not involved in the problem, but we also know that some young people exclude many other young people from using the facilities in their communities. There is a rising trend of young women reporting violent abuse by their boyfriends and partners. We also know that young men are more likely to be the targets of direct violence.  A number of the people who were present at the meeting last week spoke about having to stop their children going out, or of getting taxis for them if they did let them out. That is because of their fear of violence. The problem is greater for families in poorer communities who do not have the luxury of a car to ferry their children around. The problem of lack of youth participation in communities does not exist in a parallel universe. However, in the interests and rights of young people to engage in their communities, that issue must be tackled. We need to build an alliance across age groups and neighbourhoods, including all those who see community bullying and intimidation as unacceptable. Much has been said recently about truancy. I want to say first that truancy is a symptom of a range of problems. It is essential to focus on the causes and nature of truancy in order to develop appropriate strategies. Youngsters who are out of control—bullying others, intimidating their families and communities—need different measures than do the young people who are bullied at school or in the community and who retreat from school. Other strategies are needed for young people who are afraid to leave their homes because of what is happening there, or who are being kept at home, for example young girls who are kept at home as carers or young housekeepers. Those children need strategies that tackle the behaviour of their parents, because it is that behaviour that denies those young people the right to participate in an active childhood. We need particular strategies to deal with different circumstances. It is essential, when seeking solutions, that we engage with young people who suffer as a consequence of youth disorder. I am active in doing that in my constituency. We need to work with young people who are being bullied. We need to offer service and support for those who need help to reveal, rather than conceal, what is happening at home. The youngsters with whom I worked in a pervious existence understood that rights brought responsibilities. They liked always to challenge and they demanded high standards from those who worked with them. Truancy is a complex problem, but we will create a greater problem if we do not hold on to the importance of compulsory education. All our young people have the right to experience the liberation that is offered by education. The best youth work I ever came across was tough, demanding and challenging. The young people were treated with respect and, rather than being patronised, demands were made of them. The youth workers listened to the young people and challenged them when they disagreed with them. The best young people I ever met were  those who asked not for sympathy, but for the means through which they could seek solutions to their problems. Our communities and our democratic process are strengthened by the serious involvement of young people. We must address the particular exclusion of young people in our deprived communities who do not have the capacity or luxury to get involved in some of the processes that have been set up thus far. Young people are the best hope for our communities to become safe and secure places for all of our citizens to enjoy. I welcome the debate and I wish more power to the minister in the work that is ahead of her.

To ask the First Minister what progress is being made in addressing any problems of youth disorder in local communities. (S1F-1854)

The Deputy First Minister might be aware that, on many occasions in the past, I have raised my concerns about the serious issue of youth disorder. He might not be aware of a meeting that was held in my constituency on Tuesday, when at least 600 people squeezed into  a school hall, with well over 100 left outside, to express their concern, anger and frustration at the level of harassment, intimidation and disorder in their community. Will the Deputy First Minister agree to meet me as a matter of urgency so that he can be informed in detail of the local and broader national issues that were highlighted at that meeting? Will he give a guarantee to my constituents and others across Scotland who feel themselves to be under siege that legislation and action on youth disorder will give a central place to the rights of the victims of those crimes, will examine the effectiveness and capacity of the children's panel system—

—and adjust a system to tackle those problems rigorously—

I am sorry. I do not see why I should get held up on time on a very serious issue given the length of time that has been given to other members.

I will finish on this point—and will give priority to ensuring that the—

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate. I acknowledge the important role of primary care staff, GPs, health visitors, community psychiatric nurses and others, in my constituency and elsewhere. In a past life as a schoolteacher, I was struck by the role of health visitors, who had the capacity to pick up problems in families and who, as trusted people, were able to support those families in times of difficulty. When someone can no longer be offered any help by the acute services, there is no doubt that the care and support of district nurses and GPs can be beyond price. We all know that we live in a sick country, and that Glasgow is the sickest of our cities. There are high levels of prosperity in some parts of Glasgow, but we have to confront the reality that ill health is concentrated most in our poorest communities. The challenge to us all is to address that health inequality. I have no doubt that primary health care can be central to addressing that problem. Despite there often being a focus on acute services in  debates and discussions on the health service, the reality is that in too many of our communities, poor diet and living conditions lead to such chronic ill health that people do not reach the stage at which they can benefit from the improvement in acute services. I trust that with the new money that is coming to the national health service, which is welcome, the Minister for Health and Community Care will ensure that primary care is given a share that acknowledges its significant role. We have to see primary care as a vehicle to promote health initiatives and to develop health education initiatives. Primary care should not only have the capacity to identify problems, but where possible it should be able to treat those problems in the community.

My concern is that we did not focus on where people's needs are. In my community, the issue is often one of getting people to the stage of asking for help, or of addressing the broader problems that people face. Difficulty in accessing health care is an issue. For example, the problem of travelling for help in rural areas has been mentioned. Difficulties in travelling to be treated can also be a deterrent to poor families. Access can be a problem for families that are already under pressure and, in some circumstances, people do not take up appointments when they desperately need them. There is a key role to be filled in working with other agencies in local communities, such as social inclusion partnerships, to understand the depth of the problem. I welcome the minister's comments about the importance of the treatment of mental health problems, and I acknowledge Adam Ingram's comments in that regard. There is a clear connection between poverty and mental health problems. It is important to recognise the role of community psychiatric nurses and others who work in the field, and services such as those provided by Rossdale resource centre in my constituency, which seeks to make care accessible and non-stigmatised, and acknowledges the often episodic nature of mental health problems, which means that hospitalised care is not always appropriate. I ask the minister to consider the environment in local health clinics. The problem of families being deterred from going to their local health clinic because methadone treatment is provided there has been raised with me. We have to examine  how centres are laid out, in order that all care needs are addressed. We also have to support GPs in signing up for the primary-care-team model and moving away from the only-the-doctor-knows-best model. With regard to access to care, we have to address the problem for GP practices of patients failing to keep appointments. We need to educate local communities about the impact of that on services. I acknowledge the importance of joint working at a local level. The Minister for Health and Community Care talked about joined-up health and social care. It is essential to develop practice in that field. Arbuthnott produced a distribution formula for health care that tracks need. I contend that the social care side of the partnership deserves to be financed in the same way. I urge the minister to use his influence to press for funding for local government on a needs basis. Such a formula would benefit many in my constituency. I welcome the report "Making the Connections", and support the commitment to local communities that it reflects. I support the motion in the name of Malcolm Chisholm.

Will the member give way?

I am conscious that as I rise to speak, someone else is waiting to rise to speak at Westminster. I do not expect that my words will be scrutinised as closely as the words of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, but it does make a difference—or perhaps it makes me, as a back bencher, feel better—to be upstaged by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, rather than simply being ignored, which too often is the fate of back benchers. I welcome the opportunity to make this speech, both as the Social Justice Committee convener and as the MSP for Pollok constituency—a constituency which, with its variety of housing tenures, problems and issues, is a microcosm of the key issues and challenges that housing presents throughout Scotland. First, I highlight the role of the Social Justice Committee, which has taken the decision to carry on with its responsibilities for housing by scrutinising the impact of the legislation that we dealt with last year. This morning, the committee discussed the housing improvement task force's report. We are keen to hear from groups about issues that they believe have been omitted from the report and would be worthy of further consideration. It is clear in any discussion of problems in relation to the private sector that a gulf exists between the rights and roles of tenants in the social rented sector and those in the private sector. That gulf gives the lie to the argument that the transfer of council stock to community ownership is privatisation. I welcome the result of the Glasgow housing stock transfer ballot, which was announced during the recess. I acknowledge the key challenge for all of us in Glasgow and beyond to make that decision work for all the  tenants of Glasgow. I have time only to make some brief points. It would be remiss of me not to talk about the impact of the Glasgow tenants' decision on some owner-occupiers in the city, particularly those who bought their houses under right-to-buy legislation. Many people bought their houses because doing so was economically rational and a financially sensible decision, given the lack of investment in housing and the problems with repair and the level of rent. However, the significant investment that is to be made in the social rented housing around such people will have an impact on them. That would be an issue regardless of how the investment was delivered, but it remains a problem for those who have confronted it. That is a cause of anxiety and distress. My constituents have spoken to me about that and I am sure that others have said the same thing. Concrete plans and proposals from the Scottish Executive must address that anxiety. I trust that the housing improvement task force expects to have a key role in that. People in that position need improvement and repair grants to support them in meeting such impending costs. That group needs and deserves to be made a targeted priority. Some members discussed the consequences of not targeting sufficiently. People in that position are on relatively low incomes and their properties will be subject to improvement because of the decisions of others, not because of their own decisions. Information about grants must be provided speedily, because there is no doubt that people are wrestling with, and worrying about, that problem. The other important and related issue, to which Robert Brown referred, is factoring, whether it involves the private sector or people who are struggling to get necessary work done because their neighbours are reluctant to co-operate. Factoring of right-to-buy properties by councils has been problematic in some circumstances, to say the least. Partnership must be emphasised. The responsibility that accompanies ownership must be recognised and that must be discussed more with people who are deciding whether to buy their homes. In the private and owner-occupied sectors, the experience of contact with the construction industry is worrying and sometimes damaging. There are some well-reported instances of people being exploited and ripped off. That may not be the direct responsibility of the ministers present, but I seek reassurance that regulation of the construction industry for the benefit of customers and in the interests of a work force that is involved in a dangerous industry will be dealt with by the appropriate ministers. I emphasise the key role of construction unions in that work. I will finish by talking about another important  issue that relates directly to the privately rented sector—the regulations on houses in multiple occupation. Clear concerns are being expressed about how those regulations are operating in practice. A policy that sought to tackle bad and negligent landlords is pulling in groups that are regulated effectively elsewhere. The Social Justice Committee is taking an interest in that matter. It is fair to say that the jury is still out on how the regulations can be developed. I commend the task force's report. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Executive has taken seriously its responsibilities on housing in all its shapes and forms. I welcome the report as part of an area of work for us all that is of central importance to people's lives.

I accept that the repair grants in the 1980s were significant, but does the member agree that part of the benefit went in windfall dividends to individual owners who received the grants and then sold their houses at great profit?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to monitor the implementation of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. (S1O-4950)

Is the minister aware of the level of dissatisfaction about their bus service that is felt by many of my constituents in Pollok? They are dissatisfied with the limited services that are available, their unreliability and the frequent absence of services on key routes outwith peak hours. Is he further aware that many feel that the regulation that the act provides is simply inadequate to meet their demands for a proper bus service? Will he confirm his willingness to review the effectiveness of the quality partnership and quality contract processes and, if necessary, will he consider further legislation to address the serious problems that my constituents experience?

Will Shona Robison accept an intervention?

Is the First Minister aware that, in my constituency of Glasgow Pollok, a significant number of people have already chosen to live in much-sought-after homes that are run by community-based housing associations and co-operatives? Does he agree that such community empowerment is a positive step forward and not a threat? Will he join me in condemning those who, while tenants in Glasgow are deciding what to do, equate housing associations and co-operatives with privatisation? That equation is wilful scaremongering, particularly among elderly people who remember what the private rented sector was like. It is a grave insult to all those in my constituency and elsewhere who have worked voluntarily to deliver real housing change in their communities and, as we are talking about ideology, it is a denial of the proud history of the co-operative movement and the potential of co-operative and community-based solutions to make a difference in our local areas.

May I move a motion to extend the business?

Members may be aware that we are now online worldwide and that this debate will be webcast across the universe. I have always been stroppy at home and I am learning to be stroppy for Pollok, but even I am a touch fazed at the idea of being given the opportunity to be stroppy on a global basis. We should congratulate the broadcasting people on the work that they have done thus far, especially on the interactive debating forum. I hope that members will encourage local people to contribute. It is a great privilege for me to be given the opportunity to speak in the debate, but it is a still greater privilege to be one of 48 women parliamentarians in the Scottish Parliament. We have the third highest proportion of women parliamentarians in the world. There is no doubt that that is a great achievement. It did not happen by accident; it was achieved by the determination of women. I endorse the work of the 50/50 campaign, which seeks to achieve equal representation at all levels—including on local authorities and in public bodies. I welcome the United Kingdom Sex Discrimination (Election Candidates) Bill, which will support that work. It is important for us to hold on to what we have. We do not underestimate that challenge. I welcome the opportunity to highlight international women's day. I quote one source that  says: "International women's day is the story of ordinary women as makers of history. It is rooted in the centuries-old struggle of women to participate in society on an equal footing with men." International women's day provides not only an opportunity for events to celebrate women's role in society and push for greater recognition, but "an opportunity for reviewing, restating and acting on the political, economic and social rights of women." I trust that the debate will play a part in that opportunity. I acknowledge and celebrate the role of women who work locally to sustain families and fragile communities for no reason other than that it is work that must be done. I acknowledge in particular the role of women in Pollok and send best wishes to Women Together in Pollok, which will be running an event for women tomorrow. Anyone who says that women's involvement makes life safer and sweeter has not attended any of the local meetings, which I am sure that we have all experienced, where women lead the charge and demand that things change. Such fierceness and tenacity can and does move mountains. We all know such women. They have a local commitment and focus, but are also part of a global chain of endeavour, making a real difference to people's lives. When we reflect on the role of women, it is clear that women have driven a shift in public policy. In the main, it was women who created local child care initiatives. Those initiatives shaped and established the foundation for the Scottish Executive and UK Government approach to supporting early intervention strategies to tackle disadvantage and support women into work. Women have been in the driving seat, finding imaginative and more effective ways of identifying local need and delivering services to meet that need. The development of the voluntary sector is testimony to that work. Women have driven the political agenda, which has finally begun to acknowledge that child sexual abuse, male violence against women, the role of carers—who are overwhelmingly women—and low pay are issues that should be at centre stage in the considerations of political parties, Governments and Parliaments. We should review the situation with a critical eye. We believe in women's representation in itself, but we also believe that it has a purpose. Much more needs to be done to achieve the ambitions that are encapsulated in the aims of international women's day. Women are still fleeing violence and are made refugees in their own country by the men with whom they live. Young  women in our communities are experiencing a worrying trend of increasing levels of violence. Male violence against women continues and the statistics remain horrific. The challenge for those who express sympathy for victims is not to say that something should be done and that we must help, but to ask the harder question: why is this happening? We will not solve the problems unless we address the underlying relationships of power in our society. Despite a quarter of a century of equality legislation, women are still more likely to work part time and are still more likely to be low paid. Last year, women still earned only 81p for every pound that was earned by men. In that context, it is a matter of regret that, of the top 50 Scottish companies approached by the union Amicus to consider voluntary equal pay audits, only 10 per cent gave a positive response. We must ask what those companies have to hide and what inequality they wish to perpetuate. Although young women consistently outperform young men educationally, male hands are still, overwhelmingly, on the levers of power. Recent figures show that less than 2 per cent of executive directors are women. It is an irony that commentators have the cheek to suggest that positive action for women promotes gender before merit given that broader society reflects a situation that is exactly the opposite. We must reaffirm our commitment to equality and redouble our efforts to exercise our authority and influence to achieve that equality. I urge the Executive to examine its policies and priorities, and to question what it is doing to make the difference. Where is the evidence of Executive departments' commitment to such work and how are they ensuring that resources are targeted equally? I urge the committees of the Parliament to take responsibility in their areas of expertise to consider the impact of their work on women. This is not a counsel of despair. We must not only consider where women are, but ask why that is the case. In answering the harder question, we must develop action that will allow today's children—our daughters and our sons—to inherit a world in which equality and mutual respect are the watchwords. I send international women's day greetings to all those across the world who share that aim and dream.

I wonder whether Mr Monteith is not in imminent danger of suggesting that we ought not to take rape cases to trial at all because the accusation of rape is so damaging to someone. Everyone is aware of that fact. Does he agree that part of the reasoning behind the position that we are discussing is a belief that it is more likely that a woman will lie about rape than  about any other crime? Does he also agree that that attitude is dangerous and sends the wrong message to women who might wish to complain but who are afraid to do so because of that attitude?

Does Phil Gallie agree that the proper place to debate anonymity for the accused in relation to particular crimes is in a debate about the rights of the accused in relation to a series of crimes? Phil Gallie is in danger of equating the rights of the accuser and of the accused for a specific crime such as rape. The danger of Phil Gallie's line is the suggestion that the situation of a complainer in a sexual offence case is different from that of other victims of crime. I would be concerned if Phil Gallie suggested that. I accept that there is a legitimate debate about the anonymity of the accused in some cases, but that must be seen in the context of the debate about the rights of the accused, not in the context of sexual offence cases. To discuss the issue in that context implies that there is something different about the complainer in such cases.

Does the minister agree that primary school teachers—the vast majority of whom are women—are doing very important work? In spite of the problems that society faces, it is the fact that women are prepared to tackle the problems that gives us hope for the future. Will the minister join me in congratulating those primary schools in Glasgow that have succeeded in shifting significantly the attainment figures for pupil literacy and numeracy? In any consideration of how to make primary teaching a more attractive career, will he note that the rate at which women secure promoted posts is not in proportion to their numbers in the work force and will he reflect on the message that that gives to women primary teachers and their pupils?

Will Fergus Ewing give way?

I am  happy to contribute, no matter how briefly, to the debate. I regret that it has been necessary to introduce the bill. I accept that the justice system needs to be meticulous, as it deals with issues of innocence and guilt and of crime and punishment, but what has happened is the worst kind of publicity for a system that seems not just to grind exceeding slow but, in the eyes of some, exceeding stupid and in defiance of common sense. I welcome the fact that the Executive has moved swiftly to close the loophole, which was not of its making. I urge the chamber to accept the bill as an emergency. I confess that my initial reaction on hearing about the consequences of the ruling at Linlithgow sheriff court was fury—fury that, after a diligent search for a loophole, evidence could not be tested in court and crimes could potentially go unpunished. When I was ranting on, the person listening to me said, "Well, that's their job." No doubt the job of a lawyer is to represent the interests of their client, but we have to ask about the broader attitudes and culture that the issue that has arisen reflects and what it actually means to represent the best interests of a client. The issue is not about the individuals who were involved in the case. Obviously, the lawyers have the important job of protecting clients from corruption and misrepresentation and of ensuring that a defence can be made. It is essential that the rules are maintained, but it is reasonable to say that the rules should be rational. I cannot see the rationality in the ruling. I am not on my own in holding that view, as it seems to have taken the lawyers 22 years to spot the loophole. I have time to make only a couple of broad points. The legal system is not a game, where someone applies their ingenuity to a puzzle to see what they can achieve for a client. However, there is a danger of its being presented in that way. The challenge to those who are involved in the legal system is to develop a system in which the innocent are protected and miscarriages of justice are prevented, but which is effective, organised and rigorous enough to ensure that the guilty are punished and further crimes in our communities are deterred. I cannot overstate how important it is to shift the justice system out of complacency and into the 21 st century. I have been profoundly struck by the hostility to and despair about the legal system that ordinary citizens in my constituency express. My constituents consistently express a lack of faith in the system. We ignore at our peril those views and the consequence for our society of not addressing what those views reflect of the operation of the law in our communities. I urge members to support taking the bill under the emergency procedure, but we should commit ourselves to addressing the  underlying issues that created the situation. My constituents and the people of Scotland deserve no less.

As the First Minister has acknowledged, the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill is important because it will address the experience of women rape victims in the legal system, which currently deters the reporting of the crime, rather than the crime itself. Does the First Minister agree that key elements in addressing the low conviction rate will include listening to organisations that work with women survivors of sexual crime, such as Rape Crisis, and supporting those organisations with the appropriate resources?

Several members of the Rural Development Committee have said that the bill was clearly flawed and would not do what it sought to achieve. It makes me wonder why there was no attempt to introduce a committee bill to address the issue of fox hunting on its own, rather than adopting a destructive tactic and suggesting that that was not an option.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Today's debate on attainment is important, but we must not lose sight of our broader social inclusion agenda. A debate on education cannot take place in isolation. We must never forget that some of our children cannot improve their attainment because factors outside school prevent them even from getting to the stage at which they are ready to learn. That is why education needs to be addressed alongside housing, problems with addiction, domestic abuse and crime. Those issues need to be addressed in the round, because tackling them will also improve our young people's attainment and opportunities. I want to acknowledge the hard work that has been done in pre-school and early school learning to address the inequalities in our communities. Members may be aware of the improving early-stage attainment figures for numeracy and literacy in Glasgow schools. That is a positive trend. We must congratulate Glasgow City Council and the staff and pupils involved, because such improvement gives us hope that the Scottish Executive's strategy is beginning to work. There is no opportunity for complacency, but there are grounds for hope. We need to build on that. Two things affect my perspective: first, I was a teacher for 20 years; secondly, I am a mother of two, who has one child in primary 2 and one who is a pre-schooler. Both of my children have benefited from the investment that has been made in early-stage learning. I am sure that they will benefit more. I would be foolish to argue that class sizes have no impact on the general capacity to learn, but I contend that reduction in class sizes is only one lever by which attainment can be improved. As a teacher for 20 years, I taught classes of 30, of 20 and of 15. I also sometimes taught classes of only four or five. It depended on how complex the  needs of the youngsters were but, in certain circumstances, the group of four or five could be the most troublesome. Even if there were only four or five in the class, the support of someone else was needed. The levels of attainment did not necessarily depend on how many were in the class.

Teaching practices may indeed need to be changed, but in some cases that could also bring benefits. Some subjects benefit from a different approach. Teachers may need to move away from the teacher-talking, children-listening approach. My view is that class sizes should depend on circumstances. It is not always the case that teachers should not be able to teach a larger group. It is significant that, although the education unions have always argued for smaller class sizes, they do not argue that the policy should be loaded in the way that Mike Russell has suggested. We should not use only one lever. For a number of reasons, I am anxious about the SNP's position. There is a lesson to be learned from the targets that were set for things such as waiting lists. The targets ended up driving policy and priorities, without necessarily achieving what was sought. There is a danger that concentrating on class sizes will overwhelm everything else without doing what is intended. We might end up resourcing something that does not deliver. [Interruption.] Had Mike Russell been in one of my classes during my 20 years of teaching, he would not have got away with the behaviour that he has got away with today. Flexibility is essential. We need to consider what happens at different times in our classes. We need proper support for youngsters with special educational needs. We need support to integrate youngsters with disabilities into mainstream education. At times, teachers should be able to work one to one with a troubled child, which would not be possible if we were to invest in only one element. To use only one lever would be to deny ourselves the flexibility that must be available. I have only a short time left, but let me make one more point. The SNP has said that it would provide significant investment to bring down class  sizes. I would not demur from the idea of investing in education, but I would need to be convinced that such investment would be effective. Mike Russell said that his policy would help the disadvantaged. My fear is that the bulk of the money would come from the transfer of resources towards magnet schools and away from schools that are under capacity. The latter may have fewer pupils, but they certainly do not have fewer problems and difficulties. The SNP's one-size-fits-all strategy would have a serious impact on flexibility and on our capacity to narrow the gap in equality of achievement in education. For Labour members, that equality of achievement is as important as anything else.

I intend to be brief. I welcome the debate, which focuses again on the experience of young people and on some of the dreadful things that they have to face. I congratulate Kenny Gibson on securing the debate. Kenny made the important point that young people are prompted to run away by a range of triggers. We should see running away as one means of coping with difficult problems and troubles, some of which may be in the home and others may be in the community. In trying to find a solution, we need to focus on the triggers. We also need to support young people who have taken the step of running away from home. It is essential to listen to young people in a sensitive way. We need to understand that, in some circumstances, they leave because what is at home is worse than what they might face if they go. That in itself is a frightening thought. However, young people leave home for other reasons and sensitivity needs to be employed in understanding those reasons. We must not categorise everybody who runs away as having one problem that can be solved in one way. Sometimes, when young people play truant from school, they are characterised as having mental health problems although their response is entirely rational to their experience. I worked with a young person who might have been defined as having mental health problems as she did not come to school very often. In fact, she was afraid of what would happen to her mother when she was out of the home. That is often the case with runaway young children. Given their circumstances, what they are doing is entirely rational. As a society, we have the responsibility to address the factors that drive young people away at the same time as we focus on the child and his or her problems.

The point that I tried to make was that both should be done. Assumptions should not be made about what happens inside the family—the problem may be in the community or school. The report emphasises the scale of the problems that are faced by young people. If we are not shocked by the fact that young people are forced to run away from home because of their experiences, then—quite frankly—nothing will shock us. Kenny Gibson described young peoples' lives when they run away and their experiences should terrify us and spur us to greater action. There is understandable anxiety about young people being taken into care inappropriately to become looked-after children. However, sometimes, that is exactly what a young person needs. That fact should spur us on to ensure that, when young people are brought into care, we guarantee safe places for them to be looked after. I understand the dilemma of social workers who do not want to make such decisions, but I know of youngsters who did everything but demand to go into a safe place. The solution is not always rehabilitation with the family. We have to address the causes. I welcome developments in schools, where there is a greater understanding of the need to focus on the child rather than on the individual symptoms that are displayed by a troubled child. That will ensure that the child is supported through social work, educational psychologists and the family working together, which will prevent young people taking extreme actions. As I said, I welcome the debate and trust that the Executive appreciates the seriousness with which it is presented. I also trust that the Executive's response will be commensurate with the problem.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate. I am impressed by the work that the Local Government Committee has done. We have received yet another stage 1 report from the committee, which these days seems to be on as often as "Coronation Street". Perhaps the masses do not follow the committee quite so faithfully, but it is probably as important. I congratulate the committee on its clear and helpful report and I note its capacity to generate reports that enjoy consensus in the Parliament. It is significant that we can tackle issues on which we are agreed and that we can carry out our work accordingly. That underlines the importance of the Parliament's committees. It is essential that they are properly supported in carrying out their important work. The consultation on the bill is regarded as having been effective. That is important, because the quality of the consultation that the Executive carries out is developing as a key issue both locally—in my constituency—and among organisations with which the Social Justice Committee comes into contact. In some cases, there is a feeling that consultation, although it is taking place, is not a genuine dialogue. This is a good example of the importance of real consultation with those who have an interest in the subject. Complaints against public bodies feature strongly in my casework, and I am sure that I am not alone in being approached by people who have such concerns. Generally, I am happy with the responses of public organisations when I pursue complaints on behalf of my constituents. However, there is a danger that the message that goes out to the general public is that only the intervention of MSPs gets results. That is nice for an MSP who has managed to get a result for somebody, but it suggests something about the attitude that is taken towards the public when they seek to complain on their own behalf. It is essential that public services should strive to get things right at the beginning, so that people do not want to complain. It is also essential that, when a complaint is made, the response that is  given at an early stage is helpful. We are talking about a last resort rather than a first resort, although a lot of the problems arise when people first raise a concern and are confronted by a less than helpful, puzzled or bemused attitude from an organisation. Often, constituents have come to me when they have been exasperated and frustrated by the lack of progress that they have experienced. If citizens have no faith in the system's capacity to acknowledge and address their concerns, we should not underestimate the impact of that on their commitment to and belief in public services. The perception has been expressed to me on several occasions that organisations are policing themselves and that there is no independent scrutiny of what is going on at an early stage. It is important that people have faith in the system. Few cases are taken up by the ombudsmen and the complainer receives support in only a few of those cases. That has an impact on people's confidence in the system. The system has to be seen to take complaints seriously. There is an issue about support for the person who is pursuing a complaint, which I shall return to in a moment. Another theme that has become apparent to me is the anxiety of officials or those who work in public services about being frank and explicit when a complaint is raised with them. They may argue that they fear litigation. We must acknowledge that that fear can be genuine. However, it could also be a convenient excuse to avoid being transparent and open to comment. If there is an alleged threat of litigation, we must find ways in which those who are being complained against can be made to feel confident and protected in being explicit about their experience of the person who is pursuing a complaint. The traffic should not be one way. A key issue is that those who feel that they have been treated badly often have to make their complaint at a difficult and painful time. The complaints system should be accessible regardless of an individual's resources and we must support people through the complexities of the system. I am particularly concerned that the most disadvantaged people in our communities—those who are most reliant on public services—are probably the least supported in pursuing their complaints. We must therefore reconsider the resourcing of local support systems, such as citizens advice bureaux, so that money does not determine people's capacity to enter into the complaints system and individuals can sustain themselves throughout the complaints procedure. As I said, the ombudsman is the last resort. In my experience, the best results are achieved when those who work in the public sector are willing to meet at an early stage those who have  concerns and want to pursue complaints. It is remarkable how many cases have been resolved through a willingness to be open rather than through transparency at a later stage. Commitment to that attitude underpins our approach to public services and is at the heart of what a lot of people who work in public services believe in. I add my support for the general principles of the bill and look forward to the debates at stages 2 and 3.

I am sure that the minister is aware that in many communities, including some in my constituency of Pollok, there is a problem of chaotic drug use, which includes cannabis use. Will the minister reassure my constituents, who often suffer problems of crime and disorder as a consequence of drug misuse, that the safety and security of their communities will remain a key policing priority, regardless of the change in categorisation of cannabis?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I have been driven to reflect on what the 22 contributions could have been the last time that we debated three separate issues in 22 minutes, as it seemed. I presume that at least a quarter of them were made by Mr Sheridan. I caution Mr Sheridan. I trust that he will reflect on today's proceedings so that he does not end up being described, as the Earl of Selkirk was by Burns, as "a man of immense vanity, bordering on insanity—and every corner stuffed with mighty self". I make a serious, rather than a debating, point.

I would never suggest that vanity is solely a product of the Scottish Socialist Party. There are many expressions of vanity elsewhere. I was cautioning Mr Sheridan that the Parliament is a place where we have debate—it is not a platform or an opportunity to get headlines. I deprecate spin-doctoring elsewhere and I deprecate it in this debate. Water charges are an important issue. I have argued on record that we need to address the problems of the poor and those on low incomes, particularly in the context of rising water charges. We have been put in the unfortunate position of not having the opportunity to reflect on the strengths of the arguments; we have been told what the solution is and we must like it or lump it. Frankly, that is not what the Parliament is for. The proposals that are the subject of this debate and the previous debate have been scrutinised by our committees and, sadly, have been found wanting. In the time that we have had, we have not had the opportunity to expose that further. It is important to consider the Parliament's powers to address the needs of the poor in relation to water charges. We must question the credibility of getting the Inland Revenue to deal with the problem, which is a rather cobbled-together  solution. Iain Smith made the point about socialists no longer wanting to tax property. Mr Sheridan wants to tax property—that is why I find his proposals on the council tax and the water services tax unacceptable and not sufficiently thought through. We must acknowledge the importance of keeping water services in the public sector. I ask the minister to reassure us that the Executive will look seriously at how the proposed water charges will affect the poor. That central issue is not the monopoly of one person in the Parliament; it is of grave concern to Labour members. It is not simply a party matter; we must find a genuine solution to the problems, so that people can have a good water service that is affordable and appropriately delivered.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order. Is it in order to define as a gaggle of geese members who want to participate in a debate on a policy, rather than listen to Mr Sheridan make the same points that he has made repeatedly over a long period of time?

Will the member give way?

Will the member accept an intervention on that point?

I add my congratulations to those of other colleagues to Karen Gillon on securing this debate and congratulate all those who have achieved this great success for New Lanark. We can all be immensely proud of it. We want to celebrate the importance of New Lanark, partly as the history of ordinary working people and partly as the story of a man who threw down a dangerous challenge—saying that it is possible to treat ordinary working class people with respect, put them in an environment that is safe and healthy, and still be able to conduct business properly. We want to celebrate New Lanark's success and what it represents in the past; but we also want to celebrate the hope that it offers for the future. I want to add the congratulations of the Co-operative group of MSPs to those that have already been made. Members may be aware that, every year, New Lanark hosts international Co-operative day. We are all involved in that and very emotionally attached to it. It is always a family day and a day of great celebration. It is an important day in the Co-operative calendar because it reflects the significance of local co-operation as part of an international movement—a movement that goes beyond country and geography and that speaks to the good in us all. I urge the Executive to look at the way in which New Lanark's success has been secured and to consider the work that was done to get us to this stage. There may be lessons to be learned and other opportunities in other areas of Scotland's heritage. In particular, there may be opportunities to celebrate the collective working-class experience of people in Scotland. There must be other ways in which that can be preserved and celebrated. The Executive should also consider the more general lessons of New Lanark, looking at ways in which its ideas can be developed in other policy areas—for example in relation to economic  regeneration. What co-operation shows more clearly than anything else is the strength that is released to improve communities when we allow people to work co-operatively within those communities to generate change. I certainly feel that co-operation speaks as a reproach to those who would tell us that we are all interested only in ourselves and that the only way that things can be done is through the deregulation of the economy. In fact, things can very much be done the other way. As I said, co-operation speaks to the best in all of us. I believe that we have to mark the success of New Lanark not only by recognising the pioneering past that it represents but by seeing it as something that will allow us to focus our minds on how the co-operative model may be translated into other aspects of our work, so that the energy that was released in New Lanark can be released elsewhere—in housing or in other aspects of our society. The co-operative model is often not taken seriously, but it gives us great hope for the future. I add my congratulations to the people of New Lanark and wish them all the best in celebrating this great achievement.

Is the First Minister aware of the concerns in my constituency about the inability of Amey Highways Ltd to clear up the grass verges of the motorways? Communities fear that that will encourage fly tipping and cause another scar on those communities. What advice can the First Minister give my constituents and others who are having grave difficulties in getting a response from the company on how it is responding to that problem  and dealing with it quickly?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in a debate on these important issues. At the outset, I should declare an interest, as I am supported in my Glasgow Pollok constituency by the Scottish Co-operative Party. The debate is important because of the history of the water industry and the historical willingness to invest in the health of ordinary people. There is a clear public commitment to access to clean water and the Strathclyde referendum against privatisation, which has been mentioned, still lives on in our memories and, indeed, in the memory of the Scottish people as a whole. The issue is of great interest to the Co-operative group of MSPs and, more broadly, to the Co-operative movement. It is part of our role to take every opportunity to promote the value and potential of co-operatives. I contend that this debate is one such opportunity. I have time to make only a number of brief points. I should perhaps start with a health warning. As I did not sit on the Transport and the Environment Committee and am not au fait with all the technicalities, it would be the easiest thing in the world for someone else to trip me up. Perhaps we should just take that as read, and members can leave their clever interventions where they are. There is a danger of being blinded by the science of economics, some of which is not science at all but just hostility to new models. Some experts' hostility to and prejudice against the co-operative model does not bear great intellectual scrutiny. We in the Co-operative movement believe that there is an opportunity in the water industry to provide a community mutual model and that more work should be done to explore that possibility. We must also explore some of the myths about co-operatives and mutuals. Some people think that co-operatives are for woolly thinkers and the woolly-hatted. In fact, if we examine our economy, that is far from the case. The concept should be given more respect than that. There is a contention that co-operatives and mutuals are not efficient. For example, the Tories would have us believe that only a profit motive can drive efficiency. We need to challenge such a belief, because there are good examples across Scotland and beyond of highly efficient co-operative and mutual businesses.

That is a separate argument. People have dismissed the mutual model on the ground that it is not efficient, although I accept that Mr Scott has not argued that case. Co-operative and mutual businesses are able to focus on delivering services on a rational basis. There has already been discussion about the privatised water companies down south. The reality is that, in their search for profits, some of those companies have sought high-risk investment in far eastern hotel chains and indeed want to divest themselves of delivering water services because they are not making a suitable profit on them. It has also been argued that the co-operative and mutual option is not really public. It is clearly not for profit and there are good examples of democratic structures that can ensure local community involvement through democratically elected boards. I can develop that argument if members so wish. Some argue that the co-operative option is developed only at a time of crisis. I seek assurances that the bill does not rule out developing the model for the future. It would be wise to carry out the work now, when we are not facing a crisis, to allow us to consider all the possibilities. We are keen for the co-operative model to be explored further through a feasibility study in which we would be afforded the opportunity to advance arguments about the model's efficiency and credibility and the capacity to borrow to invest at a highly competitive rate. Such a study should challenge prejudices about the model instead of allowing them to continue. As a minimum, I seek the minister's acknowledgement that the model has not been dismissed out of hand. We must be honest about the legitimate anxieties concerning the future of the water industry. There are no easy answers. There is an issue about the impact of the Competition Act 1985 and we should examine the possibility of exemptions from that act instead of simply accepting it as a given. That said, I recognise that competition already exists in the water industry and that issue must be addressed. Although I believe that the Executive has a real desire to maintain water in the public sector, there is a genuine fear that that desire will be undermined in reality and that there will be privatisation by the back door, not because the Executive seeks it, but because of the rigours of the Competition Act 1985.  Finally, we need to recognise that the cost of any increased investment will be borne by consumers. There is a fear that a disproportionate amount of the cost will be borne by domestic consumers and, bearing in mind Tommy Sheridan's point, I think that we must consider exempting the very poorest in our communities from charges. If charges are to increase, they will do so disproportionately for those who can least afford them. We must use the Scottish Parliament's own powers to address the issue, instead of focusing on income tax, which is dealt with elsewhere. What can we do in this bill to exempt those least able to afford the increased charges in the same way that we have exempted people from the council tax?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to promote culture and the arts as being integral to the regeneration of communities. (S1O-4148)

I thank the minister for her reply. Is she aware of interesting initiatives in my constituency, such as the Pollok Kist, The Village storytelling project and the planned heritage centre? They are interesting examples of the way in which the arts and culture are being promoted. Those initiatives are supported and driven by local people. They are of interest and benefit to the local community, but will the minister reassure me that the Executive recognises the importance of promoting arts and culture and of making the wider community aware of such initiatives? That should create the infrastructure to allow broader accessibility to such initiatives and broader community interest in the arts, which would support economic regeneration in communities such as those which I represent.

I welcome the opportunity to speak on the stage 1 report on the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill. It is a matter of personal satisfaction to see that a concern and injustice that was highlighted in Scotland and in the Parliament is now being addressed in legislation. It is testament to our much-vaunted openness and accessibility that we are debating the legislation. I see a welcome willingness to listen to voices other than that of the establishment and to take those voices seriously. I congratulate the Justice 2 Committee on a thoughtful and considered report. One of the Parliament's key roles is to listen to the experience of ordinary citizens and to address issues through reasonable and coherent legislation. I particularly congratulate the Scottish Executive and the ministers involved in pursuing the bill. It might have felt a great deal easier to avoid the issue than to act. I welcome the fact that they have had the courage to progress the issue. There has been a great deal of agitation about the bill, with some of the argument against it being conducted in unnecessarily hostile and aggressive ways. The message seems to be, "Our legal system is the best in the world, for goodness sake." Perhaps we should tell that to some of the people in my constituency who have gone through the system as victims or witnesses; they have something a great deal different to say. It is interesting that Lyndsay McIntosh cited the heavy and weighty evidence of the legal profession, but dismissed as anecdotal information what witnesses and victims had to say. That is the imbalance that we seek to correct.

No.  Some have sought to develop a false caricature of the people who support the bill and of the motives that drive them. The debate has been characterised as being between the cool, rational opposition of those who know best—the professionals—and the wilder fringes of demented feminism, of which I am perhaps a representative. We have been accused of promoting and pushing a feminist agenda and of using the very limited experience of some individuals as a vehicle for promoting that agenda. The issues that women's groups and organisations promote emerge not from ideology but from experience. Women did not argue for and create women's refuges because of ideology, but because they wanted to make women safe in their communities. Women did not set up rape crisis centres as a statement of intent, but to meet needs. Women's organisations and victims' groups call for change not to promote a feminist agenda, but to address a process and a system that can leave victims further victimised and which creates the possibility that the high-profile experience of those who have been cross-examined by alleged perpetrators of crime might deter victims of crime from reporting their experience, which increases undetected sexual crime in our communities. We can usefully address the broader issue of the experience of witnesses and victims in our legal system. The response of some in the legal profession is disappointing, not least because a justice system in which people do not have faith is a major concern for us all, including—and perhaps especially—the legal profession. Bill Aitken talked about polarisation. The polarisation of views on what happens to victims of sexual crime in court stands as a challenge, not as an excuse to do nothing. We do not seek to give sustenance to those who believe in rough justice and no protection for the accused. We seek a justice system that incorporates a balance of rights and which seems fair, reasonable and just, not to the lynch mob, but to fair, reasonable and just citizens. Members have said before that, in some of our communities, our commitment to the European convention on human rights seems to be dislocated from people's direct experiences of its irrationalities. We must find ways of pulling our citizens and communities together with the justice system. We need an approach that builds confidence in the system and increases the likelihood of the system fulfilling its role in deterring sexual crime and punishing sexual crime when it is detected. I look forward to the bill being developed in committee. I welcome the fact that some people in the legal profession are addressing the issues seriously and rationally. I welcome and support the  Justice 2 Committee's stage 1 report on the bill. I trust that, with other members, we will develop a bill that offers witnesses and victims protection in the legal system.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that debt advice is widely available and accessible. (S1O-4106)

Does the minister agree that a  key difficulty that people have in tackling their debt problems is the delay in getting to the stage of receiving help and support? How does the minister envisage increasing awareness of the services that are available and of the importance of seeking help early? Does she recognise the importance of ensuring that such debt advice is sufficiently resourced to make help real and effective in local communities, especially where increased awareness has increased the number of people seeking that help?

I am proud and privileged to speak during members' business to the motion in my name on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. I am grateful for all the support that the motion has attracted, which indicates the concern felt across the chamber about the issues that it highlights. All members will acknowledge that we live in times of hubbub and change in the Parliament. I believe that the time for debating members' business is of real importance and plays a part in establishing the Scottish Parliament's worth. The debate represents business as usual, in particular for back benchers such as me. This is an important opportunity for the citizens of Scotland to see the structures and work of the Parliament being influenced by their priorities. I must start with a confession. The subject of the debate is not an area in which I have great expertise—indeed, I am conscious of my total ignorance of the condition when I first heard about it. Since then I have been interested to see the often puzzled and bemused reactions of others when I have talked to them about hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It is not easy to say it, never mind to understand it. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a mainly inherited disease that affects one in 500 of the population. It is the No 1 cause of sudden heart-related death among under-25s. It is a familial disease and each child of an affected person is exposed to a 50:50 chance of inheriting the  condition. It is a condition that, by what seems to be the most cruel of ironies, often affects the youngest, fittest and most athletic people in our communities. Those are the facts and I am grateful to the Cardiomyopathy Association for the briefing with which it provided me to assist me and inform me in the debate. I will be happy to pass on the information to anybody who requests it. I am also conscious that statistics alone do not speak of the impact of the condition on families, nor of the individual tragedies that they represent. Constituents of mine lost a much-loved son and brother because of cardiomyopathy, which had gone undetected in that lively, enthusiastic, fit and talented young man of 19; a young man who was—it seemed—as far from ill health as one could be. At that devastating time, my constituents had to seek out information about the condition, which was not easy to find. Even now, while they are still dealing with their bereavement, they seek to do something positive to help others and to prevent others from suffering a loss such as the one with which they still live. I believe that it is important to acknowledge the courage, not only of my constituents, but of all those who are coping with loss and who seek to drive, influence and support the work of organisations, such as the Cardiomyopathy Association, which seek to create better knowledge and understanding of illnesses and diseases, be that Marie Curie Cancer Care, the Cancer Research Campaign or whatever. Such organisations are full of people who want to create something better for others from their own experiences. I believe, in the difficult times—at home and internationally—in which we live, that we should take succour in the basic goodness and caring for others that we see all around us in voluntary groups and organisations. My motion contains a simple demand: that there should be a right to automatic screening for all first-degree relatives of those who are diagnosed as having or who have died as a result of the condition. It seems simple; I am led to believe that general practitioners are encouraged to offer such screening, but my constituents' experience speaks volumes about the inadequacies of that encouragement. My constituents, when dealing with the death of their son, had to seek out information. On learning that the condition is inherited, that it could affect others in the family, that it could be detected through screening and that it can be managed if it is detected, they had to fight to have their potentially affected family members screened using electrocardiogram and echocardiogram tests. It is hard enough at any time in our lives to battle for tests of whatever kind, but in the aftermath of a loss such as my constituents' loss, to have to do so seems unacceptably cruel.  In conclusion—I am aware that others have contributions to make to the debate—I seek reassurance from the minister. I seek a commitment from the Scottish Executive that it will examine closely what can be done to provide speedy access to screening for first-degree relatives and to ensure that GPs' knowledge of the subject is improved. I believe that the Scottish Executive should commit itself to consideration of what might be done to raise awareness of the condition and that it should do so in conjunction with the Health and Community Care Committee, the national health service and, in particular, GPs and health organisations, to offer real hope that deaths that result from the condition can be prevented and that families can be properly supported. I welcome the support of other members in the chamber and I hope that the debate will provide the opportunity to increase awareness of and action on the condition.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As a mere back bencher, I promise not to take four minutes.

If I am unlucky, I will get 30 seconds. Is it in order for me to ask whether John Swinney, the leader of the Scottish National Party, will take the opportunity—through a personal statement—to distance himself from yesterday's disgraceful comment by Kenny Gibson that the proposed smart card for asylum seekers is "the modern equivalent of the yellow star"?— [ Official Report , 31 October 2001; c 3488.]  If it is not appropriate for me to ask that, Presiding Officer, will you advise me how I might pursue the matter?

Will Shona Robison acknowledge the comments that have been made in the chamber about the positive benefits of smart cards and separate herself from the comments of her colleague, which attempted to associate smart cards with what happened in middle Europe in the 1930s and 1940s?

Does Fiona Hyslop agree that when the Social Justice Committee investigated what the petition to which she refers was calling for, we congratulated Glasgow City Council on the work that it was undertaking locally to support people who were moving into the area and that we recognised that the key difficulties related to vouchers and work, which are now being addressed by the Home Secretary?

Will the member take an intervention?

As the first speaker within the shortened time for  speeches, I hope members will forgive me if I do not take the leisurely stroll around the issues that we have had so far. My speech will perhaps be something of a breathless canter and I apologise for that in advance. This is a serious debate and we have a responsibility to all who are involved to ensure that we focus on how best to deliver proper services and opportunities for real integration in safe communities. I know that many members in the chamber, regardless of their party, want to do that. However, in response to Linda Fabiani, I contend that we do that not because of our Scottishness, but because of our humanity and compassion. It is dangerous to imply that we are motivated by our Scottishness, because we then exclude all those throughout the United Kingdom who are as committed as we are to making this a friendly and welcoming country. It is also important in the context of our experience to avoid using Sighthill as a kind of shorthand for issues concerning asylum seekers and refugees. We must do that first because the people in Sighthill do not deserve to be characterised en masse as racist and hostile. That is especially so when we reflect on the work that has been done by many people in that community—and by local agencies and the local council—towards Sighthill becoming a welcoming community. I say again to Linda Fabiani that, no matter how much respect I have for Jackie Baillie, that work was done before Jackie Baillie took up her appointment. We do people a disservice if we imply that it was only when we became involved that things got moving. A lot of good local people have been doing a lot of work for a long time, which should be valued. I make that point also because asylum seekers and refugees are settled throughout Glasgow, not least in my constituency of Pollok. I receive positive messages about an excellent initiative that the local authority, the voluntary sector, the churches and other agencies are taking. In my area, people are working together and are determined to ensure that proper support is provided, simply because they want their communities to be safe for the new Scots who join us, and not because there is anything in it for them.

That was not the point that Linda Fabiani made in her speech. Resources are an issue, but understanding the problems would  help with directing resources. I welcome the Minister for Social Justice's agreement to visit my constituency to mark the significance of the work that I described. We must ensure that our powers are used fully, to the benefit of local communities. We all have a responsibility to concentrate our minds on how we use the powers that we have. The context has been changed by the announcement on UK policy. I will not rush to judgment on what has been said. It is worth noting that the Social Justice Committee took evidence on asylum seekers' experiences. I am sure that we all welcome the ending of the voucher scheme. Allowing people to work provides more positive opportunities for people in our communities. Several options are being piloted. If local organisations, groups and people who are involved say that the pilots do not work, we must be open to change. We must have tests. Are decisions speedy? Are we enhancing possibilities for integration? Is support real and consistent? We cannot allow the debate to become entrenched so that when people need change, any change is considered to be a weakness. I seek reassurance from the minister that the complexities of delivering services will be appraised sensitively in, for example, supporting adults into education, understanding the needs of pre-school children and providing child care. Demands in a secondary school class in which three or four children of asylum seekers are being taught become immeasurably different when each such child speaks a different language. It is essential that local authority funding from the Scottish Executive reflects those demands and is sufficiently finely tuned. It is essential to build partnership locally with mutual respect. We should acknowledge not only the key role of Glasgow City Council, but the potential role of all councils that wish to share in the opportunity to build a fairer and more welcoming Scotland. We must have a partnership with local authorities, the voluntary sector and agencies, including the police and health services. The hard practical work must be done. Those who do that work must be respected for it if we are to ensure that our hopes of a safe and richly diverse community and society are to be realised.

Is the minister aware that tenants in my constituency and elsewhere in Glasgow have expressed concern about the impact on any future investment plans of the possible demolition of houses? Will the minister outline what is being done to address those concerns?

I am happy to contribute to the debate and I am particularly proud to open on behalf of the Labour party. It is important to recognise the role of the Justice 2 Committee in developing this legislation and I echo the thanks to all those who were involved behind the scenes and in the committee. I give particular credit to Maureen Macmillan, my Labour sister, for the work that she did on the bill.  There is no doubt that the development of policy in relation to understanding domestic abuse and violence against women has been an important strand in the Labour party and explains why Labour has placed such emphasis on women's representation. Labour and Labour women are clear that women's representation is not an end in itself, but a means by which women's needs and experiences can be addressed in the priorities of government and legislation. The Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill stands as testimony to that work. The work that the Justice 2 Committee took on was important, because it addressed weaknesses in the current legislation and emerged from a deeper understanding of the nature and extent of abuse and a realisation that marriage does not inhibit the abuser and that abuse might not stop when couples separate. Indeed, evidence of women being murdered by ex-partners stands as horrific testimony to the fact that women are often at their most vulnerable when they decide to separate from a violent partner. It is important to get the legislation right and to be willing to continue to monitor its effectiveness. However, as Bill Aitken said, it is also important that those charged with implementing the legislation and protecting those who face violence and abuse ensure that the procedures are carried out and that the work of the police and agencies involved is closely monitored. We still hear concerning accounts of women who report violence and abuse facing treatment that suggests that their situation is not taken seriously. The bill has another important role, which is to mark out society's view of what is acceptable and what is unacceptable and the value that we place on the rights of individuals to protection from violence and abuse. We want to manage the abuse, but we also want to challenge the abusers. The bill is part of a broader body of legislation that seeks to respond to the scourge that is domestic abuse and violence against women and which understands the importance of the police and the justice system in addressing the needs of women. Another element is the Sexual Offences (Procedures and Evidence) Bill, which will come before us soon. It is important to understand that the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Bill and other bills show that we have reflected on the experience of those who have faced abuse and have responded accordingly. We have paid tribute to the many people who helped to develop the bill, but in particular I pay tribute to women's organisations that continue to support women survivors of violence and which play a key role in making the case for change. I refer to groups such as Enough is Enough—I understand that they are represented in the public  gallery—Scottish Women's Aid and the Scottish Rape Crisis Network. They do their work, despite limited resources, with a desire to ensure that their first priority remains supporting women who face violence and abuse. I make one last plea. In the—often complex—debates on legislation that addresses these issues and, more broadly, that seeks to deal with crime and understand the experience of those who suffer crime, the voices of the professionals must be heard, but we must remember that the loudest voices with the best resources should not be the only ones that are heard. Those who have campaigned long and hard for this bill and for other bills campaign for a greater understanding of the causes of abuse. They deserve and need to be heard if we are to legislate against abuse as it presents itself in people's lives and if we are to challenge the attitudes and values that allow abuse to exist. I voice my party's support for the bill and welcome its being passed today.

Does Mr Aitken share the concern that has been expressed by several of my constituents that disproportionate amounts of national lottery funding go to better-off areas and that proportionately little money comes into deprived areas? Furthermore, would he welcome an inquiry into the matter?

Does the member agree that what is on offer is the possibility that the priorities of the voluntary sector will become the Government's priorities and that neither the voluntary sector nor the Government should shirk away from that?

Will the minister acknowledge the significant burden that is carried by Glasgow's council tax payers? That is a council tax issue that relates to cities. Glasgow's council tax payers have that burden because of Glasgow's wider responsibility to the west of Scotland and to Scotland as a whole. Does the minister acknowledge that in giving a commitment on the cities review, it is important that he considers that broader role? My constituents have told me that they feel that they carry a burden because of Glasgow's broader role in the west of Scotland and other places. Will the minister commit the cities review to considering that matter seriously?

Will the First Minister join me in welcoming the opportunity the measure provides for real partnership between Westminster, the Scottish Parliament and local authorities in supporting the asylum seekers and refugees within our communities? Will he acknowledge the excellent work that is being done within our communities, despite some of the problems that have been faced by the local communities across Glasgow in which there are asylum seekers and refugees? When the First Minister and his ministerial colleagues visit Glasgow, as part of their work in the area, will they take the opportunity to meet groups such as the one that has been established in my constituency of Glasgow Pollok? That would enable them to find out how positive work can be done inside local communities to make those communities welcoming and friendly places for our new visitors to come to.

To ask the Scottish Executive what proportion of Scottish Enterprise's current budget is spent specifically on social justice issues and what steps it is taking to ensure that Scottish Enterprise is involved in supporting the Executive's commitments in this area. (S1O-3766)

I am sure that the minister will agree that it is a central commitment of the Executive and the Parliament that equality and social justice are the responsibility of all departments and agencies, not just those that fall under the remit of social justice. Does the minister agree that all agencies and bodies funded by the Scottish Executive should play their part in using the levers of influence, power and money at their disposal to support that commitment? Recognising the potentially powerful role that Scottish Enterprise can play in a constituency such as mine, will the minister give a commitment to monitor and review progress on this within Scottish Enterprise and to consider ways in which good practice can be developed across Scotland?

Will the minister join me in congratulating Glasgow City Council, Nil by Mouth, the churches and Celtic and Rangers football clubs on securing millennium funding for a project working with young people? Can the minister make a commitment to liaise on that important project and to discover whether there are lessons to be learned about what we can do? Will he also consider how the project can be developed elsewhere in the country?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive intends to ensure that its review of cities will be open to all interested individuals, groups and organisations within local communities. (S1F-1200)

I thank the First Minister for that response. Is he aware of the strength of feeling among many of my constituents in Glasgow Pollok about the disproportionate burden placed on them in delivering economic, social, leisure and cultural opportunities not just to Glasgow but to the west of Scotland and to Scotland as a whole? Is he further aware that many individuals consider moving across the city boundary simply on the basis of a financial calculation? Those decisions could have immense consequences for the sustainability of Glasgow, as Glasgow City Council has highlighted. Will the First Minister ensure that the cities review will have at its heart not only an academic  overview of patterns, processes and population movements but the direct experience of individual Glasgwegians who want a fair deal for themselves, for their families and for Glasgow?

Can Mr Quinan give an example of the SNP initiating  debates—in the chamber or in committee—on the question of tolls, during which those issues could have been explored?

I am very happy to participate in the debate. I was absolutely amazed to hear that Annabel Goldie found the package dreary. Perhaps the fact that the Tories find the package dull while Labour members find it challenging says everything about the Tories' priorities in relation to Labour's. The SNP leader charged that the problem with the package was that it undermined the Parliament. The SNP leader spends most of his time telling us about the problems with the Parliament and what it cannot do—that is a significant way of undermining the Parliament. John Swinney mentioned asylum seekers. I ask him what he has done in his area to ensure that the local authorities that he controls support the asylum seeker system and the dispersal system. As far as I am concerned, we should use the powers that we have—[ Interruption .]

No. I did not say Perth and Kinross. I am talking about SNP-controlled authorities. I want to know what every member who criticises what has happened to asylum seekers in this country has done to support the dispersal programme to ensure that asylum seekers go to places other than just Glasgow. I acknowledge that our role is only partly to do with legislation.

Sit down. We have a crucial role in making a difference to people's lives, which does not always require a change in the law. In that regard—[ Interruption. ]

I make a simple point on asylum seekers: we all have a responsibility to do  our best rather than to talk about the powers that we do not have.

I have made it clear that I was not talking about Perth and Kinross. We do not have just a legislative role. I take the opportunity to welcome the establishment of the cities review, in which the arguments for a fair deal for Glasgow will be compelling. Fairness to Glasgow does not, of course, require an act of Parliament. However, it requires an act of will by the Executive and the Parliament to ensure that Glasgow citizens are treated fairly. I assure members that we will take the opportunity to make our case on Glasgow as fully as possible. I am convinced that the cities review will hear that case and act on it. I have been in this job for two years and the response of Opposition front-bench members does not surprise me. The Opposition is predictable in working harder at the put-down than at offering a serious or coherent alternative. As a Labour member of the Parliament, I particularly welcome the statement's emphasis on social justice and equality. As a Labour woman, I have fought to support an agenda over many years that understood that politics as seen by the establishment did not connect with the experience of ordinary people. It is heartening to hear the First Minister talking in Parliament about recognising the role in our communities of unpaid carers. Very often, those carers are women. It is heartening to hear a legislative programme that addresses harassment and sexual offences. It is wonderful to hear about legislation that will further protect our children. The legislative programme contains a commitment to understanding the way in which the legal system, rather than supporting victims of crime, often further victimises them. We should welcome the desire to have a justice system that addresses those who are the most vulnerable and undervalued. The reality is encapsulated in the priorities that the First Minister identified. We are not in the business of debating the fine-tuning of constitutionality—debating how we favour one set of constitutional powers over other sets of constitutional powers. We are in the business of making a practical difference to the lives of the elderly, the young and those who face violence. I especially welcome the willingness to address the issue of mental health and mental illness. I very much welcome Mary Scanlon's comments. I welcome the commitment to strengthen the rights of users of the health service and their families. As legislation goes through Parliament, I trust that it  will give us the opportunity for serious debate on mental health and mental illness. I find the increasing stigmatisation of people with mental health problems or mental illness deeply troubling. That stigmatisation leads in communities to the justification of expressions of hostility rather than of compassion towards those who suffer such illnesses. I contend that, in this legislative programme, we see evidence of a real shift of political gravity and an acknowledgement of other authoritative voices in our communities who have campaigned in areas where change is required. As the programme goes through the Parliament, I look forward to those voices being afforded the chance—in the committees and the chamber—to be heard louder still so that a real difference can be made.

I congratulate the Scottish Executive on highlighting a willingness to pursue the goal of equal access to justice for all, and particularly for those who have survived crimes of sexual violence, through the introduction today of the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill. Will the minister reassure me that there will be a continuing willingness to challenge the all-too-conservative approach of many in the legal system in future legislative programmes?

If defining affordability is not such a complex matter, why have you not given us a definition that we could have voted for or against?

Will the member give way?

Can Brian Adam explain what seems to be a contradiction in the SNP's position? If stock transfer to community ownership is privatisation, why does Fiona Hyslop oppose the extension of the right to buy to housing association tenants, which she does on the basis of defending the social rented sector? Surely to goodness the SNP cannot possibly take the position that community ownership is a private sector way of dealing with housing.

Will the member give way?

With all respect to Tommy Sheridan and the exception that he may take to this, this is not a debate about the principle of right to buy. I have to say that, as an individual member of the Labour party in the early 1980s, I lost the argument inside my own party when it changed its position on the principle of right to buy. We may not want to be where we are now, with the very contorted position on right to buy that the Tories have introduced, but that is the reality of the situation and we have to deal with it. People have to choose which anomalies they wish to support in  relation to policy. A lot is said about the damage of right to buy in communities. There has been damage in constituencies such as mine, where good properties have disappeared. There have been some benefits in some difficult and poor communities, where people have bought their houses and have invested in their communities. Those communities have then been sustained and developed, and there are examples of that. The key charge that has been made is that the right to buy is a bribe. With the changes that are being proposed with the modernised right to buy, I would defy anybody to lay that charge again. It now much more reflects the balance of subsidies and incentives across housing policy than it did in the past. The SNP's principal argument seems to be that not enough money is being spent in the social rented sector, and that the only way to protect that sector is by sustaining the absence of the right to buy within the housing association movement, because only there are houses being built. Does that mean that, if there is a commitment from the Executive—which I believe there is—to supplying good, affordable social rented housing, that the SNP would change its position? If the issue is one of supply, that is to be addressed by the Executive; it does not necessarily have to be dealt with through the question of right to buy itself. The bill's and the Parliament's role is to ensure that we assert the importance of the social rented sector and have a commitment to it. We should not simply try to protect one wee bit of it in the way that has been suggested. There is an irony in the SNP's position. We know that the SNP opposes wholesale stock transfer in Glasgow, and that it argues that there should be an improvement in the housing stock there within the local authority sector. The irony is that if that position were sustained, the houses in question would still be vulnerable to right to buy, because the SNP is not opposing the right to buy in the local authority sector. The central question about maintaining and sustaining the social rented sector is one of making it credible for people to rent their houses as well as to buy them; of ensuring that their houses are affordable; of ensuring that their houses are in safe and mixed communities; and of ensuring that their families can move and buy their houses and live in the same communities as them. That is a far bigger picture than the small question that involves, quite rightly, putting an end to what is frankly a class-prejudiced policy that was promoted by the Tories in the past. I believe that, given what has been proposed through the constructive dialogue between the Executive and the Social Justice Committee, we  now have an option that gives credibility to the social rented sector and that recognises that some people wish to buy their own homes and stay in the communities where they were brought up. [ Applause. ]

Will the member give way?

Anti-social behaviour is a serious problem. Any member who holds surgeries in their constituency will be aware of the depth of the problem and of the difficulties that are faced by far too many of our citizens. We are talking about rights, and citizens clearly have a right not to be bullied, harassed or intimidated in their own homes, nor to be subjected to racist harassment and abuse. We must be rigorous in our approach to the problem and rigorous in our solutions. We must not suggest that the problem can be dealt with in an easy or simplistic way. One of the key points to emerge from the Social Justice Committee's recent deliberations was that, although we all recognised the problem, we had some difficulty in agreeing on the best solution. We have to be honest and confront that problem. In commenting on amendment 75, I have to say that the real difficulties of anti-social behaviour go far beyond the social rented sector, just as racist behaviour goes far beyond people who live in rented accommodation. It is therefore crucial that the Executive and all the agencies—not just housing and social work—including the police are directed on the problem. One of my key concerns about Bill Aitken's proposed solution is that it implies that if we can get the tenants sorted out, we can get rid of the problem. We know that some of the problems of anti-social behaviour go far beyond that. I therefore seek a clear and strong commitment from the ministers about the central role of Executive departments working together to ensure that there is also joint working at local level to address the problem of anti-social behaviour wherever it emerges.

Tommy Sheridan indicated that he believed that the rights of the tenant against whom the action is being taken and the rights of the landlord must be balanced. Does he appreciate that another group, the other tenants who are suffering because of the problems in their communities, must be involved as well? For their benefit, it is important that the parties involved are able to resolve the matter quickly.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what new action it is taking to increase the number of available women's refuge spaces. (S1O-3479)

Is the minister aware of the concerns that have been expressed by some women's aid groups—including Glasgow Women's Aid, which raised the matter with me—about the level of revenue support that is required to meet need while more refuge places are being created? Will the minister assure us that the Executive is committed, not only to providing an increased number of safe places for women who are fleeing violence, but to tackling the underlying causes of male violence against women, which make refuges necessary?

Bill Aitken commented on some of the problems—which also exist in other parts of Glasgow—that we have had in Easterhouse. Are those problems  due not to a lack of genius, but to a lack of common sense? The one thing that we should do when building houses is talk to the people who will live in them. Ask a woman what kind of house she wants and she will certainly come up with better ideas than others came up with in the past. We do not need individual geniuses; we need policy that puts people at the heart of decision making. That would make a bigger difference.

Linda Fabiani talks about urban creep and the perception that Glasgow is a problem. Does she agree that Glasgow should instead be perceived as a place that generates huge amounts of wealth that is not necessarily directed towards the most needy communities in the city? I recognise that there is a strong case for examining the business rates, but we should at least acknowledge that the Scottish Executive is attempting to target resources appropriately within the city, despite the protests, from those who complain about urban creep outside the city, that Glasgow is being treated as a special case.

Will the minister give way?

Would Sandra White agree that it has been very difficult to encourage young people to opt for school meals? In Glasgow, by making school meals attractive and by using burger bars side by side with salad bars, we have brought youngsters into the schools and away from the mobile shop selling greasy chips outside. When they use the school meals service, the youngsters have the opportunity to choose from a variety of healthy foods—alongside other food. Glasgow City Council ought not be condemned for that, but congratulated.

My question has been answered.

I thank you, Presiding Officer, for the opportunity that this members' business debate provides to highlight the grave concern that is felt by many about Lord Abernethy's ruling in a recent rape case in Aberdeen. I place on record my thanks to all the members who signed the motion and to all the individuals and groups who contacted me to highlight their demand for action. I also commend the press and media for in general raising the issues as they have been highlighted to them. The Lord Abernethy ruling is of immense seriousness. I still remember all too clearly the shock and disbelief that I felt when I first heard in a telephone call from a journalist that a judge in a Scottish court had ruled that sex without a woman's consent is not rape unless the attacker uses force or the threat of force. I still cannot comprehend that we have in place a law that offers so little protection to women. It is evident from the reaction throughout Scotland that the ruling flies in the face of what might be called a commonsense view of what is fair and just. We know from debates in the Scottish Parliament and elsewhere that there is a great deal of concern, particularly among women's organisations such as the Scottish Rape Crisis Network, about the lack of protection that is  offered to women against male violence. There is concern about the under-reporting of rape, the low conviction rate in rape cases and how women are treated in the legal process. There is also concern about women's experiences of being in court where, although they are the victims of crime, they are often subjected to hostile treatment and feel that they have no one to speak up for their interests. We also know of the research that has revealed worrying attitudes among young people about the acceptability of violence against women. The consequence of Lord Abernethy's ruling must be addressed in that context. What message does the ruling give to women about the point of reporting the crime of rape and what does it do to their confidence in the system? The message given by the ruling to men who abuse or may abuse women is deeply troubling and frightening to contemplate. It is unacceptable that our legal system, rather than protecting women, may put them at greater risk. The ruling appears to collude with the view that women are not to be believed or trusted and that when say no they really mean yes. The Executive has a crucial responsibility to respond to the gravity of the issue. I welcome the fact that the Crown Office has considered the ruling. There are two options. It may be that Lord Abernethy's ruling was wrong. In that case, it is essential that hard questions are asked about the training of judges, their accountability and the consequences to judges when they get rulings wrong. Equally, it may be that the judge's ruling was correct. In that case—if the judge reflected the law—the law must change. A review of the legislation, such as the one that is being conducted down south, may be the appropriate way forward. If so, I urge the Executive to ensure that those women's organisations that work with the survivors of rape have a central role. The debate should not just be an opportunity for us to feel sorry for women who are victims of crime; it should be an opportunity to ask hard questions about the nature of rape. It is crucial that the debate is brought out into the open and that the hostility that is too often expressed by those in the legal profession to change in this field is challenged. The issue of the anonymity of the accused is often highlighted. Any discussion on the anonymity of accused persons should be conducted in the context of the rights of the accused generally. If one group of accused people—those accused of rape—is singled out, the implication is that women are more likely to make malicious or false accusations and that women who report the crime are more likely to be lying than those who report other crimes. Singling out rape in that way is an extension of the attitude that I have highlighted,  which seeks to blame women for their situation and maintains that women who report rape should be heard with, at best, scepticism, if not disbelief. We know that the debate on rape and attitudes on violence against women have moved on, with encouraging advances, especially, for example, in the police. However, the debate has been driven by the strength of women who have survived rape—women who have striven to ensure that society confronts the horror of that crime and the attitude to women that underpins it, and women who have demanded that our legal system changes to prevent other women from having to suffer in the same way. We should salute the courage of those women. I urge the minister and the Executive to pay testimony to that courage by acting swiftly to clarify the current law and to ensure that women are protected, not abandoned, by the legal system.

On a point of order.

Oh, it is all right. My console is working now.

To ask the First Minister whether there are any plans to review the legislation on rape and sexual assault. (S1F-959)

Will the First Minister acknowledge the real concerns, felt particularly by women's organisations and groups that support survivors of rape and sexual assault, at Lord Abernethy's ruling last Friday? His comment to the woman who said no—that it is not rape unless there is evidence of force or the threat of force—might have a serious impact on the number of women who are willing to report the crime and sends out a dangerous message to men that sexual assault is acceptable in certain circumstances. Furthermore, does he agree that the ruling has highlighted grave questions that need to be addressed if women are to have faith in the fairness of the system? If so, will he, along with the Minister for Justice and the Minister for Social Justice, agree to meet me urgently to address these very serious concerns and to discuss how these issues can best be developed?

I will address the issue of women keeping themselves safe. In a recent conversation with some young women of my acquaintance, I was struck by the way in which life has changed since I was a young woman going out for a drink. The young women told me that they never leave a drink unattended and that they almost invariably have drinks that are in bottles. That tells me that women understand the dangers and try to avoid the problem of drug-assisted rape. It is depressing that, as women get wise to that form of safety, there will no doubt be men who will find other means of exercising power, oppressing women and carrying out sexual violence. It is important to recognise that there is a feminist agenda. Although the victims of the crime outlined by Pauline McNeill may not only be women, the perpetrators will almost invariably be male. That should be addressed. This is about power relationships. Rape is a crime that uses power and sexual violence—that reflects deeper attitudes in society. That is why it is important that our legal system matches the ingenuity of men when they seek to exercise power over women and use sexual violence. Instead of being thirled to old attitudes and definitions, the legal system must address the questions that Pauline McNeill highlighted. It is also important that we continue to challenge the attitudes that are reflected in some of the decisions of the legal system. A simple lesson that I would like to teach my daughter and son—it would be valuable to all our young people and to society as a whole—is that, when women say no, they mean no. The issue is as clear, simple and straightforward as that. Men should be able to control themselves. In our society, men and women must take responsibility for their actions. When it comes to rape, however, it seems that when women say no they mean yes and that the confusion of the night absolves men of responsibility for their actions. There has been outrage in the past week over what Lord Abernethy said, but there appears to be a strongly held view that, when a woman finds herself in such a situation, what happens is somehow her fault. This debate is helpful in challenging such attitudes and in demonstrating the complicated way in which power can be exercised. We are grateful to Pauline McNeill for securing tonight's debate.

Will the member give way?

I ask the member to clarify his own position, as he seems to feel strongly about the tie-up scheme. If the casting vote in the 50-50 split in the Parliament had gone the other way, would he have argued that a tie-up scheme was inappropriate?

Mr Swinney thinks that the tie-up scheme is the solution. However, if it had been lost on the casting vote, when the Parliament was split 50-50, would he have stopped pursuing it despite the fact that some fishermen are still arguing that it is the solution?

Will the member give way?

As convener of the Social Justice Committee, I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate. The size and complexity of the bill reflects the importance of the proposals. I am happy to have participated at stage 1, and trust that the Parliament has found our stage 1 report to be useful. I thank all those who helped in the report's production: those who sat on the Social Inclusion, Housing and the Voluntary Sector Committee, including the current Deputy Minister for Social Justice, who contributed to the committee's work; all those who gave evidence, both written and oral; all the committees that produced reports for us; Lee Bridges and his clerking team, for being unbelievably helpful in making sense of the process and turning round our reports at each stage at an incredible speed, and still getting it right and grammatically correct, which is even better; the official reporters, who kept up with our deliberations; and the support staff and security staff, who, during one particular incident, used their professionalism to allow the work of the committee to continue uninterrupted, while a student stunt was being conducted in the background—we were grateful for that. Some comment has been made on the scope of the bill, and on what has been excluded from it. Given the complexity and size of what we were already wrestling with, the committee as a whole was content with its scope. However, we seek time scale commitments for the work that is being done by the homelessness task force and by the housing improvement task force. We recognise how important that work is. We were anxious about some of the work that might be said to be devolved from the bill, and have committed ourselves to what is called post-enactment scrutiny. We intend to monitor closely whether the intention and aspirations of the bill are reached once it comes into force. We were grateful for the minister's indicating that she was  happy to participate in that work. I draw the Parliament's attention to some of the important issues that the committee has highlighted, and to some of my own views, which are not always the same as those of the committee as a whole. We welcomed the proposals on tenant participation. I am conscious that I have to be on my best behaviour today, as some constituents, from the Cardonald neighbourhood forum and elsewhere, are here to watch the debate. If anyone understands the importance of tenant participation and of getting their views articulated, it is the members of the forum. I shall ensure that I keep myself under control.

Let me get into the meat of my speech first. Where the people who make the decisions have to live with those decisions, they are much more likely to be right. I am conscious that concerns were expressed in the past about the level of tenant involvement in other initiatives, particularly in Glasgow. I am content that those concerns have been taken on board. I should perhaps declare an interest as a Co-operative Party MSP. I particularly welcome the emphasis on community empowerment. I am keen, however, for the bill to acknowledge the specific role of housing co-operatives. We seek means by which people can be supported in considering housing co-operatives as an option at a later stage. We hear much about rights in the debate on this bill. The most central right that we all have, regardless of the tenure of our homes, is the right to peace of mind in our own homes. We need to look more closely at what can be done, in the bill and elsewhere, to tackle the serious problem of anti-social behaviour. If anti-social behaviour gets a grip and is not challenged—some of us have seen that happen in our communities—there can be a flight from a community and a collapse of perfectly reasonable areas in our cities and elsewhere because folk do not feel that such behaviour is being addressed. Where houses and investment are there, and where there is potential, anti-social behaviour can destroy that potential. This is not just a social or soft issue—it has an economic and resource impact on the ability of those providing housing to plan for people in the community.

I tell Bill Aitken that anti-social behaviour is not just about tenants. There is plenty anti-social behaviour by folk who own their own homes. Perhaps if we had a legal system that understood what anti-social behaviour was like, it  would be addressed properly in the courts. We know that housing policy is about far more than bricks and mortar. I urge the ministers to examine the points that were raised by the Scottish Trades Union Congress on community regeneration. It is essential that there is a community dividend in terms of employment and training from anything that the bill develops. We should address to other ministers the worries that have been expressed about the construction industry. The right to buy is clearly controversial and we should not avoid it. There is a dilemma for everyone who reflects on the matter. No one on the committee or who gave evidence to the committee argued that the right to buy should be abolished, so it is a matter not of principle but of managing the policy's existence. In a sense, one chooses one's anomaly. Whether or not we include the right to buy in a secure tenancy, there will be an anomaly. We must consider viability, pressured areas and the extension of the qualifying period. We must ensure that the ministers are honest, open and clear-headed enough to look at where viability is affected. I will finish on this point.

It is essential that we consider the right to buy in the context of housing subsidy across housing tenures, as it is not just people in the social rented sector who receive subsidy.

There should be a commitment to generating supply. I urge members to support the stage 1 report and to contribute fully at stage 2.

On the issue of tied votes and votes where there is some question as to whether people voted, you said that the votes of two members from opposing parties had been excluded. In the event of a tied vote, will the Parliamentary Bureau consider the possibility of a roll-call vote to be absolutely sure that the will of Parliament is being clarified in the vote?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you clarify for me which amendment amended the motion?

No it was not.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The reason I asked which amendment had amended the motion was precisely because I had shouted no when the question was put on Fergus Ewing's amendment.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to review the effectiveness of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority.

I thank the minister for that reply. Is he aware of some of the concerns about the system of criminal injuries compensation,  especially in the circumstances highlighted by the experience of a constituent of mine: someone was found guilty of a serious assault but payment to the victim of the assault was delayed because the convicted person appealed? Does the minister agree that it is at the very least ironic that a victim suffers because of a successful prosecution and conviction? Will the minister assure me that he will consider the means by which he can bring those issues to the attention of the appropriate people to ensure that, in our strategy for victims, victims of a crime are not further victimised when they seek compensation?

To ask the First Minister what initiatives the Scottish Executive is promoting with the aim of eradicating domestic violence. (S1F-817)

I welcome the Executive's commitment on this issue, which is due in part to Labour's determination to have equal representation of men and women in the Scottish Parliament and thus deliver a Parliament that  gives priority to issues such as violence against women rather than delivering the posturing about issues such as Europe that we witness from the Conservatives. Does the First Minister recognise the crucial importance of tackling domestic abuse across all fronts? Will he assure me that the highest importance will be given to delivering joined-up government to ensure that some of our most vulnerable women and children are given the best possible service not only by the justice system but by the health, education, housing and social work services and that the attitudes that cause domestic abuse are tackled?

Will the member inform us how many times she pursued such interdicts on behalf of men? Does she agree that society does not acknowledge the pattern that it is largely women who are being abused in the circumstances that we are discussing? This is not just about people not being very nice to each other in a house. Should we not try to change people's attitudes?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I would like further clarification on the consequences of the misinformation that we were given this morning. Because of that misinformation, there was a drive not to hear the minister's statement. I expressed my concern at the time about the fact that the people who suffered as a result of anxieties about leaks from the Scottish Executive were the back-bench members, who did not have access to the statement and were not allowed to hear it. I would like you to reflect on that and on the fact that the justification for our not hearing the minister's statement was based on misinformation.

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I asked you to clarify, in dealing with discourtesies to the Parliament, that not only was information allegedly provided before the debate, but a further discourtesy was paid to the Parliament when the statement was not allowed to be made, which meant that back-bench members such as me were unable to ask questions.

I acknowledge not only the work of the Executive but the role of victims themselves. They are often characterised, in a debate on victims, as helpless and hopeless or driven by unreasoned revenge and bitterness. Some of the coverage in the past week has suggested that. That has not been my experience of those whom I have met—whether they are my constituents or in women's organisations or other organisations that support victims. I have been impressed by their strength and their ability to translate their experience into suggestions for change. It is because victims have spoken out about their experiences and have organised to ensure that their voices are heard that we have seen a range of policy developments to address the issues of vulnerable witnesses and women who face violence, and now a strategy for supporting victims. Those have ensured that the issue has been driven up the agenda. I acknowledge the willingness of the Executive to take it on board. We cannot overemphasise the importance of such a strategy for victims. The standing of the judicial system is damaged when those who come into contact with the legal process, through no fault of their own, end up having no faith in it. There are knock-on consequences, as they might be reluctant to come forward in the future as witnesses or to report other crimes. Victims must have a place within the process. As one constituent said to me, they must believe that someone is seeking justice on their behalf. That is a challenge to those who prosecute cases in court if our system is to enjoy the confidence of all in our communities. In the short time that I have to speak, I will highlight some of the important points that have been made to me by one of my constituents, whose brother was tragically murdered and whose other family members were assaulted in a vicious attack. I will focus on some of the key issues that our strategy must address. Victims and the families of murder victims must receive information about what is happening at  every stage. The authorities must show sensitivity and awareness of the fact that sometimes victims and their families and the accused and their families live in the same community. That is especially important in regard to bail decisions and information about release from prison. Victims must be thought about in relation to the trial. Are the family of the victim to sit with the family of the accused where they may feel harassed, or that they cannot attend, and are thus marginalised even more? What facilities are there for victims within the court system? My constituent described going to court and seeing the accused and their family having the free run of the court and the area outside, while their family were given one small room. What message do we give victims if they are the ones who must be excluded and hidden? What is the balance of rights in the system? We must recognise the importance of consistent support through the victim support scheme: one person with a good relationship with the family has a crucial role to play. Will the minister examine some of the anomalies in the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board? It seems that in this case—when a victim had been assaulted, the person had been found guilty and subsequently appealed—payment could not be made. If the police had been unsuccessful in finding the perpetrator of the crime, the victim would have been given their money. My constituent made the crucial point to me that although the individuals they met were helpful and kind, the system itself seemed further to victimise her and her family—a family that had already suffered too much. I refer finally to impact statements. We must see impact statements in the context of understanding the desire of victims to be heard and to have the scale of the effect on them recognised. My constituent described to me the experience of sitting through the trial with all the difficulties of adjournment, bail decisions, the verdict and the sentence. She waited to hear the judge acknowledge and affirm that her brother was an innocent victim; she waited in vain as the judge gave the sentence and nothing more. We can all think of times when the judge has made a strong statement, but I had not grasped how important it is for families to hear such a statement. It emphasises the importance of proper training for judges and consistency in sentencing and statements by judges. It also illustrates the potential importance of statements by victims, because those allow victims' voices to be heard and enable victims and their families to assert their innocence, the innocence of family members and the significant and devastating effect of the crime  on those who suffered it. If impact statements allow that space for victims, we should acknowledge it as an aspect of common humanity that our judicial system must allow. I welcome the fact that the initiative under discussion today emphasises compassion and respect, and welcome the commitment to a continuing and developing dialogue with victims and victims organisations by the Executive and others. I look forward to seeing how this important strategy for every level of our legal system affects the lives of those who are already victims of crime and those who will, unfortunately, become victims in the future.

On a point of order. It was evident to anyone who understands how these things work that the press knew about the ruling this morning. Is not that grounds for an inquiry to establish whether someone from your office—or someone else—provided information to the press, Presiding Officer?

On a point of order.

On that issue, the problem is not whether you take that responsibility; rather, it is the fact that a statement was made in the chamber this morning that all three Presiding Officers were party to the decision. That is entirely different from saying that you take responsibility for the quality of that decision, as it is a separate matter to establish whether that decision was made by all three Presiding Officers together. That is what was said this morning.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw to your attention the fact that I was unable to listen to the radio this morning and I have not read the newspapers because I have been working on constituency business. I would welcome the opportunity to hear the minister's statement.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have now been handed the statement and I want to represent my constituents in the discussion, but I am placed at a disadvantage. Other people have had the statement or were aware that the statement was not going to be heard and could read the press. I am unable to ask a question on the issue, because I cannot read quickly enough—

My constituents have been disfranchised and I want to know how that is to be dealt with.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will Mr Quinan give way?

I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in the debate. I am committed to making the committees work. They should work in the interest, not of those who sit on them, but of the democratic process in Scotland. The committees provide the most powerful vehicle for members of the public to make their voices heard in the Parliament. We must not forget that. A great deal of nonsense has been talked in the debate. We see people clambering on to the moral high ground and ascribing the worst of motives to those who seek change. There is no right and wrong on the issue. It is a matter of managing competing demands. It is healthy to review the situation and make change where it is needed. The size of the committees was not written in stone. I was not born a member of the Local Government Committee. We all have the capacity to do different things in Parliament.

I find it depressing that some members want to be so conservative; they want the comfort of what they already have. Committees are at their best when they are uncomfortable and challenging places. I also find it depressing that members see the size of committees as a sign of status. Status comes from the quality of a committee's work, not its size. We know that the problem of clashing committee meetings must be addressed. I was not able to represent my constituency on a social justice issue when I was not on that committee. We know that there is a problem in relation to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, because its convener, Roseanna Cunningham, told us so time and again. She said that it could not get through the business.

As a woman I understand the importance of the justice agenda to women and I am not prepared to have members using boring and dull arguments about having only one committee to prevent that work from being done. That is a piece of nonsense. Justice is crucial. Smaller committees will allow members to attend a variety of committees. It is important to ensure that the model is closely monitored. If it does not work, we can review it. That is what a modern, living, breathing Parliament does. It  examines what it is doing, works out whether there is a problem and changes it. What SNP members want to do, because they cannot agree among themselves, is to stick with a tradition that is 18 months old. I hope that members will support the changes to ensure that the committees work. If there are problems, we can come back and sort them out.

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this debate. I want to return briefly to the earlier debate on the motion of no confidence. It is true that in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee there was a discussion of things that the minister could have—rather than should have—done. However, it was accepted that, given the seriousness of the crisis, those things would have made no difference. It is ironic that, after the committee's report criticised the blame culture within the SQA, the SNP should have chosen to play hunt the minister, rather than to confront the problems that developed. That was out of kilter with what was said by SNP members at meetings of the committee. There is no doubt that the views of members of both the committees involved in these inquiries were shaped by a sense of crisis, which led people to make bold assertions about its causes. Some said that it was the result of a failure to delay the introduction of higher still. Others said that it was caused by SCOTVEC, by higher still itself or by the former Minister for Children and Education. None of those assertions survived scrutiny by the committee. The real causes of the crisis were much more frightening and much more complex. All members of the committee were horrified by the chaos within the organisation of the SQA. The problems were compounded by bad decisions taken during the process—such as to have a helpline that not only gave no help, but actively undermined the credibility of the examination system. Given that confidence in the examination system and its credibility are so delicate, I urge caution on those members who are now talking about the return of scripts, about restoring faith in  the system and about the dangers that we face next time round. The SQA was reluctant to admit to the existence of problems. The Universities and Colleges Admissions Service gave evidence that, if it had been told that there was a problem, it could have helped, which would have reduced the scale of the crisis that occurred. We were all shocked by the breathtaking meltdown that took place. It was horrifying to realise that it was difficult to see how that could have been stopped. When we asked the Scottish Executive whether it could have intervened further, we were told that there was no safety net. I agree with those members who have said that we need to explore further how public bodies can be held to account. We need to ensure that crucial work that is being done on our behalf is not left vulnerable to organisations that have sole responsibility for it but fail to deliver. The report of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee reaffirms the importance of the higher still approach, which upholds the rights of all the young people in our education system. However, it also addresses the question of cumbersome assessment. The committee is not saying that there should not be internal assessment. I believe that that is as important as ever in valuing all our young people. However, we need to examine the way in which internal assessment is managed. Some of the comments that were made about SCOTVEC and internal assessment gave evidence of hostility towards an examination process that seeks to meet the needs of all our young people. In this area, too, I urge caution. When we call for change, we are not saying that we want a purely academic education system that does not meet the needs of a broader group. There was an interesting discussion about the assessment tail wagging the education dog. In evidence we have seen that parents and young people attach huge importance to results—to the product of education rather than the process. We must have a further debate on what rights we, as a society, seek from education in addition to exam results at the end of it. On freedom of information, those who examine the tortuous process that our committee went through to get information should reflect that it highlights the problem with a system that is not open and accountable. I hope that that will be used to change the system so that we can get information, call people to account and ensure that those who act on our behalf do so responsibly.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Gallie think that, in any reasonable assessment, 93 or 96 per cent would be considered a pattern? If one identifies a pattern, one can challenge the attitudes that create it. If one acknowledges that the pattern is overwhelmingly one of male abuse of women, one can speak to young boys in schools and ask them to think about the attitudes that create those overwhelming figures.

Would Tommy Sheridan agree that the reason that it is important to have discussion is that all the agencies that have sought to provide housing for women have failed to understand the complexities of the problems that women bring with them? The idea that Glasgow City Council has always offered safe refuge to women is not true. Would Tommy Sheridan accept that no one in favour of housing stock transfer as a solution to Glasgow's problems would endorse anything that would put our women more at risk and less likely to have somewhere safe to go? The housing association movement and the co-operative movement have both given refuge to women in the past.

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Given the record of the previous Tory Government, how optimistic is Fiona Hyslop that we could possibly reach agreement across the Parliament on poverty indicators? Surely it is much better for us to consider what the programme has done in identifying where the real problems lie and not to rely on reaching consensus with a group that has done so much to damage our young people.

Does the member agree that the fact that often our legislation does not appear to be equality proofed has nothing to do with our legislative powers under the Scotland Act 1998, but a lot to do with getting the organisation on the ground right to make mainstreaming effective? Does she agree that it is possible, within the current structure, for the Equal Opportunities Committee and the other committees to scrutinise legislation and ensure that mainstreaming is effective?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will Alasdair Morgan give way?

How does the member explain the fact that historically our elderly population has been far more likely than our younger people to participate in elections and to be active citizens? We are now faced with problems of turnout and of involving people as citizens. If in the past people were so passive, why did they develop structures such as trade unions and parties to fight for them? Nowadays there is less sign of that.

I look to housing co-operatives and housing associations in my constituency to deliver high-quality housing at a lower rent than that of the municipal landlords and to create a huge community dividend. Would it not be reasonable to say that, in doubting, we should look at the evidence of our eyes, and that any plan that includes community ownership and tenant participation—as is the case in the GHA—is a reasonably sufficient ground to put doubt aside and work with the tenants towards an alternative that will make a difference?

Will Mr Sheridan give way?

Is the member aware that the list was drawn up by area managers? Does he agree that one of the problems with the way in which we manage our housing is that too often we listen to area managers and do not find ways of listening to what the tenants have to say?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Mr Gibson give way?

Will Mr Swinney give way?

Will  Roseanna Cunningham give way?

Will the member give way?

It is rather a novelty for Alex Salmond to take an intervention from a back bencher—perhaps he could have the respect to allow the back bencher to decide the subject on which she will intervene. Alex Salmond raised the idea of people being evicted. What are we supposed to make of someone who walks away voluntarily from his position as Opposition leader because he is no longer able to control his party?

Is the minister aware that many people in our communities have serious concerns about the practice and competence of the SQA and find it simply impossible to understand how it came to be that a body with such a huge responsibility is not directly responsible to ministers, to the Executive and to Parliament for its actions? Does he agree that we must immediately address people's concerns that somebody must be called to account for what has happened? The minister said that he does not have the power to instruct the SQA. Does he understand that many people feel that it would be better if he had such a power—not to instruct on marking, but to set the parameters within which the SQA must operate? Will he assure me that the Executive will take steps to ensure that the flawed accountability  that runs through far too many of our public bodies is challenged and that those public bodies are brought back under transparent public control and accountability?

I am proud to have the opportunity to introduce this debate on the cross-examination of the victims of sexual crimes. I am aware that there is considerable interest in this debate. I believe that that interest reflects a general concern that some have about our legal process—about women in the judicial system and about the broader issue of the rights of victims in the judicial process. It also reflects the anxiety that some of us have about a curious dislocation between what the legal system decrees to be fair and what society would define as just and fair treatment. I start from some basic premises about justice. We all have the right to a fair trial. We all have the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty. As victims of crime, we have the right to a fair hearing. There should be legislation that ensures that victims of sexual assault are not cross-examined by the person accused of the crime, which is currently the system in England and Wales. That should be a blanket rule for certain categories of crime. Such a general rule would not prejudge or reflect on the individual accused. It is simply an obscenity if, in even one case, in the name of justice and fairness to the accused, the legal process sanctions the further abuse and intimidation of a women who has been raped. The rights of the accused must be protected, but no one has been able to explain to me how a person's innocence is attacked if the cross-examination of the victim is carried out by a third party. Rape is the ultimate in the exercise of power and control over another human being. We cannot  allow our formal processes to be subverted to allow the further exercise of that power. There is a problem around the debate on rape and sexual assault that we must acknowledge. We know that below the surface—more visible at some times than at others—there is a residual unease and anxiety about, perhaps even a little hostility to, women who report rape. There may even be an instinctive disbelief in their claims. It can be seen as legitimate to be as tough as possible on the woman making an accusation, because if she breaks, she is a liar. She may simply be broken by the system. It seems that the presumption of innocence does not always extend to a woman who reports that she has been raped. That is not to deny that there has been movement in society's attitude to rape. It is now acknowledged that there can be rape within marriage. There is a broader awareness of the extent of domestic abuse and violence against women. We know, for example, that police procedures, particularly in cases involving sexual assault, have improved immeasurably. However, it is important to acknowledge that that movement has been brought about not by the judicial system renewing itself, reflecting and changing, but by the work of women's groups and women's organisations, which have identified the problem, named the crime and developed solutions, often in the teeth of official resistance. I want to recognise all those women affected, who have often been talked of as victims and placed in the same category as vulnerable children. We should see them as survivors who have had the courage to speak out about their experience to save others from the same. If anyone is to get credit for the changes that we are going to introduce, let it be those women. Any observer would acknowledge that the case for change has been pressed in the recent period, and that there has been a huge backlash—especially from figures in the legal profession and the judiciary—that has been horrific and mesmerising in its belligerence. Accusations have included the suggestion that rape cases go to trial without the same test of evidence as other cases, when we know that rape is often under-reported. We are accused of seeking tabloid headlines, pursuing a women's agenda or attacking human rights. There has been a desire to characterise this debate as being the emotional versus the rational mind; the lynch mob versus the due legal process. I refute such divisions. The debate is simply a plea for a civilised approach and for equality under the law. I congratulate the Executive on its announcement that it will legislate on the issue. I am disappointed that we waste energy debating whether that decision is a U-turn or a defeat, or for whom it is a victory. It is a  welcome advance. We are not now talking about whether; we are talking about how. I also acknowledge—perhaps unusually—the role of the media. They have recently played their part in highlighting the injustices that the Executive is now moving to address. I recognise that there is much to be done, but I trust that those who seek to delay, and to drag their feet, will not be allowed to do so. They must not be allowed to determine the pace of change. I also seek assurances that the way in which we shift will be developed in partnership with the women's organisations that brought this debate to the fore in the first place. At the heart of the Executive's decision to move is a clear and important understanding that advice on policy making in justice comes in many voices, not just in the accents of our legal and judicial betters, but in the voices of women survivors, women's organisations, victims and their families. There are alternative sources of wisdom in our society. It bodes well for the prospects of the Parliament if that understanding reflects a shift in the balance of political gravity in our society so that we now listen to more than one voice in our community. The importance of process in rape cases is crucial. When we talk about crime, we hear a great deal about deterrence. We must examine how we deter potential rapists. We must consider challenging society's attitude to women and to our sentencing policy. We must also confront the way in which our current processes can deter women from reporting the crime in the first place. When crimes go undetected, unreported and unpunished, as a society we are diminished. This is only one part of the important work of ensuring justice and equal access to the process of the law for all our citizens. I am happy to have this debate and I look forward to hearing the other speeches.

I just want to clarify a point about the committee's role in this matter. Other committee members and I voted against the committee's final position on about the first 10 amendments, after which it became clear that we would not have a majority on the committee.

The votes were quite clear and the rest of the amendments went through on the nod. Mr Gorrie and I know that there is no way that those amendments would come to the chamber and be whipped through against our conscience. We made the political case in the committee, and were defeated.

As I am a member of the Local Government  Committee, it is my turn on this subject. This is a contentious issue, but one area, although the committee debated it seriously, was seen less as a matter of contention than as a matter of wrestling with what we all identified as a problem. At that stage, the discussion focused especially on the role of LECs. We were anxious that the activities of bodies that have access to significant public moneys and that have an important role at a local level should be transparent and accountable. Kenny Gibson says that the problem is that company law will not change. My understanding, however, is that the Parliament will consider LECs and their role. It is possible that the role of the LECs will change—I hope that that is possible. The committee as a whole was clear that the LECs and their role as public bodies were an issue, but other committees in the Parliament are addressing that. I hope that we can return to this subject at a later stage. We should have defined the bodies that we were dealing with; bodies would then fall within or outwith that definition. However, we started with a list and, through the committee procedure, realised that some bodies did not appear to be on it. There is no easy way to solve that. We can take either Gil Paterson's catch-all position or the Executive's position, which is to deal with the narrower group now and to consult on the broader group. However, the intent remains the same. We should maximise the bill's coverage of bodies that can deal with public moneys, are publicly accountable and relate to the same ethical standard. That should apply to MSPs as well. All sorts of bodies—small, localised bodies, children's panels and so on—have expressed anxieties about this matter. The best way for us to hold the position on a national standard is for people to commit to it through discussion and consultation. I therefore support the Executive's position, which is to consult those bodies further. My anxiety is that, if we do not consult, people will not sign up to the code of conduct. We want a commitment from the Executive that this is not the final word on the matter. Kenny Gibson wants to characterise the proposals as the Executive excluding people from public accountability; he wants the code to be all-embracing. However, it is clear that other bodies can be included at a later stage. It would be unacceptable if this issue were not addressed in the near future. By shifting on this, the Executive has acknowledged the political issues that have been identified, has made a commitment to moving forward with the bodies that are included on the list and has taken off the list travelling people's organisations and so on, which should not be included in the scope of the bill.

When I heard Phil Gallie commenting favourably on something that I said, I was tempted to throw away my speech, throw up my hands and admit total defeat. I certainly do not know what that will do for my credibility in the Labour party. We shall have to wait and see. It is important to recognise that we are debating a complex issue. One of my concerns about the approach of the Tories is the suggestion that there are all these easy solutions that are just sitting there, waiting for the political will to pick them up and run with them. We do a disservice to those who suffer most from crime to suggest that it is as easy as that. It is important that we take the debate around crime and disorder out of the ownership of the Conservatives. Crime is a concern in all our local communities. In the recent past, I have dealt with very specific and troubling cases where constituents have been concerned about sentencing decisions that they cannot understand or where they have had horrific experiences as the victims, or relatives of the victims, of crimes. People also have great concerns about the way in  which bail agreements are reached, because they believe that the result is detrimental to their rights. Even when we discuss more local issues such as housing, they are often linked to questions of youth disorder in the local community. There are anxieties about policing decisions. People feel frustrated that the police do not respond quickly enough to incidents that take place on the doorstep. I agree with Roseanna Cunningham that at the heart of the debate is the issue of confidence. Those who have been accused of a crime must believe that they will get a fair trial. However, the victims of crime must believe that they, too, will get a fair hearing. Our communities, including elderly people who have been harassed by youngsters or residents who have been harassed by their neighbours, must believe that their concerns are being taken seriously and must have confidence that the police will respond to local priorities. Similarly, our young people must feel that they have the right not to be moved on and harassed simply because they are young; they ought not to be judged by their age or have presumptions made about their behaviour. I will briefly touch on the question of children's panels. Before I became an MSP, I worked with young people who were saved by that early intervention and by the willingness of the legal system to look beyond a child's behaviour to what had caused that behaviour. It is not an easy process and often calls parents to account in a difficult way. It would be to our detriment to have a system that said that we believe that young people at the ages of 12 and 13 are beyond the pale and cannot be saved. We know that locking up our young people does not work. Recently, we have seen a good example of the importance of having confidence in the system. We have had a debate on the cross-examination of witnesses in sexual crimes. I believe in the right of people to be considered innocent until proven guilty. However, no one has been able to explain to me why that important principle would be damaged by introducing a general category of crimes where a defence is pursued through a third party. Unlike the Conservatives, I am committed to the European convention on human rights, but we need to understand that we have to defend the rights of all, including those who are accused of crime and those who have suffered it. In the past few days, there has been a concerted and ferocious attack on those who have been making the argument about protecting victims in such cases. I have been shocked by the ferocity of the attack, for while we may argue about the solutions to the problem, the fact that there is a problem is self-evident.  We have heard accusations that we want to deny people their human rights. It has been suggested that rape cases are pursued inappropriately to court when they are unlikely to lead to a conviction; in fact, the women's organisations are saying that the big concern is that rape cases go unreported because women are frightened of what will happen to them in the system. It has been suggested that this is about the special agendas of women's groups—that the legal profession gives us considered advice while the rest of us are in the business of special pleading. Quite offensively, it has also been suggested that women, and others who are campaigning on this question, are chasing tabloid headlines. The reality, too often, is that women in rape trials have been at the wrong end of tabloid headlines. To suggest that people are in the business of chasing such headlines is offensive. Women's organisations at the sharp end of supporting women who have been the victims of sexual crimes have sought not publicity, but equal access to justice. If women's organisations, those who support children and those who campaign on behalf of victims had not campaigned long and hard, there would have been no change in the process that is now trumpeted as sufficient safeguard against harassment. There would have been no video links, no special arrangements for children and no discussion around inappropriate questioning. Those were all, at one time, feared and resisted on the basis of the rights of the accused. At the heart of the serious debate about options, there must be close scrutiny of what the judicial process does and how that works out in our local communities. We need more transparency about what judges are asked to do. We need a police force that is linked more closely with its local communities and their priorities. There must be an acknowledgement that, while we are told that we are all equal under the law, many groups in our society have the strong feeling that there are still some who are more equal than others. For as long as citizens feel that way—even if the feeling is ill founded—and we do nothing at all about it, we will have a problem in sustaining a fair system of justice, because our justice system will be undermined by people's lack of confidence in it.

One of the big issues is indeed that of women not being able to access traditionally male jobs, but does Maureen Macmillan agree that another issue is the fact that women's work is undervalued, which is why it is low paid? Some of the most important jobs, whether in child care or in the caring professions, are low paid not because they are unimportant, but because it is traditionally women who do them.

I acknowledge the importance of the debate and welcome the learning disability review. It is especially important, given the commitment of the Parliament to social inclusion. Since my election as an MSP, I have had the privilege of working with people with learning disabilities, their carers and professionals and volunteers in that sector. It has been a steep learning curve for me. We face an important challenge to our preconceptions about what learning disability means. Historically, society has taken a limited view of the issue, which has resulted in limited opportunities for those who are defined as having learning disabilities. I want to place on record my congratulations, and those of the Parliament, to the people—whether those with learning disabilities, their carers or those who are working in the field—who, over a long time, have managed to bring about the significant shift in policy and attitude that is creating wider opportunities for people with learning disabilities. I shall highlight two examples of good practice from my constituency, which can inform the  debate on what we mean by good-quality service. The services that are provided are important for people with a variety of disabilities, but are especially important for those with learning disabilities. The first is a project called Junction 51, in Penilee. A partnership between, among others, the social work department, the health board, Enable, the users of the service and their carers, has been able to develop a community-based service that is tailored to the needs of the individual, rather than individuals being tailored to the limits of a building. Junction 51 is based in a broad community resource, with a resulting positive impact on all those who are involved and a shared understanding of differing abilities throughout the community. The second example is a pioneering development in Glasgow's internal transport service. The service is used not only by Glasgow citizens with learning disabilities, but by other groups with disabilities of various kinds—people who need the service's specialist provisions. Glasgow City Council undertook a best value review of the service. It took a courageous step: it asked those who used and needed the service what they thought of it. The council got answers aplenty on what people needed from the service, what its weaknesses were, and how the service had contributed to the stigmatisation of people with learning disabilities. From that process emerged a group with the snappy title of parallel transport liaison group. Whatever the difficulties of saying its name, the group is a significant model. It includes the users of the service, the carers, and professionals from the social work department, education and building services—the people most involved in the delivery of the service. As a consequence of the thorough and rigorous assessment of the weaknesses of the service, and a detailed identification of the action that was required, Glasgow City Council has recently taken delivery of the first group of a fleet of 80 buses that are recognised across Scotland as being state-of-the-art in terms of meeting the needs of the people who will use them. I would like to draw members' attention to the crucial role of the voluntary sector in that example. The group that was most involved was Fair Deal for 1 in 100, a locally based group in Mike Watson's constituency. The group does a whole range of things as it campaigns for those with learning disabilities, but at its heart is a central belief: it does not seek to speak on behalf of people with learning disabilities, but seeks to develop means by which those people can speak for themselves and shape their own lives. I urge the minister and the relevant committees of the Parliament to consider the crucial work that  has been done in Glasgow and to reflect on that model. I also ask the minister to acknowledge that resources should be used not only on the services that people need, but on empowering people with learning disabilities to shape and develop the services themselves. That is not always easy, but I believe that it is crucial to getting the services right. I will finish on a point that concerns social inclusion. I make the point gently to the SNP, because I know that we have had cross-party consensus in the debate. It is unfortunate that, in its amendment, the SNP has—inadvertently—removed a statement that captures the approach of empowerment. The SNP's amendment takes the line in the Executive's motion about the Parliament looking forward "to a future where all relevant agencies work together with people with learning disabilities to ensure that they can live as full lives as possible in our communities" and replaces it with a line saying that the Parliament "welcomes the opportunity for inter-agency co-operation to ensure that those with learning disabilities are treated with equality and respect." I believe that the Executive's approach reflects the importance of putting people at the heart of the process, rather than having agencies doing things for them, no matter how well intentioned the work of the agencies may be. I do not believe that the SNP intended not to put people at the heart of the process, but I believe that when we talk about these issues, the empowering of people to speak on their own behalf has to be central. Although we can do good work for people, the work that is done and the service that is delivered will be much more valuable if people are empowered to talk for themselves. I support the review, and I give my best wishes to those who will take forward its recommendations.

Will Shona Robison give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to monitor the role of social inclusion partnerships in meeting the needs and priorities of women. (S1O-1796)

Does the deputy minister agree that there is a general issue about monitoring and re-evaluating the work of local SIPs and that it is important that communities are reassured that the process is rigorous and transparent? Will she ensure that, in the  evaluation process, local SIPs take on the recommendations about working with women and identifying their needs and priorities, and does she agree that SIPs should be in real dialogue with women, given the crucial role that women often play in holding families and communities together in difficult circumstances?

In my former life as a teacher, I never spoke to a noisy room, so I hope that everyone will be nice and quiet for me. I am pleased to have the opportunity to introduce this debate on an important issue for my constituents and for people across Scotland. I would like to make it clear at the outset that I am not an expert in this area, and I am grateful for the information that was provided for me by a range of organisations in the construction industry, including the Construction Industry Training Board, Glasgow City Council building services department and the unions that are involved in this field. I start by highlighting a situation with the construction industry that I believe creates a problem. Our awareness of the industry is often highlighted only when it intrudes in our everyday lives—when it creates traffic problems or when inconvenient scaffolding is put up. We tend to celebrate the designers of buildings, and the buildings themselves, but often we fail to celebrate the builders. We must recognise the importance of the process of construction to the economy, as well as the product of that construction work. Construction is a hugely important industry in Scotland, employing about 130,000 people and undertaking about £5,000 million of work a year.  We hear a lot about the virtual economy and e-commerce, but it is important that we recognise that many of our fellow citizens are involved in an economy that deals with real materials in real places. At times they battle in difficult circumstances, and many of them are put at risk because of a lack of regulation and safety. Sadly, there remains a significant number of fatalities in the industry; it is crucial that that is addressed. The Health and Safety Executive, according to its figures, was notified of 66 fatalities in the industry between April 1998 and March 1999. The unions have a crucial role to play in protecting the work force and I welcome the important steps forward that the Government has taken in recognising trade unions and their right to carry out that important job. The motion acknowledges the likely growth in the industry, with its potential to create a lot of job opportunities. It is estimated that, in this part of the world, through the private-public partnership education initiative, the proposed investment in housing in Glasgow and the development of the Clyde village, there may be an investment of £2 billion over the coming six to 10 years. That represents a huge opportunity for the physical regeneration of significant areas of Glasgow. It also represents a huge opportunity for the economic regeneration of some of our most deprived communities. It has been suggested that, sadly, there may be a significant skills shortage in this city. There is evidence of workers being brought in from places such as Liverpool and Newcastle. The Mackenzie Partnership report from May 2000 quotes the Construction Industry Training Board construction labour forecast in Scotland for 1999-2003. It reckons that there will be a need for an additional 32,000 workers in that period, 17,000 of whom will be skilled tradespersons. It notes that only some 1,400 apprentices are currently registered annually, although that does not take account of the new initiatives that I have identified. It is crucial that we address the skills gap, to ensure that people in our communities benefit. After all, if workers from local communities get work, they will spend the money in their communities and offer greater hope for regeneration. The importance of targeting training cannot be underestimated in ensuring that that job dividend comes to our communities. Perhaps too much is said in current political circles about learning from the private sector. Perhaps there is an overwillingness to imply that the private sector model is always the best. We can learn a lot from the work that is being driven forward by the public sector. Glasgow City Council building services department offers an excellent model for innovation and partnership, as it  recognises its social role as well as its economic role. Since the early 1980s, it has offered a sustained commitment to apprenticeships. It emphasises encouraging young women into the construction industry; currently 85 per cent of those employed in the industry are men. It offers work experience to school students, has developed partnerships and funding opportunities in a range of areas and has shown a willingness to meet the needs of the young and the long-term unemployed. Moreover, it has provided an accredited training facility to the private sector. I wish particularly to highlight the important work being done by the council in tackling the issue of pre-vocational training. It is recognised that some of our citizens need extra support and encouragement. Through the pre-vocational training process, in partnership with the council's education service, that support is now being offered. I call on the minister to study that initiative and to work with those involved to see how we might get matched funding, which would allow the initiative to be expanded. That is perhaps an opportunity for active intervention by the Executive. I wish above all to emphasise how important it is that all involved—the unions, the local authorities, social inclusion partnerships, enterprise bodies, the Executive and the private sector—grasp the importance of the construction industry's social responsibilities and work in partnership to maximise its benefits. I hope that, in the coming period, when contracts are being developed, a willingness to address the social dimension will be given proper credit and will help to define what is best value when those contracts are granted. There is a huge opportunity ahead of us. With real joined-up thinking across sectors, departments, agencies and unions, we can ensure that high-quality training and real jobs in a safe construction industry will benefit all in our communities.

Will the member give way?

Earlier, Nicola Sturgeon said that the debate was about whether the Scottish Parliament would allow Mike Tyson to come to fight in Glasgow. Does she accept that it is not within the powers of this Parliament to decide  whether Mike Tyson should be allowed to come to fight in Glasgow? Does she agree that she is being dishonest and using this issue as an opportunity to debate the powers of the Parliament? She should focus on condemning the circus that we are about to have celebrating male violence—that is what this debate is about. Does she accept that she is attempting to hijack this debate?

Will the member give way?

If we are focusing on the issues, does Shona Robison agree that this matter  is of concern—an affront—not just to women in Scotland, but to all women in the United Kingdom? Does she agree that it was therefore most unfortunate that her leader last week chose to talk about Scotland instead of women and about Scotland being sold out for Tyson's gold rather than about women's safety being sold out for Tyson's gold?

No one here wants to see people smoking, and no one welcomes the health statistics that blight Glasgow. It is inappropriate to suggest that the Minister for Health and Community Care has some kind of strategy to do what Dorothy-Grace Elder suggests. It would be better to have a debate on health that focuses on the problems rather than another cheap political point.

Since I was elected last May, I have been proud to take every opportunity to make the case for Glasgow while I have been in Edinburgh. I am prouder still today to make the case for Glasgow in Glasgow. I understand that some people think that this is old news—old hat and a rehashing of old debates. The case of Glasgow is worthy of repetition. It is essential that we find solutions to Glasgow's problems. Tommy Sheridan suggested that the debate be focused on new Tories, or on people who disregard the easy solutions that are offered to us. That is an insult to those of us who strive to represent our constituents and other people in this city who want to solve Glasgow's problems. We are not looking for easy headlines or for saviours in Glasgow; we are looking for solutions. This visit is a symbolic shift of power from Edinburgh to Glasgow. We want that to be backed up by a shift of Government jobs to Glasgow so that Glasgow, which had the highest turnout and the highest yes vote in the referendum for the Scottish Parliament, should enjoy not only the  democratic dividend but the economic dividend of the creation of the Parliament. As I have argued before, Scotland needs to take ownership of Glasgow's problems. After all, Scotland has benefited over centuries from the wealth that has been generated by Glasgow and by Glaswegians, by the sweat of their brow. We are claiming Glasgow's just reward. Part of the willingness to take responsibility for Glasgow is encompassed in the proposals for housing, as a part of which Glasgow's debt will be lifted from the backs of the tenants and redistributed to taxpayers generally. That is a responsibility that we should welcome. I want to underline the case for metropolitan status for Glasgow and the need for a fair deal for the city. We know that there is an issue about people from outwith the city boundaries coming into the city to work yet not contributing to the city's sustenance. We know that Glasgow plays a crucial role in the national and cultural life of Scotland, from international football matches to the women's 10k that some of us ran at the weekend. Glasgow supports and sustains Scotland, but it does not have national resources to do so. We must acknowledge Glasgow's fair case. I welcome the opening of the debate on a proper definition of need. Several members have talked about joblessness and the importance of employment strategies. They are important, but we must also acknowledge the consequences of joblessness for communities in relation to the impact on families, the drugs problem and the increase in crime. Those consequences will not be addressed just by creating jobs, no matter how important that is. An essential part of our social inclusion strategy is that we recognise it as an economic and social process. We must acknowledge the density of problems in Glasgow as well as the level of need. This morning, Phil Gallie said that 20 years of the Tories represented Tory regeneration of the city. That is Humpty-Dumpty world, where words mean what people want them to mean. If Tory regeneration means presiding over record levels of unemployment, the collapse of manufacturing industry and unimaginable levels of poverty, heaven preserve us from the Tories re-emerging from their dodo status—as described by Tommy Sheridan. However, it is significant that there are more people in Glasgow who support the Tories than support Mr Sheridan's party. I want to acknowledge the role played by Glasgow City Council over the past 20 years.  In the blame game, much has been said about Glasgow councillors and what they have done for Glasgow. We should acknowledge the role that  they played throughout the 1980s in protecting the citizens of Glasgow. The worked with local people to preserve their communities. We should congratulate the Scottish Executive on working to empower the local authority and activists in working together in partnership to deliver real change in Glasgow. It is essential that the regeneration strategy does not have too narrow a focus. We have to create benefits for all the citizens of Glasgow. We must remember that those citizens include our black and ethnic minority communities; we must also meet the needs of women. I welcome a strategy that includes thematic social inclusion partnerships that acknowledge the needs of the most excluded. The Glasgow Anti-Racist Alliance, the groundbreaking work on supporting care leavers and the routes out of prostitution initiative are all crucial to our community. It is essential that we develop a realistic regeneration strategy that meets real needs. For example, Pollok has been excluded from the new assisted areas map because it does not fit a pre-defined pattern. Despite the significant industrial opportunities in the area and the creation of the M77, it has been excluded from the map—although prosperous parts of the city are included. I urge the minister to bring his influence to bear in changing that. If that is the result of a pre-defined process, it is clear that there is something wrong with the process. I welcome the steps the Executive has taken. Glasgow MSPs in particular are holding the Executive to account. Through partnership we can make a real difference to the future of Glasgow.

Will Bill Aitken give way?

I am interested to note that the Tories are going to address the problems of Glasgow in the next few hours. It might have helped if they had addressed them over the past 18 years, instead of compounding the problems of the people of Glasgow who, although they indicated over a long period what they thought of the Tory approach, unfortunately suffered it for all that time.

For information, my name is pronounced Lamont—with the stress on the first syllable.

rose—

rose—

Will Mr Salmond give way?

Does the member agree that often when we discuss social inclusion and sport, we are focusing on boys—football and so on—in the hope that eventually some of them will play for a team that we hold dear? Would Sandra White acknowledge some of the important initiatives that identify the needs of women in sport? Would she join me in congratulating Glasgow City Council on supporting the women's 10K on 14 May? I am not mentioning it just because I am going to be running in it, but because it is a useful initiative and I hope that the member will join me on the day.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to monitor the environmental and economic impact of the construction of the M77. (S1O-1616)

I thank the minister for that reply. However, is she aware that, although the M77 has now been completed for more than four years, many of my constituents are still waiting for compensation and for appropriate landscaping work to be done? Is she also aware that, because of the proposed changes to the assisted areas map, although Pollok constituents are bearing the environmental costs of the M77, support to develop the economic and industrial potential offered by the M77 may be denied? Will the minister and her department give a commitment to meet the local communities to ensure that those concerns are fully pursued and that the impact of the M77 on the health and well-being of my constituents is closely monitored in the long term?

Has Lloyd Quinan listened to the debate? Did he listen to what Labour MSPs said? Is he aware of what Labour MSPs will do, if necessary, to ensure the abolition of warrant sales and poindings? He should have changed his speech and he should have listened to what people had to say. That is what is known as debate, democracy and the new politics.

Will Lyndsay McIntosh give way?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this debate even if, earlier, Tommy Sheridan pronounced my name in a Sunday way—which associates me with a certain useless chancellor who could not even pronounce his own name. I am happy that the position of the Executive has changed from what seemed to be direct opposition to proposing an amendment that outlines its commitment to abolishing poindings and warrant sales and makes helpful suggestions about the way forward. As a Labour back bencher, and I believe representing the views of many of my colleagues, I urge the minister, even at this late stage, to withdraw the amendment, to make it clear that this Parliament wants warrant sales and poindings to go. I further say, in all seriousness, that if the minister does not withdraw the amendment, I believe that I and many of my colleagues will vote to ensure that they go. We must take note of the fact that three parliamentary committees—the Local Government Committee, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee and the Justice and Home Affairs Committee—heard evidence, deliberated and expressed some reservations, but took the view that the bill's principles should be supported. Let there be no mistake: there was no collective rush of blood to the head; no emotional spasm; no mass enchantment with the person who promoted the bill; no desire to create a cheats charter; and no desire to capitulate—I believe that was the word used—to Tommy Sheridan. It would be helpful if the new politics could stretch a little further than individuals and highlight the political issues that we are debating. This was a clear decision, taken deliberately and thoughtfully. Its significance should not be underestimated.

I am in the Labour party. I know that poverty is not a new issue and that dealing with poverty is not a new issue for those of us who have fought long and hard to deal with those matters. The view of the Local Government Committee was that unless the decision to abolish was taken, there would be no need or pressure to find an alternative. It is known as concentrating minds. It is clear to the Local Government Committee, and I believe that it is the view of many Labour MSPs and others, that the level of stress and distress caused by this process is unacceptable. In effect, warrant sales and poindings humiliate, with no evidence of benefit, the poor who genuinely cannot pay in order to put pressure on those who can pay. I will make serious points about issues that the committee process and some of the debate on this issue have generated. We should challenge the idea that the poorest in our communities are waiting for the opportunity not to pay their debts. We will all have examples of constituents who, far from attempting to avoid paying what they owe, will sacrifice and do without to ensure that they are debt free. We know that many struggle to pay. We know that many, especially among our elderly, suffer to pay. I would contend that, if people wish to learn the skills of tax avoidance, they should look not to the poor, but to those who pay handsomely for advice that reduces their tax responsibilities. I emphasise the importance of the point that we need to develop an alternative means of collecting debt. People see that as fair: people should pay what they owe if they can afford to pay. It is in the interests of the poorest in our communities that local government collects council tax from those who can afford to pay in order to deliver the services that the poorest in our communities require. Tommy Sheridan has indicated that the bill is incomplete. He has said that sanctions are required. That is the challenge for us. Good government is not just about identifying problems and then wringing our hands; it is about finding solutions. What we should do today is to draw a line by saying that we wish to abolish warrant sales and poindings and that we will abolish them. Tommy Sheridan has flagged up the issues. It is now the job of our committees, the partnership Executive and the Parliament as a whole to develop a package that will secure the rights of those who seek to recover debt and stop the current system that so cruelly tests the poorest in  our communities. I urge Parliament to agree to the principles of the bill in the sure and certain knowledge that we will revisit the complexities and difficulties of it. We must agree to the principles so that we can get on with the job of developing a system of debt collection that does not have at its heart such deep injustice.

I apologise for being absent at the beginning of the debate—I was having transport difficulties—and missing some of the opening comments. I should also declare an interest: my husband is a councillor in Glasgow City Council. I understand that some people believe that that may prejudice what I say. I find that hard to believe, but there we are. I broadly welcome the bill and am encouraged by the view that people have been taking on the importance of establishing confidence in people who serve the public, whether in councils, public bodies or elsewhere. There was a clear consensus in the Local Government Committee on a broad range of issues. Many of the concerns that were expressed in the committee have already been rehearsed and will be revisited at stage 2. Aspiration is the easy bit—the devil is in the detail. We must re-examine seriously some of the concerns. I welcome the Executive's willingness to engage in debate and dialogue through the committee process. I hope that that will continue and that it will commend that approach to other members of the Executive at other times. Specific concerns raised in the Local Government Committee include the problem that MSPs are not included in the bill. We must address that, not least to minimise the opportunity for cynicism about what we are doing. If we establish processes to regulate others but choose not to regulate ourselves, that will increase rather  than decrease cynicism. Adam Ingram's concerns about the way the system might work would apply equally to local councils and us. I am not comfortable with regulating myself but demanding other standards for others; I hope that Parliament will look at that at a later stage. The committee was also concerned at the exclusion of groups such as local enterprise companies and bodies regulated by company law. It felt that that threw up contradictions and it did not find the Executive's response convincing. We need to cohere national ethical standards rather than to splinter them. A lot of the debate has been on section 2A. As a member of the Local Government Committee and of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I heard a great deal of the evidence, much of which I found compelling. A clear recommendation of the Local Government Committee stage 1 report is that section 2A should be repealed. It is evident that there is not one voice speaking for parents or for children. There are huge concerns for children, but they are not the monopoly of one group or one side in the debate. In the Local Government Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee, Labour members welcomed the support of Liberal Democrat and SNP members in understanding the principles involved and supporting the Executive's moves to draft a section that focused on the needs of children. I was disappointed that the willingness to meet the broad political challenges thrown up by the debate was not matched by the SNP education spokesperson, who could not resist opportunism and seeking party political advantage. This morning, I heard her saying on the radio that the distinction between the SNP and Executive positions lies between the guidelines being written into the bill or anchored in it. I presume her point is not so much the distinction as to show that there is one. I draw members' attention to the Keep the Clause campaign's evidence to the Equal Opportunities Committee. It partially accepted that the section should go, that it discriminates and that there is no evidence of plans for gay sex lessons or of groups awaiting the opportunity to invade our schools with homosexual propaganda. That showed me that the Keep the Clause campaign is more comfortable arguing on billboards, in misleading petitions and through a referendum that will falsely polarise the debate than in dealing with the complexities that the debate has revealed. Particularly today, when we are trying to encourage girls to challenge some of the roles currently apportioned to women through bringing our daughters to work, I hope that the current  discussion on guidelines for education in sex and relationships will provide an opportunity to raise the widely held concerns about the early sexualisation of our children and about some young boys' attitudes towards the legitimacy of using violence against their girlfriends. The horrifying findings of the Zero Tolerance Trust on the attitudes of some young men—and indeed some young girls—about what is acceptable in a relationship and our concerns about early sexualisation surely give far greater cause for concern than the false fears that have been generated in the debate. I hope that the Executive will pursue concerns raised by Zero Tolerance in developing discussion with young people in schools.

Is the minister aware that many people who experience hearing loss during their lives—as opposed to those who are born deaf—are not directed towards lip-reading support when they are diagnosed as having lost their hearing? As a  result, such people may become very isolated, which is a particular problem for elderly people. Will the minister raise with his colleagues the importance of examining that issue and discussing it with people who are involved in health and social work services, as part of our broad and important social inclusion and equal opportunities strategy?

Does the member agree that people are choosing to move away from areas such as the one that he represents, the city of Glasgow? Would he support calls for metropolitan status for Glasgow, which would be acknowledged in a distribution formula, to prevent people choosing for financial considerations to move outside the city boundary while continuing to use services located within that boundary?

I am happy to be part of any debate that reasserts the importance of fair and progressive taxation and the importance of local government services. We all know that the many debates on what Scotland needs, generated as much by the Tories as by anyone else in the chamber, have acknowledged the efficiency and importance of public expenditure. Whether road building, railways, schools or health, we know that the most efficient way to deliver those services is to do so collectively, and we will all benefit from them. One consequence of the poll tax debacle was that the understanding that the poll tax was unfair somehow collapsed into a view that tax was unfair. I am happy to be part of any debate that reasserts the importance of taxation as an enabler for our society, rather than something to be feared. We have to look at what is being said in local government. There is a consensus across the country about local government finance issues, but I say to Tommy Sheridan that those views do not concentrate on the problems of the council tax formula. They concentrate far more on the level of local government resourcing and the ability of local government to determine its own priorities. It is important that at some stage the Executive acknowledges the almost universal demand for a review of local government finance. I have said publicly that I am in favour of such a review, and I can assure members that, as a non-Executive member, I am beavering away doing everything I can to persuade the Executive of its importance.  Equally, the Local Government Committee has said that should a review not be granted, we will do everything in our power to ensure that such a review takes place in the committee. Tommy Sheridan's views on a service tax will play a part in any such review, and I have no problem with his service tax report coming to the Local Government Committee. I have anxieties about a local income tax and the suggestion that it should be raised centrally and that distribution should be determined centrally. One of Tommy Sheridan's documents says: "It will be efficiently collected centrally and distributed by the Scottish Parliament to each local authority according to need." One of the strongest messages from local government discussions that we have had is the importance of covenant and partnership with local government. Too often in local government there is a feeling that it cannot be responsive to local needs, and that too often local needs are determined centrally. We also have to recognise the long-held view that local taxation should acknowledge the importance of taxing property. That is a complex area, and we cannot debate it fully here. We should be relaxed about what the Local Government Committee is allowed to look at in this area. In such a debate I could not miss the opportunity to talk about Glasgow, because in Glasgow it is clear that the debate is not really about council tax; it is about what happens when council tax has to meet the shortfall in provision from central Government. Glasgow knows more than anywhere the problems of defining need, which is at the heart of our critique of Tommy Sheridan's position. I welcome the fact that the Government has begun to acknowledge the importance of deprivation factors. We know in Glasgow that there are disproportionate levels of poverty among our pensioners and those who have disabilities; disproportionate problems with drug addiction, not just for drug addicts but for their families; and consequences for service provision for young people being brought into care. A report by Glasgow City Council has identified how Glasgow has not been treated fairly in the grant distribution system. I call on the Executive to look at that. Glasgow is sometimes presented as a huge black hole into which loads of money falls and somehow is inefficiently spent. The reality is that in Glasgow there is huge poverty, but it is among even greater wealth.  I call on the Executive to consider allowing the business tax that is generated in a community to remain there. That would mean that an extra £60 million could be used to address Glasgow's problems. I understand that there are difficulties  because where communities are poor, business taxes are not generated, but I ask the Executive to examine that. Equally, I would like the Executive to target money for health and so on in other areas. I join other members in welcoming the fact that any debate that generates greater understanding of the importance of local government is to be welcomed. Any debate on local government must have at its heart the importance of partnership and delivery of services to those who are most in need.

On a point of order. I seek clarification on the timing of decision time. I understand that members wanted to raise points of order, but you will understand that some of us operate to tight timetables. It would be appreciated if decision time could be held as close as possible to the time at which it is supposed to be held, if points of order, of the nature of those that we have just heard, could be taken after that.

I am interested to know where, in the 18 years of Tory government, there is evidence of a Tory commitment to community empowerment and social inclusion, which are at the very heart of our education and housing policy. As I said earlier, any transfer of housing has at its heart a commitment to community empowerment. I do not see that in the Tories' policies during those 18 years.

I agree that we have a serious problem. The largest part of our infrastructure was created by the previous Labour Government, but there were then 18 years when nothing was done except to destroy our economy. I hope that Fiona McLeod agrees that the challenge is to recognise the difficult situation that we are in and to come together to find a solution. However, we cannot deny that those 18 years happened and caused huge damage to our economy.

I enter this debate with some trepidation; it is so often clouded in technical financial terms that it is  difficult for many people to focus on the issues under discussion. Quality housing, good school buildings and strong infrastructure should be matched by the rigour of a real social inclusion strategy to allow us to build a healthy environment in which people can participate fully. As Christine Grahame and Michael Matheson should know from the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee and the cross-party group on older people and aging, the SNP has no monopoly of concern for older people. We are all engaged in a hard debate about how to deliver quality services to the older members of our community. We should set this debate on infrastructure in the context of years of Tory neglect. We are often accused of using the Tories as scapegoats; however, we should remember that scapegoats were often innocent, and the Tories were not. We should acknowledge that this society is picking up the pieces and living with the consequences of a policy of neglect, which was driven by profit and based on attacking the public sector. It is disappointing that the SNP sees this debate only as an opportunity to prove that the Scottish people were wrong when they voted for our current constitutional settlement—as the SNP encouraged them to do—and as an opportunity to point out what the Parliament cannot do. I hope to highlight the Parliament's powers to get the best value for money from our infrastructure and to build an infrastructure that will deliver for us in the 21 st century. I am aware that there is a huge on-going debate about housing. As a result, we should seriously examine the work of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee and its findings. Furthermore, we must be more confident about other ways of providing housing. Although private sector moneys have always been available, the challenge is to find out how those moneys can be directed. My area contains some good examples of how bringing together private and public moneys through the housing association movement and housing co-ops has developed good-quality housing and created a volunteer dividend for the community. Housing in its broader context has been recognised in social inclusion partnership initiatives. Crucially, the housing association movement has led the way in putting tenants at the heart of decision making on the design and running of houses. People in such areas shed no great tears over the old public sector model, which allowed very little or no tenant control. Any stock transfer must have at its heart a matching commitment to real tenant empowerment. We must take into account the points that have been raised about the transparency of the process, and  the Executive needs to address some issues about consultation with the community. We should be stricter in drawing up contracts. If the central principle is that the private sector is more dynamic, such dynamism should be demonstrated in ways other than low pay or reduced pension rights. That challenge is particularly important in the construction industry, which will benefit from much of the work on our infrastructure. It is still a sad fact that, in the UK, there are three deaths a week in that industry. Despite the millions of pounds that have been invested in construction work in my area, anyone who has visited a building site in the past 10 years will have found not one apprentice. The only apprenticeships and real training are being provided by Glasgow City Council and—dare I say it—its direct labour organisation. We must acknowledge the key social role of DLOs in developing apprenticeships for girls and boys, proper safe training and genuine local employment. The challenge to the private sector is to match such quality training and local jobs; the people in our communities must receive a work dividend from these developments. This debate is not about blind faith in one area or another. Our committees must examine the options and find the best possible solution for our people. Across parties, in local communities and in local government, people are taking hard decisions because they want good schools, which they will have in Glasgow; good housing, which Glasgow will have once the housing debt is cleared; and services that our young people and older people deserve. As a result, although we scrutinise the available options, our test is not whether we will benefit electorally from our decision; it is whether we deliver the service locally, whether we improve people's lives and whether we use private moneys in ways that our communities, not the private companies, want. I urge members to see this debate not as an opportunity to undermine the Parliament's work, but as an opportunity for the committees of the Parliament to take a constructive role.

Will the member give way?

I have built a reputation for being obliging to ministers at every opportunity, so I welcome what has been said. I hope that that will apply to all the work that we do on bills and other public documents. The language that we use should reflect the diverse nature of our society, and particularly the experiences of both men and women.

I want to make a few brief points. Perhaps it is because we had a debate on this subject recently that there has not been a rush to the microphone today. That does not mean that we do not recognise the importance of the debate or of the decisions that are being made about the census. I will address the reasons why people wanted to include a question on religion. First, it is of historical interest to capture at a particular time in Scotland's history the fact that people who have strong religious beliefs identify themselves as such. That reason would be sufficient in itself to include a question on religion. Much is claimed for religion. At the turn of the century, and under a new Parliament, there is an opportunity to ask to what extent people feel that religion is still important to them. The census allows people to express that view and I welcome the inclusion of the question on religion for that reason. Secondly, as has been mentioned, for some groups, particularly within the ethnic minority community, the issue of religion weighs heavily on service needs. This point relates to observance rather than belief. For example, it is important for the education authority to know the requirements of young Muslim girls, in areas such as physical education and diet. As part of our drive to ensure that we meet the needs of all our communities, the  information from a census question on religion will allow us to open up dialogue and debate more fully with those who attempt to provide services.

We should be careful not to assume that all Muslims come from a particular ethnic background. Many people whose families have come from Asian countries might now identify themselves as being Scottish Muslims. A question on religion is important because those people might have religious observance needs. I take the point that Brian Adam makes, but the reason for including the questions on ethnicity and religion was that the black and ethnic minority communities, in particular, were asking for that. That weighed very heavily with the members who sit on the Equal Opportunities Committee. It is significant that the service providers were not asking for those questions to be included. That suggests that we should encourage our service providers to open up and think about minority communities in our society. Just because the service providers do not ask for particular information to be included, that does not mean that it is not required. When the black and ethnic minority communities asked for the questions on ethnicity and religion to be included, they were, in a sense, testing this Parliament's willingness to listen. We did listen, and the questions were included. Our Parliament should be applauded for seizing an opportunity. I recognise that the situation would have been different if we had been dealing with a main plank of Government policy, but we welcome the flexibility that the Executive showed in the matter. I want to make two further short points that I hope the minister will address now or at a later stage. First, although the bill deals with issues relating to the diversity of our community, it is couched in archaic language, with the male pronoun used as the generic. I hope that we will take the opportunity to be bold and to use modern language that recognises not only that women have the right to equality, but that they exist in terms of the bill. Secondly, there has been a recognition  throughout the debate on the census that it is important to get disaggregated data on black and ethnic minority communities and on women. I ask the minister to comment on the role of Engender, which has given us the gender audit. Will she outline the other ways in which the Executive intends to seek the important information that we need to ensure that what we talk about in the chamber and what policy makers talk about here and at local level matches the experience of people locally? We need to move on the clear inequalities that the Engender report exposes, which are also evident in other parts of our society.

Mòran taing. Chan eil mòran Gàidhlig agam, ach tha mi glè mhòr as a' chànan aig na daoine 'on tàinig mi. Chan urrainn dhomh ach mo thaic a thoirt dhan Ghàidhlig, agus tha mi a' toirt taing dhan Phàrlamaid seo airson gu bheil iad a' dèanamh an dìcheil air a' chànain a chumail beò.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I do not have much Gaelic, but I am very much in favour of the language of my forebears. I can do no more than give my support to Gaelic and I thank this Parliament for doing all that it can to keep the language alive.  The member continued in English.  Gaelic may not come easy to my lips, but it is very strong in my heart. I hope that no one will make any Gaelic interventions on me, as my mother's capacity to translate would not stretch quite that far. I come from a family of Gaelic speakers and I was brought up in Glasgow. My family moved from the island of Tiree for work. For economic reasons, that journey, which was made in the past, continues to be made by the young from our island communities. As members may be aware, I was the first person to speak Gaelic in a debate in the Parliament. In a way, it was fitting that the first Gaelic that should be spoken in a debate in this Parliament was not spoken by a fluent Gaelic speaker but by someone from the Gaelic diaspora, stumbling hesitantly, who lives in and represents a city that has provided a home to many Gaels over the generations. The mark of Gaelic migration remains significant in my constituency in the south of Glasgow. When I was growing up in Glasgow, there was  little support for Gaelic. We lived with cultural diversity: while the rest of the world rocked to the Beatles, we were listening to Calum Kennedy. That broad experience of being a Gael living in Glasgow led me to be hostile to any kind of nationalism that attempted to define us in terms of a narrow Scottishness to which I could not relate. I welcome the work of the Government in the promotion of Gaelic, particularly in Gaelic-medium education. My generation lost the language partly because the importance of such an approach was not recognised. I used to go to Gaelic classes on a Saturday morning. I recall that I learned to sing "Brochan Lom"—a whole song about the importance of the consistency of porridge. The development of a more dynamic approach to Gaelic arts and television has normalised Gaelic in the lives of our children. I heard a lot of Gaelic at home, but the Gaelic that was on television and in the national eye seemed to be all harps and high voices—a million miles away from the Gaelic humour and song and the unaccompanied psalms that I heard at home and on Tiree. There is no doubt that, at one time, the Gaelic community feared the disadvantage of difference—a fear that is common to many of our minority and migrant groups. We should put on record our thanks to local authorities for supporting Gaelic in a new way and encouraging it as they have done. We are learning the importance of delivering an inclusive Scotland that does not fear difference, but celebrates it and draws strength from it. We should recognise the key role that parents play in driving the agenda of Gaelic-medium education and their volunteer effort in establishing the pre-school movement. I hope that that partnership with parents will continue. It is important that we closely monitor how Gaelic-medium education is being delivered. The power of symbolism is never lost on the Gael and the symbolism of our speaking Gaelic today has been recognised. When it comes to education, however, symbolism on its own is not enough. It is essential that the educational need is recognised and catered for as it would be in English-medium education. It is important to recognise the difficulties that might be encountered in delivering the curriculum in a Gaelic-medium education to young people from families in which no Gaelic is spoken, whom we want to encourage. I emphasise that we should resist the inclination to take a narrow view of Gaelic arts and culture. In the Mòd, a greater emphasis on the involvement of children and on drama competitions is evident. I encourage the minister to consider any initiatives that will encourage children to use Gaelic in their normal lives when playing games and reading  books. That will give my children the opportunity to have greater contact with the language than they have had. I welcome this debate. This Parliament seeks to represent all Scotland in all its diversity. It wants to reflect on its past, draw from its past and learn for its future. Learning Gaelic and listening to Gaels will play a significant part in that.

Thank you for the opportunity to debate the motion, Presiding Officer. I like this lectern—I suspect that it is the nearest that I will ever get to a dispatch box, so I intend to enjoy it. We in Scotland—particularly in Glasgow—are in crisis in terms of drug addiction. In 1999, there was an increase in drug-related deaths of 29 per cent in Glasgow. The increase in drug-related deaths in the wider Strathclyde area was 85 per cent. Those figures do not take into account deaths, including suicide, that are indirectly related to drug addiction. An analysis carried out on behalf of the greater Glasgow drug action team of 62 such deaths in Glasgow revealed that the average age of the deceased was 28. Furthermore, 84 per cent of the deceased were male and 24 per cent had been released from prison less than two weeks before their deaths. Heroin alone was the cause of 30 per cent of the deaths. Heroin along with other drugs accounted for 47 per cent of the deaths. There was also evidence of increased chaotic drug use among those who had died. Those are grim statistics. However, for many people in our communities, the mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters, and dependent children of drug addicts—it is estimated that a third of addicts have dependent children—those are not statistics, but many individual tragedies. In this debate, I want to draw attention to the impact of drug addiction not only—so tragically—on drug addicts themselves, but on their families. Someone who is involved in a local support group in my constituency told me that all families of drug  addicts live in fear of the knock at the door. They live with the embarrassment, anger, deep sadness and fear that are created through the fact that one of their loved ones is lost to drugs. We know that drug addiction impacts massively in particular communities, and that any solutions must acknowledge the interests of the broader community and the families as well as those of the individual. A recent social work report highlighted the fact that 95 per cent of the estimated problematic drug-using population in Glasgow is located in communities that are classified, according to the Carstairs deprivation index, as being most deprived. There is a need to recognise that the social regeneration of deprived areas must be an element of service provision for drug abusers, and that service provision should not be restricted to treatment of the addiction. We need more than medical solutions. I was privileged to meet the Glasgow Association of Family Support Groups and a member of greater Pollok's family support group. They emphasised that one of the problems that they have to tackle, when dealing with the drug crisis, is that the needs of the family are often forgotten. Because of the stigma that is associated with drug taking in a family, people often come to support groups reluctantly and only when they are in crisis. The motion suggests that such groups offer direct counselling to addicts, but they do not: it is through working with the families that the groups come into contact with the addicts. Through 32 groups in the city and 26 affiliated groups beyond the city boundaries—including groups in Dublin and the Isle of Man—the Glasgow Association of Family Support Groups undertakes crucial work in sustaining and supporting families in crisis who are often grieving. That work is generally undertaken by volunteers and sustained by very limited social work and health board funding. More often, funds are raised by the individual groups. We should not regard the drug problem as a theoretical dilemma on which we can make academic judgments based on the options for treatment that are available. We must listen to the experiences of local people, as they are probably our greatest resource in tackling the drug crisis. Such people have told me of the problems of someone who is coming off drugs. They have told me that being a drug addict is a busy life that involves the constant search for money to buy drugs. In dealing with addicts, we must address ways in which they can be supported and kept active when they are not on drugs. We must also acknowledge the work that is being done to support the children of addicts. It is now common in our communities for grandparents to take on the difficult role of parenting children  whose parents are suffering. They know how and where drugs are being dealt, and they tell us—very worryingly—that young people are starting to use them earlier. There is a problem with the funding of family support groups, which is all the more acute because of the direct link between drug abuse and deprivation. Because the Glasgow group provides a Glasgow-wide service, it cannot access funds through local social inclusion partnership groups. Locally, the family support group often offers individual support and may not be regarded as appropriate for SIP moneys. I hope that the minister will consider ways in which that problem can be tackled in the future. Sadly, there are grounds for pessimism in the figures that have been compiled by Glasgow City Council's social work department and the drugs action team. The figures suggest that a serious problem is becoming more serious still. Nevertheless, through meeting family support groups and listening to their views, we are also given grounds for optimism. As a mother contemplating the future for my own children, I stand in awe of the parents in those groups, who face the worst imaginable prospect of their children being lost to drugs. Such people will work to support others in the deepest trouble simply because that work needs to be done, not because there is anything to be gained for themselves. There can be no better basis for our solutions for Scotland in the 21 st century than in recognising that people will carry out that work willingly. During my visit to the office of the Glasgow Association of Family Support Groups, I viewed a room that was hung on all sides with quilts and embroidery made by people who had lost their children, friends or relatives to drugs. A roll call of names and faces stands as testimony not to the statistics, but to the huge waste of human life that drugs have visited on us. Through its drugs strategy, I trust that the Executive will find the means to tackle the scourge that is addiction. I also hope that it will find the means of funding those who seek to deal with the fallout from that drug addiction, which is suffered by far too many of our families and communities. I hope that members will involve themselves in this debate.

I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to what is a central and complex debate. None of us wants to run away from the difficulties that we as a Parliament face, and which local government faces. One of the challenges to the Parliament will be how it develops its partnership with local government and how it is able to resource the means by which services can be delivered, in a quality way, at a local level. We must recognise the problem that the minister faces in this debate and in dealing with these issues. By the very nature of the debate, it is tempting for everyone to fight for their own patch. It is important that the Scottish Parliament, if it is signed up to genuine social inclusion for the people of Scotland, is able to develop the capacity  to see the whole picture. We must have the courage to develop means by which real needs are addressed and real priorities identified. The minister has already said that he will review poverty and deprivation indicators before this stage next year. That is very much to be welcomed. Despite what I have said about the whole picture, perhaps it will not surprise members that I wish to say something specifically about Glasgow. Glasgow's role in the national life of Scotland—for example, it hosted the Scotland-England game last year—is significant and costly. In that example, its role was also rather painful. However, that role should be acknowledged; I believe that that should be done by granting a special metropolitan status to Glasgow. However, I wish to concentrate today on making a case for Glasgow being treated fairly.

Let me get into the meat of this first. Some would characterise Glasgow as a place that is awash with cash that has been frittered away by local government. I wish to consider the way in which the government-aided expenditure formula for social work services actively works against Glasgow. No specific allowance is made for addiction in Glasgow, despite the fact that we know that the level of addiction is increasing. That has huge implications for social work not only in terms of caring for addicts, but in terms of the impact on the broader community, for example, in relation to child care. Members will be aware that the national trend has been to reduce the number of children and young people being brought into the care of local authorities. However, since November 1997, Glasgow has bucked that trend, with a 24 per cent increase. In the past 15 months, Glasgow has had a 13.5 per cent increase in young people entering care. That trend can be related directly to an estimated doubling of drug addiction in Glasgow. The implication of having young people in care, as they move through the care system and into adult life, is huge costs to the city. The second factor that I wish to highlight is the government-aided expenditure formula for the allocation of community care moneys. No account is taken of the ability of clients to make a financial contribution to community care, which is increasingly means-tested. The impact of that can be illuminated by the following figures. Glasgow has 12 per cent of Scotland's population; however, 20 per cent of all Scottish pensioners who are on income support live in Glasgow. Glasgow has 12 per cent of the population; yet 27 per cent of  disabled people on income support disability premium live in the city. Those figures highlight something important: that Glasgow has a greater share of the serious problems facing our people than its share of the population; however, it does not have a greater share of the resources. Because of the deficiencies in the formula, Glasgow is spending £15 million more on social work in 1999-2000 than it was allocated.

I am aware of that response on the question of metropolitan status but I urge the Executive to look at creating that status and granting it to Glasgow. On the broader question of the benefits of the Labour Government, there are people in this Government who are committed to and understand the importance of locally delivered services. I hope that the Minister for Finance not only sees that Glasgow is a special case but sees its need for fair treatment. Glasgow is already suffering from the impact of poverty and deprivation in its communities and has to pay a disproportionate amount to tackle it. I urge the minister and the Scottish Executive to take on board these arguments so that, next time round, Glasgow is given status as a special case.

Is the minister aware that over 700,000 people in Scotland suffer from hearing loss? Is he further aware that while hearing aids play an important part, lip-reading classes and the development of lip-reading skills can also be of great benefit in challenging the exclusion and isolation that are caused by that problem? Will the minister explore the importance both of directing people towards lip-reading classes at the stage of diagnosis and of funding for the training of lip-reading tutors and lip-reading classes? Such classes would play an important part in including in our society those who suffer from hearing loss.

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to the debate. I would like to point out that there are concerns in the Equal Opportunities Committee about language in the home, and I hope that we will receive assurances on that issue. It is not necessarily helpful to collapse together our commitment to the Scots language and our commitment to Scotland and to the census. People are coming to a balanced judgment on those issues. I welcome the shift that the Executive has made, although I have some concerns about the fact that this could not be done in a more straightforward way, by informing the committee at a stage when it would not have created the difficulties that it did for the SNP. A recognition by the minister that he has got it wrong is a sign of strength, not an admission of weakness. I want to put on record my thanks to all those in the Equal Opportunities Committee who worked together, not on the basis of party interests but genuinely to co-operate when they could make a difference. We must recognise, on today's evidence, that our committee structure can enhance the work of the Parliament. Committees are not a threat; equally, they are not an opportunity, in macho parlance, to square up to the Executive or take the Executive on. They are a means for us to make better policy, as they allow back benchers—and, more important, groups from outside Parliament, using the committees as a vehicle—to influence policy. Committees are not, therefore, an opposing power in the Parliament; they have a key enabling role. I would rather have less discussion in the language of victory, defeat and entrenched positions, and more of the listening that we have had in this debate on the census. There have clearly been difficulties with procedure. It is important that we do not dwell on them, but learn from them. The first problem  seems to be that the census was perceived as something neutral—a practical issue, rather than a political one. However, in reality, very few decisions—as any excluded group would tell us—are neutral. Organisations that have appeared before the Equal Opportunities Committee have, time and again, stressed the importance of compiling data that will improve services. The main defence against including the questions on religion and ethnicity is that no one asked for it, but that is self-evidently not the case. It depends on who is asked and what is asked. If we had asked policy makers, 15 years ago, how best to reduce unemployment, how many would have suggested extending child care? Very few, as they would all have been men. We must think about who we are talking to. As the Commission for Racial Equality says, we need to understand that "Challenging exclusion must involve uncovering issues that agencies do not yet fully understand." The argument is, of course, circular. Groups are colour-blind and do not seek information on ethnicity, so information on ethnicity is not required. Mainstreaming breaks that circle. The religious question plays an important part in defining one's identity, which is significant in itself. I recall, as a school teacher a few years ago, asking a child to fill in a form in which they had to describe their religion. I asked the child whether to put down Christian. "No," they answered, "I am a Protestant." That says something about identity, if not about that child's grasp of religious denominations. In the black and ethnic minority community in particular, religious observations have service implications. I know a young woman whose parents would regard themselves as being of ethnic Asian origin—from Pakistan. She would describe herself as Scottish, but also as a Muslim. That has an impact on service provision in schools. The census offers an opportunity that is too important to miss. We must grasp the lessons on mainstreaming that the debate has exposed and seek assurances on the important role of the equality unit. For example, did the equality unit discuss the emerging differences of opinion on the census? Was it asked for its view? We need to be reassured about the perspective of individual departments. It is deeply ironic that the census—which seeks to give a picture of our whole society—should expose the possible weaknesses in our departments' procedure for equality proofing. We must emphasise the importance of maximising effective consultation with outside groups. Equality issues must be addressed in all our mainstreaming.  We must resist the temptation to divide the world into areas in which equality matters or does not matter. Equality matters in everything we discuss and it should be at the front of our minds. We must remember the powerful messages of inclusiveness that have emerged during the census debate. We must recognise that we are a white legislature and that we have a chance to take the first step to challenge that. The first step is to listen to what the black and ethnic minority communities and groups are saying. In the shift that we have seen today in the Executive, and in making the decision to include the questions on religion and ethnicity, we have given ourselves the opportunity to understand our multi-ethnic and multicultural society better. We should, therefore, be better able to serve its needs.

Is the minister aware of, or would he be willing to investigate, some of the proposals for bringing a social inclusion perspective to developing e-commerce, so that it is not left to those who want to make a fast buck, with no trace of benefit to anyone else? Will he look at the potential for a public sector body committed to software development—the expensive part—so that we could all share software for free or at low cost? That would have the spin-off of harnessing all the talents of all the people in our communities.

I welcome the statement and its recognition, long understood by the Labour party and the Labour movement, that when there is diversity among decision makers, the needs of the broad range of groups in society are more likely to be met in decision making.  I ask in particular that there should be an emphasis in discussions on the importance of challenging the assumptions about what constitutes merit, ability and talent. After all, if we asked a range of white, middle-class, middle-aged men what constitutes talent, they would probably give us their curriculum vitae. I hope members agree that this is not just an issue about fairness, but that it is an opportunity to tap into the huge, underused resource of talent in our local communities, particularly among women, which sustains communities and local organisations, often in difficult circumstances.

I shall try to be brief, as I know that many people have a contribution to make. I want to draw the attention of the chamber to the work of the Equal Opportunities Committee women's group, which is attempting to put the discussion of rape and violence against women in the context of attitudes to women and the unequal treatment of women. As a group, we have been asked to look at what happens to women within the judicial system, as victims of crime—specifically sexual crime—as vulnerable witnesses and as offenders. At some stage, we may want to consider the last category. There is no doubt that women are fast-tracked through the system and end up in jail more quickly  than men do. The question whether girls are judged differently from boys in the children's panel system also merits examination. It is important that we recognise, when we are talking about the issues raised by Gil—and I thank him for bringing the motion before the Parliament—the way in which, in the crime of rape, women are blamed for being in their position. Society instinctively blames women for being there, in order, somehow, to justify that appalling crime and to find a reason for it that is attached to women and not to its perpetrator. As Malcolm Chisholm mentioned, a great deal of work was done, before the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, around the document "Towards a Just Conclusion". That document, and the work around it, recognised that women do not have equal access to and equal treatment under the law, particularly in relation to their experience as witnesses. I emphasise the urgency with which that work should be revisited. I hope that the minister will be able to reassure us, particularly on the treatment of women who are being cross-examined by the man who is accused of raping them. What civil rights can we possibly be seeking to defend in putting even one woman in that position? I regret to say that the response that I received from Jim Wallace was rather cold and academic, despite the fact that this cannot be seen as a cold and academic problem. Perhaps we need a legal system that not only deals with the problems of the real world, but reacts and feels like the real world does. There is no doubt that the minister understands the anger that society in general feels about the treatment of women in rape cases. As a result of the actions of one brave survivor, who spoke out about her experience, I hope that we will begin to have a legal system that responds to that treatment of women. It is entirely unacceptable that anyone should ever be traumatised in such a way again. I would have thought that any innocent man, wrongly accused, would have been prepared to cede the right to cross-examine. He would not want to traumatise further a woman if he himself felt that he was being treated unfairly by the system. We must apply all the fine legal brains that we can find to achieving a solution. In particular, we have to thank the survivor who brought the problem to the attention of Scottish society. In my view, politics is not just about identifying problems; it is about managing and solving them. There is no doubt that women's organisations and women generally—and, broadly, society—want us to see the big picture. They want us to recognise that maintaining the right to conduct such a cross-examination would be a grotesque perversion. We  have to find a way of ensuring that people get a fair trial but that, nevertheless, the cost of that fair trial is not the further abuse of the woman who stands as a witness. I echo what has been said about the importance of supporting women's organisations and about the fact that those organisations were set up not by statute, but by women who saw the need and the problem. We should be supporting those organisations fully. I hope that even this small debate may play some part in moving things forward and in ensuring that the Scottish Parliament does not inhibit the finding of a solution to the problem. I hope that women in Scotland find the same protection under the law as has been put in place for women in England and Wales.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to progress the issues in relation to vulnerable witnesses raised in the report "Towards a Just Conclusion". (S1O-955)

Will the minister explain the apparent delay in bringing forward proposals? The consultation closed in the spring of last year. Will he assure the chamber that the Executive will give the highest priority to bringing forward legislation to prevent the cross-examination of the victims of sexual crime by the accused? That legislation will give the women of Scotland the same important protection that is being put in place in England and Wales.

I am not sure that I would use the word "rush" to describe what has been done thus far. The practical problems that the minister identified seem to have been dealt with south of the border. If it can be done there, surely the Scottish Parliament can do the same here.

I would like members to picture the scene: a secondary school in Glasgow. A man is lurking at  the gates, approaching young people as they enter, encouraging them to buy drugs. Cut to a family home. Mum and dad are pacing the floor, fretting about the possibility of their child taking drugs, worried about when that young person will come home. Cut then to a young person being told about the dangers of drugs, stunned into a decision not to take the risk. Finally, cut to the group of people sitting on beanbags, rolling joints, listening to "Tubular Bells", discussing the relative safety of cannabis. All those scenes form parts of our idea of what is happening in relation to drugs. To some extent, they are all rooted in the truth. Across communities and classes, parents fret and young people experiment. I want to speak about another world: where young people from the poorest parts of our country are 30 times more likely to go into hospital with a drug-related emergency; where there has been a 50 per cent increase in drug deaths in Strathclyde in the previous year; where drugs are not pushed by evil outsiders, but are found in the home; where parents are not striving for the solution because they are the problem; where drugs are woven into the fabric of children's lives; where cannabis is not taken as a drug of choice, but is taken as part of a random, reckless mixture with drink and other drugs; and where, as revealed in a recent report by the University of Glasgow's centre for drug misuse research, far from being motivated to deal with their problem by a fear of death, addicts are often suicidal and depressed and overdose because of their suicidal feelings. There is little that is more distressing than telling a 13-year-old that he may not reach his 14 th birthday if he continues to dabble in drugs as he is doing, knowing that that will not stop him. In some communities, parents are fighting for the resources to protect their children before the drugs kill them. This is an emotional issue. All Scotland suffers, but the burden of the impact of drugs is hugely concentrated in certain areas. We must recognise that the problems go too far to be sorted out by a drugs policy alone. I welcome the fact that our drugs policy is placed firmly within our social inclusion policy, and I would resist the temptation to take it away from the responsibility of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, as the drugs problem is connected with social exclusion in most of the communities concerned. Those communities' problems will be solved, and change will be delivered by working with communities and addressing the problems of unemployment, poor educational attainment and poor health in the round to form a national commitment, locally shaped and locally delivered. Of course there is a place for discussing harm  reduction, for drugs education and for methadone programmes. I do not close the door to anything mentioned in this debate that might offer some solution in the future, but, where the drugs problem is most intense, we need to view it as a symptom of a difficulty, and not mix up the debate on lifestyle choice and drug taking with the intense problems of those who are most at risk. I would be failing in my duty if I did not address the particular problems of my constituency: the pain felt by families who grieve for their children lost to drugs; the intense impact on particular communities; the disturbance experienced by families who live so near to where the drugs are being dealt that addicts shoot up in their close; drug-related crime; anti-social behaviour; and problems at school. There is also an impact from the increase in the number of people with co-morbidity problems of drug and drink, as identified by mental health agencies in Glasgow. Glasgow has specific problems. It generates huge wealth for Scotland, but is struggling with a massive drugs problem, which represents a divide within Glasgow. I again call on the Executive to look positively on demands from some of us for a special strategy for Glasgow. That will provide resources to allow the professionals—and our strong communities in Glasgow working together—to take on the complexities of drugs problems and to give our children a better future than the too-sad future that some of them face now.

I will talk specifically to the provision on the abuse of trust, but I would like to make a point about the language in which the bill is written: it refers throughout to "he". In relation to this bill in particular, that language may be confusing. I say that as someone who is on record as saying that I regard domestic abuse as an issue that has a specific gender perspective. However, we should be moving on in our new century from the generic "he" covering men and women. It is obvious that if we referred to MSPs as "he", we would be talking about only 63 per cent of members—a welcome development. I hope that in the interests of equality and clarity that comment will be taken on board in relation to all bills. There is a growing understanding and acceptance that, sadly, abuse happens to our young people, and we need to take all possible steps to prevent it. But that consensus did not always exist. Often in the past, those who sought to expose what was happening to too many of our young people were characterised as loony feminists or man-haters, but as in many areas in which women's organisations have led, society has followed. Much of the work done to shift public consciousness in this area has been done by women's groups, but, more important and more powerfully, by the testimony of the survivors themselves. In a previous existence, as a schoolteacher, I worked with vulnerable young people, and now, as a mother, I am hugely aware of the immensity of the power that a child's trust gives one, and the pain and damage that is done when that trust is broken. I can assure members and anyone else who listens to this debate that I would do nothing in this vote, or in a future vote on section 28, to make the young people I work with, or my own children, more vulnerable. We should be aware that, often, young people who have to deal with inappropriate treatment by adults in authority over them are characterised as difficult, as having mental health problems and as being unmanageable, when their response is entirely logical. It is good to know at least that our justice system, through the children's panel system, recognises that sometimes our young people are made scapegoats, and that we have to look at the whole young person. We have to recognise the problems that information on the abuse of trust can create within the care system. Not only can it impact on those who are genuinely working in the best interests of young people, it can create a reluctance to bring a young person into the care system for fear of what may happen to them, even if, in an ideal world, that might be the most appropriate decision.  It is a huge cost to the individual, and to us all, if a young person who is already vulnerable and whose only experience of adults has been one of maltreatment, arrives somewhere safe, only to find that they are offered support by someone who will treat them equally badly. In some circumstances, they may not even be aware that the treatment that they are experiencing is wrong and that society disapproves of it. It is essential to support those who seek to work with young people and who wish to empower them. We have to put young people at the heart of our policy. We must recognise that our condemnation of those who breach trust is absolute, regardless of the age, gender, class, occupation or sexual orientation of the abuser. Whatever differences the abusers represent, what they have in common is that they are choosing to exercise their power—the power that society has vested in them—over vulnerable young people. They do it because they can. There is no hierarchy of disapproval in relation to the abuse that our young people experience. Our girls are as vulnerable as our boys; indeed, given the sexist comments that are the normal experience of many of our young people, they are often more vulnerable. We have to give our young people the power to be strong and to be safe. We have to teach them to speak up and, ultimately, we have to seek to ensure that those in power learn to listen.

Will Mr Gibson recognise the sterling work done by Glasgow City Council in the face of the Tories' hostility to the public rented sector in developing excellent initiatives in housing co-operatives, housing associations and tenant-management co-operatives? Many of those initiatives were developed in the area that Mr Gibson sought to represent and I currently represent.

rose—

On a point of order.

Is it appropriate for a member to doubt my motives when I raise political questions about an area that I represent? Mr Gibson may wish to speak to my husband, who in fact did not have a vote in his own house when he stood for selection. Any judgment I have made—

I understand the particular concerns of the ethnic minority community in Glasgow and elsewhere. What does Ms White think her party's policy of urging people to wait until it has won an election and negotiated independence will do for the people of Scotland? The reality is that unless we get rid of the debt problem in Glasgow and lever in more money, we will have a major problem there.

As a Glasgow MSP, I say that if we solve Glasgow's problems, we will solve a major problem for Scotland. It is about time that this Parliament took ownership of Glasgow's problems. Glasgow paid a heavy price on behalf of Scotland for generations, and if this Government does nothing else than address Glasgow's housing problems, that will be a major benefit for the whole of Scotland.

Will the minister join me in welcoming the young people who have come here this afternoon to speak to members and to ask us difficult questions about the education service that we provide? Does he recognise the importance of providing for a broad range of special needs and for, for example, bullying? Does he agree that the key to delivering the service will be to listen to young people, who have so much to say on such issues?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in today's debate. Mike Russell mentioned the anorak's interest in detail but, as a woman involved in  several fields, I am always conscious that the devil is in the detail—it is often the subtext that does one in. Debates such as this are important, because the organisational structure often reflects the opportunities for people to contribute. Perhaps I should declare an interest—Fay, who is four, and Colin, who is two. They are the pressures on me to seek assurances that Parliament will honour its family-friendly rhetoric. Members will be aware that the Scottish Parliament was launched with great aspirations—particularly those held by women. Women saw the Parliament as an opportunity to develop a new model of working, to bring Government closer to the aspirations of Scottish women and to get rid of the synthetic anger and adversarial indulgence that we see in Westminster, where our MPs are separated from their families all week and deprived of sleep. For some reason, we are led to believe that that leads to good legislation. We thought that the Scottish Parliament would offer the opportunity for more efficient working practices, with less ritual and more delivery of the goods. We also thought that it would provide a better opportunity for women to stand. Those who fought for the Scottish Parliament believed that it would commit itself to having representatives who lived in the real world. In the past, too many women who might have been interested in political life had to decide between standing or having a family. If our MSPs are not rooted in real life, they are unlikely to be tuned in to what our society needs. There is no better way of putting yourself and your self-importance in perspective as you prepare for a parliamentary meeting than having to persuade your son that his clown outfit for the Hallowe'en do is really very nice and should not be taken off as he comes down the stairs and having to persuade your daughter that she ought not to do that with the broomstick. I do not pretend that this job brings with it the stresses that many people face in a range of occupations for far less remuneration. However, in a world that is driving towards more flexible—not easier—working, it is ironic that our arrangements make it difficult to build flexibility into the care of our children. We argue that family friendliness should be not about doing less, but about allowing people to choose where and when they work. For many women, that means organising their lives so that they can get home but work later on. I want to underline our concerns about the recommendation that Parliament should, on a vote, be permitted to sit until 7 pm. I am disappointed that that recommendation is being made, although I understand why it is being made. Women are used to managing time imaginatively; I contend that this is the least imaginative option. I  urge members to ensure that the late sitting takes place only in extreme circumstances, when all other options have been considered. Perhaps we should consider sitting late but holding the vote the next morning—that would allow some flexibility. We must not do anything to hamper or prevent those MSPs with families from playing an active role in the work of the Parliament. We need an attitude that is more likely to enable us to be in tune with those outside the chamber and to listen to their concerns. We should remember that being family friendly is not about providing the means to arrange child care, but about allowing us the space to work and care for our children ourselves. That is a model for good working and a challenge to employers who drive towards presenteeism. Encouraging employees, particularly men, to spend long hours at work away from their families causes many problems. This is a real test for our new Parliament; we will see the result in four years' time, when the electorate sit in judgment. It will also be a test of our idea of family-friendly working. There are two questions. First, will those members who have families stand again? Secondly, will young people, particularly women who may wish to have children in the future, see being an MSP and having a family as a viable option? I hope that, when we come to put the standing orders into practice, our family-friendly rhetoric is matched by family-friendly action. In only the most difficult circumstances should we consider using a Wednesday night. At the heart of our procedures should be a desire to be flexible and considerate to all who wish to participate in the work of the Parliament.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I wonder whether Mr McGrigor might include women in his delightful picture of togetherness.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

This debate is serious as it concerns the broad issues of poverty among pensioners and the health and well-being of older people. I was disappointed that the motion in the name of John Swinney condemned the lack of action by the Scottish Executive and focused so specifically on an area in which the Parliament has no power. I was equally disappointed to see the response of Scottish National party members—particularly Alex Neil—to the report that came out today about the health of the people of Glasgow. On a day that we were shown a horrific picture of inequality in Glasgow, it is a disgrace that he should suggest that all the responsibility lies with the Labour councils of the past 70 years. To suggest that is to ignore the structural and economic problems that Glasgow has faced. I was brought up in a poor part of Glasgow. A Labour council and a Labour Government ensured that we got a good education. My generation and my mother's generation aspired to the council housing that the Labour councils delivered because of the problems of living in the private rented sector. Everyone recognises that the Labour council has protected Glasgow. The Parliament has to take ownership of Glasgow's problems and work with the local council and the people of Glasgow. Members of this Parliament should not take the  opportunity to make cheap political points, but it should not surprise us that the SNP has done that: it always picks the wrong targets and, consequently, finds the wrong solutions. The idea that constitutional change will deliver for the pensioners of this country is an absolute nonsense. I want to talk—

I have heard Ms Elder talking about Grecian 2000 already and I was not impressed. I want to talk about the cross-party group on older people, which I was privileged to attend recently. It was a valued initiative by organisations representing and campaigning on behalf of older people. An important point was made there about not separating off older people. Michael Hare Duke said that we are all aging and that perhaps we should welcome it, because if we were not, we would be dead. It is a significant point to make, that when we tackle issues that matter to older people, we benefit the broader community. Equally, if we tackle the economy and issues of social inclusion and talk about poverty, pensioners will benefit. Pensioners are concerned about issues to do with drugs, and I have to say to Tommy Sheridan that his party's policy to decriminalise heroin will hardly make them feel safer in their homes. Because older people rely on public services disproportionately, any commitment to delivering high-quality public services will impact on them. I would like to locate areas where the Parliament can have an impact. Our committees can have an impact. I cannot believe that Alex Neil said that we do not need committees and that we do not need to talk. We need to listen to people and work with them, and our committees are a key place in which to do that. On transport, we should be talking to the bus operators about what they are doing on sensitive areas of bus service, such as routes to hospitals, for example, in Glasgow. The operators have a responsibility in that area. The Health and Community Care Committee should be discussing the importance of supporting older people to stay in their own homes. We should be talking about the rights of carers and the importance of assessing the needs of carers in their own right. On crime, we need to acknowledge the impact of the fear of crime on the lives and well-being of many older people. We have to consider the opportunity to bring old and young people together to challenge the stereotypes that each group has about the other. Within pensioner groups, we need to recognise the diversity of needs. We are  debating equalities this afternoon. I hope that the minimum income guarantee will address the important inequality for pensioners and will give particular support to women, who, as we know, are among the poorest of pensioners. At a lobby that I attended last week, it was clear that pensioners are demanding that we address the problems that too many of them face. One woman there said to me that she got annoyed at those who said that this Government was doing nothing and that it was as bad as the last lot; she said that we must give it a chance. The Scottish Executive must recognise that we have been given an opportunity to tackle pensioner poverty and to address questions beyond income, such as agism and so on. We have to identify the issues that exclude people and limit their lives. It is an opportunity that we must take fearlessly, without closing off options or refusing to consider any available alternatives. We should be serious about monitoring progress, so that that particular woman's willingness to give us a chance will be rewarded with real change in her life and that of all older people.

I welcome the opportunity to speak, even if the previous speech was hardly in the spirit of co-operation. I am proud to be a Labour and Co-operative MSP. I declare an interest as a member of the Co-operative party. I recognise and applaud the tradition in my area of co-operative activity in the Co-operative party, and importantly in the Co-operative Women's Guild, and the co-operative initiatives in the broader community. The Scottish Co-operative and Mutual Forum reflects the diversity of the movement that we seek to celebrate today. There is a tendency to think that co-operative initiatives are the province of woolly-hatted do-gooders, that they are easy or soft options, and that they are not part of the hard debates on the economy and social inclusion. However, co-operation offers a significant contribution to those debates. The reality is that co-operative initiatives involve hard work, risk taking and high levels of trust, and when they work effectively, they are a standing reproach to those who would have us believe that there is no such thing as society, and that as individuals we must be appealed to only on the basest of motives—that of personal gain.  The Co-operative movement is not just a movement of the past that was intriguing in its time. It has something to say now and in the future. The Rochdale pioneers knew that, as did the visionaries closer to home in New Lanark. They understood the importance of social inclusion, the liberating influence of education and the power of decision making at local level. Those examples say something to those of us who might be defined as the political class. Vision, the ability to develop policy and to seek and find solutions to the world's problems are not the monopoly of those in elected positions, and we will stand or fall in Parliament by our ability to work with our communities to develop solutions. The Co-operative movement is of significant importance, and is often willing to take responsibility, whereas the private sector, simply looking for quick gain, will not take the risk. Co-operative initiatives can meet needs that the public sector is often slow to recognise. Co-operative child care initiatives are a good example of the public sector following on where co-operation has gone previously. The Co-operative movement also offers a variety of interesting options for the future, whether it is in finance, the housing sector or elsewhere. I hope that in the future, those models will be taken up. The most powerful thing about co-operation is that it speaks to the good in us all, and it allows us to be optimistic that we can manage our affairs together and liberate ourselves to work together for the commonweal.

I welcome the minister's statement and the priority that the Government has given to the issue of land reform. The issues of land ownership, access and the use and misuse of the power that lies with those who own our land are a touchstone of the politics of many us in the chamber. It is ironic that those who, in the case of field and blood sports, would like us to celebrate the countryside, should make it quite clear, when it comes to access, that they want us to celebrate it from afar. For that reason, I welcome the document's proposals on access. It is also important to address the Tories' attempts to collapse together the interests of landowners and the interests of rural communities, which are not necessarily the same thing. I trust that members will allow me to relate a bit of personal history. Jim Wallace made the point that Parliament had not seriously addressed the question of land reform for almost 75 years. In 1918, my great-uncle, William McPhail—a bard with, I believe, a particularly satirical turn of phrase and a crofter on the island of Tiree—went to jail, along with seven others, for the crime of planting the land for which they were negotiating the right to rent. The negotiation was being delayed by the farmer involved and by the proprietor, the Duke of Argyll. The dispute ended in court—on the one hand, because of the courage of those impoverished men in asserting their rights to feed themselves and their families and their determination to fight for the rights of their local community to sustain itself, and on the other, because of the obduracy of those who felt that they had the power to control that community because they owned the land. The only thing that those impoverished but courageous people had in common with those who sought to exploit them was their Scottishness. Opposite us is the Scottish National party, which believes that we should construct our entire constitutional existence on the basis of that Scottishness. The treatment of my great-uncle—and, over the years, many others like him—clarified for me as much as anything else why I am  a socialist and not a nationalist. It is crucial that we identify the real targets in tackling inequality and injustice. The experience of the clearance and exploitation of rural communities is not specific to Scotland, but it is particular to communities where ownership is concentrated in a few hands. Equally, the ability to ride roughshod over local community interests is not particular to foreign landowners. We must recognise the consequence of the concentration of power in the pattern of ownership in Scotland. I welcome the fact that the Government is seeking to shift the balance in favour of local communities that are committed to sustaining their own areas and determining their own priorities. Land reform is an on-going process. I wish to identify two areas to which the Executive might wish to turn its attention in the near future. One is Deaconsbank, which is in my constituency of Glasgow Pollok. Barratt built 639 houses in Deaconsbank between 1977 and 1982. After development, 27 acres of land were left undeveloped, the title to which, I understand, remains with Barratt. However, the maintenance of the land is both legally and literally a burden on the local residents. They must maintain the land, although the ownership and hence the right to develop or dispose of it remains with Barratt. There has been much talk in recent years of rights being matched with responsibilities. Unfortunately, because of Barratt's shabby behaviour and the archaic nature of land tenure in Scotland, Deaconsbank residents have responsibilities, but no rights. I hope that at some stage the minister will consider acting against unjust burdens such as those imposed in Deaconsbank and, doubtless, in many other communities in Scotland. I wish to mention another area, which was highlighted by Age Concern—retirement housing. It is important in terms of rights; the contractual terms in many deeds of conditions are unsatisfactory. I hope that the Executive can consider that area. I declare an interest as a member of the Co-operative party, because I wish to highlight an area of particular significance to the debate on land reform—the power of co-operation in communities. Rather than communities being handed a programme that is good for them, co-operation gives communities the means by which they can be empowered to take control over their own lives. We must recognise and seek to build into all areas of our social and economic lives an opportunity to co-operate, to develop community business and to celebrate the social forms of ownership.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is promoting joint working by local government, the national health service and Scottish Homes. (S1O-534)

I am sure that the minister is aware that there is a great deal of important joint working across the agencies at a local level to deliver a coherent service to the most vulnerable groups in a community through, for example, community care, primary health care and mental health care. Is the minister aware, however, that professionals and voluntary groups report that attempts to work in partnership can be hampered by the separation of budget cycles, accountability lines and priorities at a Scottish level? Through the minister, I ask the Scottish Executive to give high priority to the organisational change that is required at a Scottish level to ensure support for crucial joint working at a local level.

Does Phil Gallie recognise the particular role of women in the voluntary sector? Women in the voluntary sector welcome the emphasis that this Government places on child care. In the voluntary sector, one hears time and again about the importance of good quality child care in enabling people to participate in whatever way they choose.

I will  address some of the points that Mr Rumbles made. However, I ask him respectfully to consider what all the agencies say about the nature of domestic violence, and I put a proposition to him. If there were significant evidence of women's violence against men, the first place it would be seen is in the development of self-help organisations. That is what the Women's Aid organisations tell us about the experience of women. When women got themselves together and raised the issue on the political agenda, it was directly as a result of their experiences. I welcome this debate and the announcements that have been made today. I have time to address only a limited number of the issues that are involved. I am conscious of the work of women's organisations in developing policy, raising awareness and supporting women who experience domestic violence. It is testimony to those organisations—over many, sometimes hostile, years—that we are now at this stage. It is important that those organisations maintain a central role in the work at the next stage. We all know the significance of the debate that we are having. It is important to view domestic violence in the broader context of male violence against women, and to respect those women who are survivors of domestic abuse. They are not a peep show. We should look beyond the bruises to, very often, courageous women who, while carrying those bruises, are the first to be concerned about the safety of their children. Sometimes, in discussion of this issue, there develops a sad bemusement towards the women as if, as victims of crime, they are uniquely illogical. Why do they not leave? The reality is that women are often responding to their circumstances in the most logical way. Think of the strong messages that say that lone parents can damage the prospects of children. Remember the condemnation that follows if a woman, even if it is to save herself, flees and leaves her children behind. Consider the evidence of our own eyes and ears when we read of men who have attacked their ex-partners and their children after they have fled—the evidence that tells us that fleeing violence does not always make a woman safe. Children, too, suffer. They may be seen as difficult or as having mental health problems because they do not attend school or because they display distrust of adults. In fact, what more logical response can a child have to their dad hitting their mum than staying home from school to protect her, or than not trusting adults when their father has made the most grotesque breach of trust by terrorising them and their family in their own home? It is crucial that schools and health services recognise the essential role that they can play, not  in exacerbating children's problems, but in supporting children. We know that domestic violence knows no class or racial boundaries. It is therefore essential that there are local organisations that meet locally the needs of women in poverty who find it difficult to get out, of disabled women or of black and ethnic minority women. My final point relates directly to what Mike Rumbles said. We talk about support systems, of ways to protect women, of empowering women to take control, of getting women out to help children and of multi-agency work. All of those circle, and are designed to manage the fallout from, the central problem, which is violent men who think that they can be violent with impunity. If we are to change the situation, we need to recognise the gender-specific nature of such violence. It is essential to see the pattern. The problem is not dysfunctional families. It is not the unhappy conjunction of individual men and women who do not get on. These are not men who are some freak of nature. Male violence is too persistent and consistent for that. We know that attitudes to male violence remain a major concern and reflect what boys and girls learn about acceptable behaviour. Many men can make their partners and children refugees in their own country and yet still go to the pub and talk about football. They remain part of the normal world. They are not ostracised, which is a central problem in dealing with male violence. It is crucial that we support not only the central work of groups such as Women's Aid—women who suffer domestic violence cannot wait for the world's attitudes to change—but the work of groups such as the Zero Tolerance Trust. We must also identify what and who causes violence and how attitudes are perpetuated. If we do not acknowledge that domestic violence reflects the unequal power in our society, we will never get rid of it. We owe it to our children—boys and girls—to continue the process of changing our and their expectations of how things can and should be.

I come to this debate with some trepidation and anxiety. It is my view that there are no easy fixes in this debate—there are no easy answers. People who seem so certain on subjects such as this—subjects that are so complex—always worry me. I have been on a steep learning curve since becoming an MSP, and the issues of crime and community safety have been raised time and again by my constituents. They are the issues that are raised most consistently by victims of crime and—more often—by people who live in communities that experience disorder and harassment by young people. As the minister said, it is clear that crime is linked to poverty and deprivation; but it is also true that the victims of crime and community disorder are often the most vulnerable and poorest people in society. The challenge for us is to recognise the importance of joined-up action between and across communities and Government. I want to raise two important issues. The first is drugs. A report by the greater Glasgow drugs action team has shown that experimenting with illegal drugs is equally common in all communities, but that people who live in the most disadvantaged parts of greater Glasgow are more than 30 times more likely to be admitted to hospital in a drugs-misuse-related emergency than those who live in the most affluent areas. Everyone experiments, but the poor die. We must also recognise that youngsters from families in which there are serious addiction problems are experimenting with drugs. The problem is related to poverty and I welcome the role of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee in tackling it. The statistics are frightening, and represent tragic events for many families. I welcome the attack on drug dealers and the establishment of a drug enforcement agency. The report also surveyed people in Glasgow who inject drugs. They reported that they had—on average—committed 26 offences in the previous month in order to feed their habits. While we take on the dealers, we must also address the rest of the problem: we must recognise that addiction-driven criminal acts will stop only when addiction stops. The second issue that I want to raise is youth crime and disorder, which is consistently raised with me by elderly people. It ranges from low-level nuisance behaviour to under-age drinking, harassment and the targeting of older people. It can cause horrific stress and distress. To some young people, it is a sport and they do it because they have the power to do it. It is a form of bullying and it is the same kind of use of power that we see  in domestic violence. It is unacceptable. We must recognise that that kind of behaviour exists. It must be addressed. I spoke to a member of the children's panel for my area yesterday and she told me that referrals to the panel are increasingly serious. That makes me anxious. One of the strengths of the children's panel system is that it can intervene early. It can deal with and support youngsters who are beginning to get into troubling behaviour. If the referrals are serious, the youngsters must be much further along the road and it is unlikely that they can be helped. The panel member also reported that most cases are still about care and protection. There are questions of physical abuse, neglect and sexual abuse of young people. We should remember that the most dangerous place that many of our children can be is their own home. I welcome the overall strategy that the Government has presented. We must strike a balance between technological developments in CCTV and community safety initiatives and forums such as the one in my area. Communities often seek low-level, person-centred initiatives that can make a real difference to the lives of ordinary people. We must have confidence in the judicial system and we should talk to children's panels to examine how they can be supported in their positive work with young people. It is important to work with young people. They are often stigmatised—they are seen on a street corner and immediately regarded as the problem.

The Labour Government has recognised, as I do, that people are in positions where they must make hard decisions. Local councils have also recognised that. We know the difficulties that local councils have faced in the recent past. We also recognise that things are moving forward through initiatives being taken to support local government in recognition of the particular problems that Glasgow faced as a result of council reorganisation. Changes will be made. My experience of working with young people shows that they often cannot use facilities in communities because other young people prevent them from doing so. There is a kind of bullying that is complex and requires more than throwing  community workers at it, although they have an important role to play. We must talk to young people through the youth parliament and youth network organisations such as the one in Glasgow. We must talk to young people who care about their communities and about how they are presented—the young people whose agenda is to deal with and challenge the other young people in the communities who cause as many problems for young people as they do for the elderly. We must talk to young people not only about the problems they create or are perceived as creating, but about their potential and their agenda on what they think Scotland can do for them. That will ensure that our communities no longer suffer the blight that they now endure. Young people know about community safety as well as anyone else. It is essential to any strategy that we work with them and support them in initiatives that will make a difference to their future.

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Aitken agree that  there is lot of evidence to suggest a direct link between deprivation, unemployment and homelessness? It took the Tories 18 years to create the crisis in homelessness, and you have the audacity to stand there and say that it has taken us two years to address the problem. I am amazed that I can even find the words to condemn you for saying such a thing. I hope that you will support the measures that have been proposed and perhaps will make some positive suggestions about how they can be moved forward.

I agree that this is a serious debate, so will Linda Fabiani explain why the SNP has chosen to settle for glibness—by using the phrase toll tax, for example—which closes down the debate about the options in transport policy? We should all discuss the challenging problems of meeting the pressing needs of the individual, such as those of a mother, and the general needs of the community.

I welcome this debate on domestic violence. It is one which is too often left hidden and not allowed to come out into the open.  We spent some time this morning, quite rightly, debating issues of public safety in relation to people with diagnosed mental illnesses. Domestic violence, which, in the vast majority of cases, is a violence which men visit upon women, is carried out by sane men against the women whom they live with or have lived with, and they carry it out simply because they can.  The issue of male victims of domestic violence is the exception which proves the rule. In reality, most domestic violence emerges where we find a certain kind of behaviour acceptable, where men's and women's roles are defined in a certain way, and where it is acceptable for men to view women in that way.  We obviously need to address the misery, fear and violence that is the daily experience of far too many women. I agree with the comments that  have been made on funding and I say this: this Parliament, which has so many women, must reflect women's priorities, and I hope that the Scottish Executive will listen when we discuss funding. We cannot afford to have women who screw their courage to the sticking-place and who ask for help if that help is not there for them.  We need to examine a whole range of issues in some detail: I want to highlight one. There is a clear issue about the legislation in this country, some of which does a disservice to women and undermines those who are fleeing violence. There is a clear role for the Justice and Home Affairs Committee in scrutinising current legislation. Representatives from the Glasgow women's support project raised one example of that with me: the way in which the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 can be used by male abusers of women, because of questions of access, to create further difficulties for women fleeing violence.  I hope that the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, with women's organisations and other organisations supporting women who are fleeing violence, will deal with this and other matters that have such tragic consequences for women and their families.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to monitor the effectiveness of town and city centre closed-circuit television systems. (S1O-223)

Some of my most vulnerable constituents have told me that they feel like prisoners in their own homes. Does the minister share my fears, in the face of the immense problems that crime presents to us all, that there may be a temptation for us to become dazzled by the quick technological fix, when more low-key, personal strategies for crime prevention may be more effective?  Does the minister also agree that CCTV must be monitored effectively, openly and honestly in order that we can support it on the basis that it is effective rather than simply because it is fashionable?  Finally, does the minister-

For one who has never been described as a consensus politician, it is an interesting experience to welcome the consensus that is developing today. We are all on a learning curve and consensus represents my own learning curve, considering my political background.  I welcome the establishment of the food standards agency and I want to emphasis the important role that it will have in protecting our families. It is interesting that, because of the food scares, issues of food safety have become universal. Before the scares, questions of health and food were often seen as the province of those with the income and time to move beyond the normal run of food outlets. As the issues have come into the popular domain, we have a responsibility to ensure that they remain there. We all have a role to play in ensuring that we eat safely and healthily.  I welcome the decision not to fund the agency by an across-the-board levy on retail outlets. That would have had a significant impact on small outlets as they would have had to make a hugely disproportionate contribution. The debate around the issue has revealed the way in which the big retail companies have concentrated their businesses in a small number of premises, very often to the detriment of local communities.  It has been claimed that David McLetchie should get credit for that change. As I am usually reluctant to give the Tories credit for anything, I would like to make another claim and declare an interest. I am supported by the Co-operative party, which is the political wing of the Co-operative movement. The retail wing of the movement is absolutely committed to supporting and sustaining local communities and does that by supporting small shops and establishing outlets, often in remote areas and poor areas. That strategy would have meant that the Co-operative movement would have been heavily penalised by a decision to fund the agency by an across-the-board levy. The role of the Co-operative movement in ensuring that there is not an across-the-board levy should be recognised, as should the fact that the Government was willing to make that change.  On the broader question of food safety, I think we should recognise the drive towards uniformity in our shopping habits. That uniformity often excludes the poor, the elderly and those who do not own a car and makes those people more likely to suffer from poor standards of food safety. We should recognise the particular importance of supporting community and co-operative initiatives that relate to food and food safety. Those initiatives are able to address the issues and sustain new developments at a local level, something which will improve the health and safety of all communities in Scotland.  We should all welcome the importance of the food standards agency and look forward to the agency doing effective work on behalf of the people of Scotland.

Will Mr Raffan give way?

Self-interest dressed up in high moral tone is still self-interest. Members should be more honest about some of the things that they say in debates. Frankly, the comments made by John Young were offensive.  We have a new and complex system: we have both constituency members and list members. That system was introduced because we wanted to keep the connection between the local constituency and its representative in Parliament. In doing that, we recognised that there was a difference between list and constituency MSPs. We have come here in different ways and the Parliament must address how we manage those differences.  I have heard members bandy around words such as equality. Anyone who has tried to deal  with the question of equality will know that equality does not necessarily mean treating everybody the same; when we are talking about addressing poverty, it means doing entirely the opposite.  There is no doubt that MSPs are here as equals: we all earn the same wages. In a previous existence, I was a secondary school teacher and I earned the same as every other principal teacher who did that job. I did not feel that I was being treated unequally because the science department got a larger requisition than my department did. Its hardware needs were more expensive that those of my department and I recognised that the allowance system reflected the needs of individual departments. We must address the needs and responsibilities that the allowances in the Scottish Parliament have to meet.

The point is not that I am entitled to an allowance, but that I am entitled to an allowance of up to a certain amount. I would ensure that anyone who claims an allowance has to justify it.  We also have to recognise that there are difficulties. It is my responsibility to represent the people of Pollok-all the people of Pollok, not just the healthy majority who elected me.

I am not taking any interventions, so members may as well not bother bobbing up and down.  According to Mike Russell's argument, I represent the people of Pollok; Tommy Sheridan, who was beaten in Pollok, represents the whole of Glasgow; and Kenny Gibson, who was beaten in Pollok, represents the whole of Glasgow-presumably, they do not represent Pollok, where they were defeated.  Alternatively-still following Mike Russell's argument-Tommy Sheridan and Kenny Gibson represent the people who voted for their parties. However, the allowances should not be used to promote direct party interest. I would condemn anyone in any political party who attempted to use them in that way.  The other position that Mike Russell might be suggesting is that the people of Pollok are represented by eight MSPs: me and the seven members who represent the whole of Glasgow. Anyone can see that I will be the first port of call, the first person to whom people will come-I am not saying that I am the only person-and that there will be a clear difference between my responsibilities and those of the seven list members.

The allowance system should reflect and serve the democratic interests of the people of Scotland, not the interests of individual parties. I include my own party in that.

I have already said no. The charge that we are denying opposition-

Certainly-this is my last point. The charge that we are allowing neither opposition nor access would be justified if the list MSPs were not going to receive any allowances. There is a differential allowance in recognition of the differential work load. We need a monitoring system to check whether, in fact, there is a differential work load; if there is not, we must change the system. The people of Scotland need to be represented and they must not suffer because of debates about individual allowances.

Will  Mr Russell give way?

Is Mr Russell prepared to define new politics as something other than mere abuse? It should involve listening to what people have to say in context. To be honest, new politics is not about people simply agreeing with one's views. It is about taking seriously what everybody has to say. That does not mean that debate cannot be robust. Mr McAllion's contribution was certainly robust, but it was also fair and hard-hitting. It is rather disappointing, therefore, that Mr Russell has taken only one phrase from it. That is not new politics; that is old abuse.

It is for this body to decide how best to scrutinise ministers, when we meet and so on, but I would like to make a point about where the work is being done. I do not know what Dorothy-Grace Elder thinks she will be doing when she is not here. If I am not here, I fully intend to work on behalf of my constituents, the people whom I represent in Glasgow Pollok. With respect, it is old politics to think that sitting in this chamber talking to one another makes change. What will make change for Scotland is us working in our constituencies, representing the people there and, above all, listening to what they have to say about what we should be doing.  We must get away from the idea that to prove that we are working hard for our constituents, we must sit in this chamber. That is part of our role, and holding people to account for what they do is an important part of the democratic process. However, it is as important to ensure that the people of Scotland can participate actively in that democratic process through the people whom they chose to elect to this body.

Taing dhuibh airson cothrom a bhi bruidhinn. Tha mi ga chunntais mar urram a bhi an seo an diugh a seasamh airson muinntir Phollok.  Thank you for the opportunity to speak. I am proud to be here to represent the people of Pollok and, in supporting the nominations for junior ministers, I am proud to speak my first words in this new Parliament in the language of my parents and forebears. [Applause.]  If I may speak about rhetoric, SNP members should remember that, although they claim, as they did last night, that the SNP is Scotland's party, no one has a monopoly on being Scottish. We are all Scotland's parties and our job is to ensure that all Scotland's voices are heard.  I am sure that members who are native Gaelic speakers will have winced at my halting Gaelic. At one time, Gaelic marked people out as being different and, in many cases, Gaels did not use their own language. Now, fortunately, things are different. However, there are still many people in our communities who are marked out as different, who are visible, and who feel under threat. I am proud to be part of a Labour team that seeks to celebrate and embrace difference, but which will challenge the underlying and damaging inequalities than can emerge from those differences.  I am pleased to support the nominations of Frank McAveety and Jackie Baillie, who, with Wendy Alexander, will be responsible for leading the fight for social inclusion and justice. There are many causes of exclusion, whether of the carer looking after a dementia sufferer, the woman victim of male violence, the young black person suffering a racist attack, or the child whose life chances are already significantly determined by the time he or she goes to school. It is fitting that Scotland's first Administration in Scotland's first democratic Parliament should have social inclusion as a central aim.  A crucial area of inequality that must be addressed is the experience of women. I am proud of Labour's record on equal representation. It was done not by proportional representation nor by accident, but as the result of the determination of women in the Labour movement, and outside it, to ensure that, from the beginning, this Parliament would be different.  I welcome the fact that Labour's team for tackling social exclusion contains two strong women, giving practical meaning to all our aspirations for the women of Scotland. Our challenge will be not only to work for the women of Scotland, but to work with them, to bring about real change.  Perhaps people are wondering what the difference might be. I am the first woman ever to represent the people of Pollok-records go back to 1761-and that is a responsibility that I take seriously. I hope that we will now have the opportunity to create a politics that seeks practical outcomes, empowers those who need changes, and ends the world of gesture politics that is, regrettably, so beloved of many people in this chamber, who, soundly beaten in the election, want to use this Parliament to go on performing.  Wendy Alexander and her team seek not gesture but action. We should welcome a strategy for social inclusion that emphasises the crucial and critical role of communities in determining priorities for themselves. We welcome action on housing and action to tackle child poverty.

I have just stopped after twenty years spent working with young people and their families who faced more challenges in their everyday lives than we shall ever know. Our children's voices must be heard and their stories must inform and drive our priorities in power. They can tell us the cost of poverty. They can tell us what happens to their educational opportunities. Given what the Tories have done to create social disaffection during the past 20 years, I for one would have pause for thought to wonder whether my priorities are the same as those of the Tories on the question of tuition fees.  Those young people know the impact of poverty on their health and emotional well-being. We should be outraged at the affront that the statistics of poverty give to our idea of a new Scotland. I commend Labour's team to members, and I urge support for a team and a strategy that must address inequality and that will embrace the power of co-operation. I am supported by the Co-operative party and by the Co-operative movement. We have nothing to fear from co-operation. We must celebrate community and give power to communities in order that the Scottish Parliament can take on the responsibility of tackling the deep-rooted injustice that is faced by too many young Scots.