Will the member give way.

Will the member give way?

Much as I appreciate hearing the detail that is comprising the debate at this precise moment, I cannot help but think that the Opposition has to come up with an answer to the question that is being asked elsewhere in the United Kingdom: what are we going to do about the cost of living?

I have a very basic question, for the benefit of people who might not understand all the high-flown economics. How can we be experiencing growth without the debt getting bigger if we are borrowing more?

Is it true that the credit rating portrays what everybody else values a currency and economy at, and that the UK’s credit rating has not reached again the AAA rating that it used to have?

I have an interest to declare—I am the Parliament’s one qualified specialist PE teacher. I might have two sticks these days, but I would not even be going around on two sticks if I had not qualified in PE. Although I greatly appreciate the work that the minister has done in promoting the additional modules of PE for general teachers at training colleges, nothing will beat a PE specialist and no money should ever be saved by having the shortage of PE teachers that Liz Smith alluded to. We cannot expect to improve the quality of our PE without quality teaching and the in-depth knowledge that comes from specialist PE teachers. I pay tribute to the minister, who has been really good in her post. However, she talked about the quantity of PE teaching that we now have because there are statistics to say that more kids are doing two hours of quality PE. The phrase “quality PE” trips off the tongue, but I have not yet seen a definition of it. What about the quality of the teaching? Do we know whether that is improving? We cannot possibly judge that at the moment because we do not have an even playing field. What is the idea behind the strategy? Is it that we should be better at sport and, as a by-product, produce healthier people, or is it to have a healthier nation and to achieve that through sport? There is a difference, and the priority must be established.

Obviously, I am pleased to hear that. We have not yet identified a strategic way to develop sports that suit Scotland. The figures show that fewer young people are taking part in sport of their own volition, and that cannot all be explained by the PC-in-the-bedroom generation, because the same generation exists in Scandinavia and elsewhere. Although some other countries find it difficult to get young people to take part in active sport, countries that are more like us than we care to remind ourselves of, such as Iceland, Norway, Sweden and the Baltic countries, have become experts in the sports that suit their terrain and climate. We still try to be world beaters at sports that we can never be world beaters at, although every so often somebody good will pop up. We could have a greater number of people performing at a higher level if we chose the right sports. Why do we not concentrate on winter sports? We are world beaters at them. Why do we not choose sailing? Why not boxing? We are good at that, so we should sort out how we feel about it. Why do we not choose orienteering? We are made for sports like that, but we have not thought too much about it. We might get more people involved in those sports, but we have not tried. We have tried football, rugby and other commonly played field sports, but people do not hang on to them—only a minority of people continue playing them after they have left school. I ask the minister to take a wider look at sports. Absolutely fundamentally, I want the minister to look again at PE in schools. She has done a great deal on that and much has been said about it. It is now fashionable to believe in PE but, as Ken Macintosh asked, why is it an also-ran or tack-on subject in educating our children? Why do some people still look at me and think that I am daft because I am just a drillie? It is because there has been and is a terrible snobbery in Scottish education and in school classrooms. The PE teacher has been derided as the thick one. Members have asked why PE does not have the status that it should have—

I have said my piece. Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Does the member have an answer to the question about why there has been that drop in the percentage of young people who are taking part in sport?

Will the member give way?

I thank Mark McDonald for giving way. That is not the point that he thought I might make. The council is providing a top-class quality facility, and all the clubs—there are a lot of clubs in the Grampian area—will want to use it. My message to the council would be, “Don’t put the prices too high,” because the clubs cannot afford to take the water time.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member has given an excellent example of a sport that has far too much underfunding, but so much potential.

Will the minister take on an even more fundamental issue and look at the idea of incorporating specialist PE colleges into universities? That was the position when I trained, but I fear that there is now far too much classroom work in the approach adopted.

I congratulate the Government on producing a very workmanlike document, which I hope will start many of the debates that we should have in Scotland. I also gently say that Nicola Sturgeon should not dismiss what Malcolm Chisholm said, because a lot of us feel that this looks too easy. We know that it will be difficult, which is where we get to negotiations. When we talk about negotiations, should we not think of tapping into all the talent and experience in Scotland after the yes vote? There are people who have been front benchers and in Cabinets, and there are people who have done international negotiations—they are called Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling; I would leave out one or two others. I seriously urge the Government to think of the whole country and not just the Scottish National Party.

The paths of my family and Helen Eadie’s family crossed a long time ago, when Alex Eadie was a candidate in Ayr and my husband, Jim, was his election agent—that is a team, if members can imagine it. When Jim was elected to Westminster, he went to live with Helen, which is something that not everybody knows. He was there with a clutch of young members of Parliament, and she was the landlady. He says that, even then, her characteristics were kindness and consideration, which everybody has spoken about today. I am glad that people have spoken about the fact that she could do one. When she heard some of the things that I said about Europe and the European Free Trade Association, she did one. However, I appreciated her, because she was that rare animal—she was loyal to her party, yet she walked to the beat of her own drum, which is a difficult feat to pull off. Helen was a very admirable woman; she was a serious woman. A lot of people did not realise just how serious she was, but she was a mine of information on Europe, for example, because she took the research seriously and did not only read the first pages the way that most of us do. We will miss Helen in the Parliament; she was so obviously a good person. She sought nothing more than to pursue what she saw as righteousness and people getting a fair deal. In that, I admired her, because she was never knocked off that course. Her intention in politics was to do good; she succeeded.

Is the member concerned in any way that we should be concentrating on defence work for the Clyde when we know that the Ministry of Defence will cut back the size of the navy even more?

Let us get back to shipbuilding on the Clyde. Can the member explain why it should still be in the same perilous state that it was in 40 years ago, when I represented the constituency? It has been hanging on by its fingernails for 40 years. Does the member agree that it would be a good idea to try something else?

I hope that Stuart McMillan thinks that it strengthens his argument to recall that Jimmy Reid decided that independence was the way forward.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Ooh! Thank you, Presiding Officer. I cannot make too many points, but I will say that I am absolutely in solidarity with Duncan McNeil, because his ambitions are the same as mine were and still are. Chic Brodie made the same sort of point, which is that, at the end of the day, it is the bottom line that counts. There is not a Government in Europe just now that can afford to pay over the odds, and the United Kingdom Government is particularly strapped for cash. I therefore suggest that timing is all. A fortnight after the Scots vote for independence, it is just possible that there would be folk in England who might object if some warship orders for England were placed with a Scottish yard. That is a fortnight afterwards, but a couple of years afterwards who cares? The rule of thumb will be how much it will cost in Scotland compared with elsewhere. I talk about diversification with some bitterness because, when I was elected for Govan, it was in the same situation as it is just now, so I suggested that the yards could make liquid gas carriers, which was a market that was only just opening up. However, I have to be honest and say that the unions, led by Jim Airlie, laughed at me and told everybody that I was a silly lassie—I wisnae a silly lassie then and I’m no one now. There are still things that could be built on the Clyde, but Duncan McNeil knows better than anybody else that the upper Clyde is limited in the type of ships that can be built there. As for diversification, it has been tried: Kvaerner did it when it built the upper structures for oil rigs. Lots of things have happened on the Clyde.

It is a case of putting our minds to ensuring that things happen in a logical, planned fashion

Will the member give way?

I may have missed this—I apologise if that is the case—but does Labour have a strategy or policy on shipbuilding on the Clyde? Is its intention that the Clyde should deal only with military orders? If so, who will pay for those, given that the UK is just about bankrupt and cannot afford to pay for the ships that are already on the stocks?

I am doing Malcolm Chisholm a good turn. Because I respect him so much, I must ask him the following question. He used the phrase “once and for all” again. Does he believe that it is ever possible to settle any principled question once and for all?

The point intrigues me. The member claims that he has the best of both worlds. Does that mean by implication that the part of the British isles that left the British state has the worst of all worlds? Has Ireland got the worst of it?

The Deputy First Minister said that the bill is large and complex. That is fair enough—but who cares about that? What we care about is the bill’s central core, which is the opportunity for Scots to face and to answer the core question that runs through all our politics. The bill gives us a chance to choose a future of which the boundaries, aspirations and achievements of Scots will be determined by the Scots themselves, with no excuse with which to blame anybody else. Some Scots feel that the future is somehow a barter, and that if we stay a region of the United Kingdom, there will be a safety net—but safety nets can fail, too. If you fall into the safety net at the circus, you are not as big a draw as you are if you try without the safety net. I am for going without a safety net, because we have everything that we need to do that. Other Scots see Scotland not alone, but certainly alongside and the equal legally of any other country in the world. Independence is important for our self-image because we will change from regionalists and those who are always a wee bit behind the fashion and the times, to being leaders, as other small countries are. That applies not only to the normal small countries that we always cite; members should think also about Singapore and what it has achieved. We may not like how they did it, but members should think about what it did with the numbers and its positioning. There are lots of examples that we can draw from. I know that I will never regret voting yes. It will be my legacy to my grandchildren—there are 10 of them. We will be expecting them to pick up from where we leave off. We will have given them the opportunity to go for the highest standards of achievement and humanity—just the best. That is what they will aim for, if I vote yes, and that is why I will never regret voting yes. I wonder how the people whom we call unionists—of course, most of them are not unionist; they just happen to be on the opposite side of the chamber—feel about their legacy? We know what their legacy is: 17 more years of fuel prices pitched higher than inflation and heaven knows how many more years of austerity. It is a crippling of ambition and it is a squeezing down of what we in Scotland might aspire to. That is the legacy that we take with the union. If they do not want to accept that, let us hear what the alternatives are, because there have been precious few alternatives voiced in the debate so far. I ask those who are trying to be imaginative about what would happen post independence—the new relationships and partnerships that would be struck—to have a sense of context and timing. It will not all happen at once. Some things can happen the week after and others will take 10 years. They must be sensitive to that because first, they will lack credibility if they do not get it right and, secondly, they will frighten the horses—I mean, the opponents. People ask whether they should vote for independence or union with their hearts or their heads. Like all Scots, their hearts are in the right place, so their heads will probably dictate that they should not vote themselves into poverty, fuel poverty—which I have talked about—and minority. If people think about it, their heads—not their hearts, which know that they are Scottish and need nothing else to think about—will tell them that. If they think about their future interests and those of their families, they will vote with their heads; they will vote yes and vote for an independent Scotland.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You said that a good number of back benchers were interested in putting questions on and debating the position of the shipyards. I was elected to represent Govan 40 years ago today. The trouble then was the shortage of orders after the current ships were in the slips. The problem is therefore old. Many folk know about it, and we could have a constructive debate in the Parliament about where we will go in the future.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on Police Scotland’s reported decision to ask the City of Edinburgh Council to grant licences for saunas only on the condition that items of a sexual nature are not allowed on the premises. (S4O-02507)

I thank the minister for his reply, but I am a bit puzzled, as the Scottish Government promotes the safer sex message. It is an odd contradiction to ask saunas not to have any condoms in them. Where was that policy made? Is it an operational matter, or should it be overridden by the Government’s greater task of ensuring safer sex and lower levels of transmission of infectious diseases, which are on the rise? That is another reason why this instruction is so mysterious. While I am at it, I note that the saunas that were visited and inspected included gay saunas. Does the minister know why that was?

Can the member give me some information?

I am sure that the member will be able to help me with this. It is a laudable objective to have people reclaimed—to have new people walk out of the prison gates—but recidivism in Scotland, we are told, is extremely high. How does Scotland compare with other countries? Do other countries manage to renew the heart and soul and body when they send their prisoners out?

Will the member give way?

Let me ask a quickie. Does the member think that what crime prisoners have committed makes a difference to how they are received and are able to rejoin society?

Employers should also be encouraged to provide some of the training in prisons, because the cabinet secretary will have a hard job persuading folk during a time of recession that they should put their money where we are saying their mouths should be.

I greatly appreciate the amount of work that Elaine Murray has done and the statistical information that she has provided. Were the stats for the better times—the period before the recession—the same? Has she considered doing that comparison?

On the point that I made earlier, how do we shape up against other countries, and to what extent does poverty determine the outcome of rehabilitation?

Would it be possible to find out whether everyone who speaks agrees with going to a new set of verdicts—proven and not proven?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I ask the minister—urge him, even—to let Mr Rennie explain why not.

Will the minister give way?

Does Mr Swinney expect that, after the election, the incoming Westminster Government will cut a bit more?

I take everything that the member said about Slovakia and the Czech Republic, but has he checked on the position now?

I am very interested in and am trying to follow what Mr Brown is saying, so I ask this question most sincerely. Does the Opposition on the benches where he sits expect to see a different outturn from the economic measures that are taken on either side of the border, or does it expect events to bring forth the same ends?

Has work been done recently on the success of shared jobs? I have found that women are more likely to share jobs and are quite happy to do that, but I do not know whether that is included in the plans.

Does “bugs” include spiders?

Will the member give way?

I put it gently to Willie Rennie that he, too, is somewhat paradoxical. He talks about the improvement to the UK economy when we are borrowing at a rate of £3,200 per minute.

I am interested in what Richard Baker is saying and I am glad that he, and everyone else, is taking the subject seriously this afternoon. How could we fine tune the Scottish economy in the way that was described by Joan McAlpine and Alison Johnstone, when they talked about women’s employment and the creation of more women’s employment, if we do not have the fundamental lever of power that allows us to make our own choices?

The member will be too young to remember it, but the Scottish Development Agency was meant to provide the capital for such upcoming companies. Who is doing that now?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

We have talked a great deal about the powers that we have and the powers that we might or might not have, but is not it the case that we need the sheer dynamic that is created by people working and setting up wee businesses? That is why I referred to the old Scottish Development Agency, which I think had greater risk capital at its disposal than Scottish Enterprise has, and which encouraged people to get up and go and try something new.

I wonder whether Ruth Davidson is aware that there are fewer men under arms in the British army and other services now than there were at the start of the battle of Waterloo. In a recent news story about Syria, it was reported that the American fifth fleet had been moved into the Persian gulf and the sixth fleet had been moved up to the eastern Mediterranean, while the British had a submarine somewhere off Cyprus. Are we joking about this Great Britain defence?

On the matter of campaigning 40 years ago, I was there. A report then that found that one child in 10 was born to fail.

As every speech has shown, there are alternatives. So why independence? Because we’re worth it. [Laughter.] Of course independence will also make Scotland better off, though not perhaps by the 500 quid promised by The Scotsman. I think that we could get them down to 450, but that is another story. We will be more entrepreneurial, we will be bolder and we will be doing just as every other country that has become independent or regained its sovereignty has done. They have been able to mould their society and their economy in their own image. Communities change. It may well be that there was an argument at one point for the total community of the United Kingdom having one economy, but not now. There is too much of a difference, particularly between the south-east of England and the rest of us. There are practical arguments—that might make me an instrumentalist nationalist, in the words of Malcolm Chisholm; I hope that it does not hurt more—and we have to concentrate on those practical things. In a good speech that shows that he knows how many beans make five in education, Kenneth Macintosh pointed out all the things that we could do if only we stick with the United Kingdom, but we have stuck with it for a while and we have not got round to doing them all. That is not because we do not want to; maybe it is because the amount of money that we have to move around is in the thin column at the end of the accountant’s sheet of paper. We cannot move mountains if we do not have the fundamental tools to do that. We can move molehills, perhaps, but that is not going to satisfy any of us—I hope. I believe that our aspirations will rise if we go for independence, because our self-respect, our feeling of pride in ourselves and our boldness will grow bigger—just the same as everybody else’s do—and the opinions of people outside Scotland will reflect that. Independence will not make us a world power, but do we want to be a world power? I do not think that anybody wants us to be, but neither does it hold much attraction to stick with Britain and therefore fall into the category used by President Putin’s adviser, who described the country formerly known as Great Britain as an unimportant little offshore island that nobody bothers about. His assessment of the United Kingdom fair takes the sting out of the argument that we are better defended. Are we better defended with one submarine when the United States can put the fifth and sixth fleets into the same conflagration in the world? Are we better defended when we send boys and men out to Iraq and Afghanistan with the wrong boots and without proper armoured carriers? I do not think that we should boast too much about what we can do in defence now. The defence chiefs are saying that we cannot put an army into the field, so what is the argument in favour of being defended by Great Britain, as it was called? Things change, and it no longer holds water to chant that we have the best of both worlds. Just what is so good about this British state? My friend and colleague, the existentialist nationalist Christine Grahame—

No, you cannot. You are an existentialist. [Laughter.]

I apologise, Presiding Officer. She is making me laugh. I talked about the men without boots and so on, but what about the aircraft carriers without planes? How can we defend when we are spending all our money on aircraft carriers with no planes? What about the social wage? Is it the best in Europe? Is that something that we should aspire to? Is it the best that we can do with all the millions that are coming from the North Sea just now? No. Our pensions are not the worst in Europe, but they are among the worst, and some of them are shocking in what they produce. I will not go into the details as I do not have time, but everybody here is aware of how shocking the position is for a huge percentage of our old people at the end of their lives, given the pensions and accommodation that we give them. That brings me to housing. When I was the director of Shelter—a long time ago—we said that we were short of houses in Scotland, so if we were going to sell council houses, they had to be replaced. That might have worked. Councils would have had to replace them with the proceeds that they got from selling them. However, that was forbidden—from London. We wanted to do it in Scotland, but London did not want to do it, and Labour in London backed the Tories in London. That is a fact, and we still live with the results.

It is not fashionable to be a nationalist, as far as I am concerned. It has been a while since I worked out that the best way to look after people in Scotland as well as we can do is to do it for ourselves. I will vote in favour of the independence proposition that is before us, although there are lots and lots of things that I still have to argue out. I hope that the Government will make it plain that there will be choices about how we accomplish the same objectives in our independent Scotland. Neil Findlay and I might yet march shoulder to shoulder.

If the people are demanding information about independence—and I agree that they are—I think that they are also demanding information about the alternative, which is the union.

And I am not looking guilty.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. You will never let me forget that. I have a serious question for the Government. Will it undertake to give a commitment to patient autonomy? A very small number of people who suffer from degenerative conditions such as MS or Huntington’s can—even with the best palliative care—find their existence to be unacceptable. Autonomy would mean that they would have the right to ask for assistance to end their life because they have had enough.

Does the member imagine that there will be a propensity for one side rather than the other to seek to stretch the rules and perhaps get round them?

Regarding the general principle of spending limits having to be agreed and adhered to, on the assumption that somebody breaks the spending limit, what is the sanction against that person?

I was deeply engrossed in what Linda Fabiani was saying. What if we get a yes vote and somebody else has paid the money? I would not be for giving it up. [Laughter.]

I, too, congratulate Andrew Mylne and the drafting team. I have become quite close to them while my proposed bill has been going through, so I know the amount of dedication that exists in the team. Sometimes, we overlook it. There is a fair and clear bill before us. I cannot understand why Mrs Butler—[Interruption.]—why Ms Ferguson said that we should not have a change in the timing for proxy voting. Does it matter? I wonder why it matters.

I thank Ms Ferguson for her reply, but I still do not understand her reasoning, to be honest. I think that 16 and 17-year-olds who are living abroad with their parents should, of course, have the vote if their cousins who are living here and happen to be still at Redford barracks have a vote. That is not worth arguing over. People are worried about purdah. I am not much bothered about it because if the Governments want to say something, they will say it, in or out of purdah. Do we really think that folk only listen to what we say because we say it in here? I do not think so. It does not really matter all that much, so I suggest that the people who are handling the bill should not get too upset about it. I also say is that it is excellent that an attempt has been made to introduce a fair and equitable bill. We have heard, as usual, that a level playing field would be the order of the day. However, I asked about the sanction because if parties break the rules in a general election, candidates might be disqualified and parties might be fined, but if someone breaks the rules in a one-off referendum, what is to be done about it afterwards?

I thank the Deputy First Minister for taking the issue seriously because I am quite serious about it. I believe that there is a different temper entirely to a one-off referendum where everything that people have—heart, soul and body—is committed one way or the other, and they are not going to be bothered too much if someone breaks a rule that was man-made to try to ensure that the process runs smoothly. Do not imagine that we can control money; all sorts of money is fed into campaigns. If either side wants it, money can be fed in in kind, in all sorts of ways. I have been there and I have seen it happen. In the Europe referendum campaign in 1975, the people who wanted to get into Europe had 10 times the budget of the people who did not want to get into Europe; the establishment was for Europe, so that is where the money was and nobody bothered to question it. The same thing happened in the last referendum in Scotland. The establishment was not really on the side of a yes vote at all—even though it was the then Government’s policy—so all sorts of things were done to ensure that its side of the argument was boosted. Foreign contributions came in the value of what was said by foreign visitors, if they were distinguished enough or well-enough known here. Those comments were donations in kind. They were not counted in the campaign’s financial statements but—by God—they added to its value. We have to bear that in mind when we are talking about a referendum, rather than a general election. The last thing I will say is that the security services that protect the integrity of the British state will not stop doing what they do because of anything that is written in a bill, no matter how good the bill is. We are battling against that. The people in the better together campaign know that they have that going for them, but I hope that they eschew it. We are all Scots, and the security services do not exist to protect the Labour Party in Scotland, but to protect the British state in Scotland. I hope that we can all agree on that.

Will Lewis Macdonald give way?

Can Mr Macdonald explain why he thinks that people who believe heart and soul in a change, such as the nationalists do, will stop campaigning for that change? What is the difference between that and socialists in the Labour Party who are still campaigning for socialism?

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that that is more important than we might think? We will be keen—obviously—to know the result, but there will be a period of uncertainty following the vote, in which all sorts of things could happen, as the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth could undoubtedly recount. Having to wait too long can have international repercussions.

Will the court closures have a knock-on effect on the number of hours that police officers will be expected to attend court as potential witnesses or for any other reason? I imagine that that would not help their morale just now. Will he also say whether he has had any reports of morale being not what it should be in the old Lothian and Borders force area?

I was glad to hear the cabinet secretary give such a whole-hearted endorsement of the public ownership of water. Could we have a hint in the next draft of the budget as to how he feels about the ownership of the renewables industries that are now being developed? Will they also be in public ownership?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that the leader of the Opposition did not mean this, but she may have given an indication that the permanent secretary, Peter Housden, would present some sort of front or cover for the First Minister. I hope that she takes some opportunity to ensure that the Official Report does not give that impression.

I apologise for being late, Presiding Officer—I had other business outside the chamber. However, I am glad that I came in at this point. How much more difficulty is there for Gypsies from Scotland because of the large number of Roma people who are coming from the east and who do not seem to be popular in some areas?

We have talked about the difficulty, because they vary in size, of assessing the needs of Gypsy Traveller communities in order to deliver services to them. Has anyone approached Highland Council and asked how it deals with providing steady education to a population of children that varies from 64 to 97? Nigel Don referred to the tremendous difficulties for local authorities in that regard.

Will the member give way?

If I may presume on my friendship with Christine Grahame and hope that we will still be pals afterwards, I suggested some time ago that we should reconsider the idea of introducing a law against making too big a profit. Has the Justice Committee—or anyone else—considered that idea?

I first met the man when I was just a young cub reporter and I was doing an interview with him—I do not have the faintest idea what it was about, but I remember thinking, “There’s a good guy. Too bad there are strikes against him: he’s a Tory and he’s a Jambo.” [Laughter.] I later had reason to change my mind about him. Just before we came here, we were both at a yee-haw concert by Reba McEntire—he was as big a country fan as me. We started to talk about that and found that we had a great deal in common at that level. Although David was a wonderful debater—none better has graced this Parliament—he never let me in, and I had a slight girn about that. However, I am very grateful for something that he once told me. I do not know whether members will remember, but we had an unseemly row—I think that it was in the first Parliament—about whether we were worthy of our wages. Scottish Television had conducted an opinion poll and found that the Scots thought that we were not. Well, quelle surprise! I advised the Parliament to ignore all of that because rules had been laid down that we should stick to, or else we would not be able to ensure that other people would stick to the rules that we laid down. David came up to me after the debate and said, “I think you did the Parliament a good turn today.” The fact that he knew and recognised that and told me about it was worth a great deal to me. I will miss him and so will we all.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Six minutes! Thank you so much, Presiding Officer. Where will I start? First, let me put a few people right on a few things. Johann Lamont should remember that it was not because Labour got gubbed and had to find a way of coming back to some prominence and some usefulness in Scotland that we started with devolution. Some of us have wanted devolution and then transfer of power to Scotland for 40 years. Along the way, we have managed to join in and help with the UCS campaign, the housing campaigns and any number of other campaigns that I could mention. I have the battle scars from those campaigns too, because for me they are indivisible from the means that we are trying to find to best govern ourselves. We have to look at the totality. There must be an awful lot of members in the chamber with fairies living at the bottom of their garden if they thought that they could get through this year and completely separate the Government’s programme from the principle that we have to decide. That is why I would not have done it the way that Alex Salmond did it—I told him that a while ago, but we are where we are. The Government’s programme looks thin in places, but it shows potential in other places. Folk such as those on the front benches, who have come up with some pretty good ideas during today’s debate, could use that potential to ensure that those ideas get into the legislative programme. The Government should be magnanimous enough to say, “That’s a good idea.” I thought that the no campaign figured far too large in much of what has been said by members on the other side of the chamber. From what I have heard, some members just seem to parrot what Scotland could not do. They say that we need broad shoulders so that we can make the same mistakes as have been made by London—no, we could do that with shoulders like sauce bottles. James Kelly complained about civil servants working for the Scottish Government to produce ideas for the white paper. What does he say about half of Whitehall being tied up finding things for the other side? Before I come on to what I wanted to talk about, I want to say how much I agreed with the Tories on the issue of corroboration. I think that we need to hold on to the requirement for corroboration, which is one of the jewels of the Scottish system. Perhaps we should also consider whether, instead of “guilty” or “not guilty”, the verdict should be “proved” or “not proved”. That would also take care of the third verdict. My colleague Alison Johnstone, who talked about the lack of attention to physical activity in the Government’s programme, spoke the truth. She, too, could do a great deal, because she has loads of good ideas on how to get communities involved in promoting physical activity. I make no apologies for saying that the white paper will be the most important paper ever to come before this Parliament. Therefore, I think that we are entitled to look at it in a somewhat different light. For that reason, the Government must understand that, although white papers usually signal a Government’s intention as regards implementing its policies, this white paper must be better than that. The white paper will need to hold out the various options that the Scots might choose in several different policy areas. For example, the First Minister has said—I have often heard him say it—that we will be a monarchy, but I think, “Mebbes aye and mebbes no.” That is a decision that should be taken by the Scots individually. What sort of head of state do they want? Do they want a monarchy? Do they want the monarchy that they have got? Do they want a president? Do they want a senate? Do they want to choose someone from the senate? Do they want a head of state at all? Those are options—all of them legitimate—and I think that the white paper should encompass them. I have talked about the monarchy, so let me now talk about the difficult things. We will need to control our borders. We will need to determine who comes into and out of Scotland, and we should be quite blunt about that. We are very stupid if we say otherwise, because south of our border there is going to be a huge debate about how population is controlled. Any country has the right to say who comes to live within its boundaries, how many people should be able to come in any one year and so on. We can do that without being racist and without being exclusive. We should be honest about it, but everyone is beginning to duck out in case they are labelled extremist and racist. Those are a couple of the things that we might look at and consider how they should be presented in the white paper. The white paper should be not merely about the Government’s position. The Government can say which option it prefers or advises, but it should also say what the choices are. People have been asking for information—that is what folk on the other side of the chamber do not seem to realise. A look at any opinion poll shows that the majority of folk are saying, “I do not know enough about this.” Well, the way to find out about it is to look at the normal business of government and to hold that up against the options for change that are being suggested. The Labour Party says that it is suggesting options for change, too. Labour should not be a stick in the mud about it: let us see them and let us hear them. Labour could roll out a white paper as well. The Labour Party is supposed to want maximalist devolution—fine, let us see that in a paper. I am not in any way afraid of that, because I think that the Scots will realise that, if they vote no, on the day after that, the whole place will realise what a wound it has inflicted on the body of Scotland. They will not do that. We have come too far for us to stall or turn back. That is why I think that, at the end of the day, the Scots will vote yes. They will be full of doubts and complaints and there will be terrific jokes against ourselves, because that is us, but I think that we will vote to move on, because if we vote to stick in the same place, we will be a laughing stock. In the Parliament in London, they will say that we are all mouth and no kilts. Those of us who lived through the 1979 referendum can visualise that. That referendum had a much smaller goal, but people realised what they had done to themselves in the time immediately following it. It took us a wee while to lift up politics in Scotland—that did not happen until the UCS came along and that sort of heart came back into Scotland. We cannot afford to do that. Right now, extra revenue is available to any Scottish treasury and we should use that money productively. I do not care that people say that we could not possibly have enough money coming in to fund the things that we want. Who is kidding who? Why are they trying to hold on to us?

Oh yes—I was just noticing the time, Presiding Officer. I ask the Government to take on board what I have said about the breadth of the white paper.

I pick up where Patrick Harvie left off. If we are serious about this being an advanced legislature and our body of law being better than we have had, we must consider what improvements we would make—certainly from prisoners’ point of view—were we to resist banning prisoners from voting. This situation may be the result of a peculiar shyness on the part of members. Most members in here are quite bold—we are new and cutting edge—and yet, on this matter, such members automatically say, “Oh no, we couldn’t give prisoners the vote. The public wouldn’t like that.” I have not spoken to a huge number of people but I can say, hand on heart, that everyone I have spoken to about this agrees on the middle road, if you like. They do not want to think of axe murderers and people who have committed dreadful crimes being allowed to vote, because that is taking part in society in a privileged way, and such prisoners have forfeited that privilege. However, they think it too much to deprive people of the vote who are in prison for less time and for less serious crimes against society. Those prisoners should be encouraged to take part in society and to see the error of their ways. We will be falling down on the objectives that we have set ourselves if we do not consider this issue very seriously. Remember that we do not need to take all the decisions ourselves—we are asking for guidelines. I am prepared to trust the Scottish Law Commission to come up with guidelines that judges and the general public can live with.

Before Ms Goldie speaks, I would like to apologise to the Presiding Officer, Mr Kelly and the chamber—I forgot to turn off my phone.

Surely the ECHR position is not about the particular vote but about the principle of voting, which means that if we can vote in one way to elect a member, we can vote in another way.

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that recent actions by Police Scotland reflect a change in emphasis in local policing. (S4O-02288)

I noted the cabinet secretary’s replies to Richard Lyle on the importance of local licensing. I want an assurance from him, if that is possible, that emphasis will be placed on continuing what was considered to be a successful policy in managing prostitution in the Lothian and Borders and Grampian regions, in comparison with the relative failure of zero tolerance in Strathclyde.

I feel as though I have wandered into a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous. “I am Margo and I’ve got Parkinson’s.” Excuse me if I do not shake all over the place, because it just so happens that that is under control, so I should be able to comment on one or two things. I have never tried to make myself an example to people who have Parkinson’s, because everybody who has Parkinson’s has a different form of it. There is no use in saying to someone, “There’s so and so. Why aren’t you like them?”, because they are not like so and so, they cannot be, and why should they be? That is something that rather appeals to me—the independence of it. James Kelly would probably agree that a greater awareness is required among the general public, because there is unknown territory in regard to Parkinson’s. It is one of those things that people do not want to get, and they are not quite sure what they have got until they are diagnosed. I certainly was not at all sure what it was until I was diagnosed, and then I found out that it was not actually as bad as I had thought; I found out that I could just get on with my life. People have to make certain adaptations, but we have to do that anyway as we get a little older—not that I am meaning to get any older but, if I get older, I expect that I will have to adapt some things. More research is needed into the whole business of Parkinson’s. I know that there is some wonderful research being done, but I would like to see a bit more. It seems that we have waited a long time for breakthroughs in relation to the condition. The really important thing that James Kelly highlighted is a simple thing: the link between GPs, patients and specialist nurses. I regret to say that, in some areas, GPs have not kept up with developments, so I hope that they take that as me chiding them and immediately get to know all about Parkinson’s and about the specialist nurses—who are too few in number, from the point of view of a Parkinson’s sufferer. There are many competing claims for the priority choices that are made by health boards. I understand that, but that is where the people in the gallery come in. The campaigners are the ones who are solidly out in front calling for Parkinson’s to have higher priority than it has, or are highlighting something that makes changing the rules or the law urgent. I pay full tribute to the campaigners on the condition; they can expect to be doing even more in the future, because there will be even more competition for resources. I wish that I had longer, because I would tell members terrible sad things, but I do not. Thank you, Presiding Officer.

On the subject of care and carers, I would probably not get my tea tonight if I did not say what a wonderful carer I have at home. It is a serious point. The three nurses in Lothian are worked off their feet. They are very good nurses and there is a good communication system, but there will never be enough—that is the point that I was trying to make. I would like training in caring to be extended to the carers—people who will not become professional carers but who could receive some additional knowledge through that route.

Is it within protocol for the minister to tell us where Parkinson’s comes in the pecking order as regards the campaign for funds internally in the department?

I apologise for intervening again, Presiding Officer, but it might be an important point. One of the things that carers could do to help generally with the wellbeing of the person for whom they are caring is give simple massage. That is the sort of thing that could be taught to a carer in the home. It would cut back expenses and make life a lot more pleasant, and I would like it, please.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for bringing up such a minor matter, but is “mojo” an example of parliamentary language?

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will use the criminal justice system to establish whether people have been transported illegally through Scottish airports and discourage it from happening again. (S4O-02198)

I thank the Lord Advocate for his full reply. It is a better quality of reply than we have had on the issue up until now. However, as he is aware of the recent research, he will realise that allegations persist that such flights came through Scotland. I ask him to not dilly-dally and wait for someone to tell him that there should be an inquiry, because the evidence is there in front of his eyes and the will is there too, I imagine, from this Government, because the present minister said—in, I think, 2007—

—that it comes down to political will. Fundamentally, that is what is lacking from the Executive. The Government, as the Executive, must stand up for the values to which the people of Scotland adhere and maintain the laws that we have held dear for centuries. I appreciate that that is not in the Lord Advocate’s domain, but perhaps he could tell the minister that that is what we all believe.

Will the member give way?

Has the member given any thought to the fact that there are perhaps too many degrees on offer and that too many people feel that they have to go to university instead of enrolling on a more suitable course elsewhere?

Will the member take an intervention?

Has any study found whether immigrants and temporary immigrants to this country block as much development as do the adults who are overqualified for the work that we want young people to do?

This comment might be a bit simplistic but, given our aim to put 50 per cent of those leaving school into universities, are we not simply storing up trouble for ourselves if we do not work out a plan for what happens at the other end?

Will the member give way?

Are we better together?

I will be interested to hear Duncan McNeil’s answer to my question, because he was an active trade unionist. To what extent has the trade union movement acquiesced in the growth of underemployment and part-time employment to cover the fact that we have lost so much real employment?

I come to the debate as someone who does not know what she is going to be when she grows up. I hope that I will find out quite soon. We must not imagine that underemployment is a new thing that is attributable to either Mrs Thatcher or Tony Blair. I was first elected 40 years ago in Govan, and Govan was de-industrialising then. That was the big problem. Much of the problem was that people were underemployed or unemployed, although they were mainly underemployed at that stage. Then, 20 years ago, Ravenscraig shut, signalling the end of the Scottish steel industry. There was underemployment, unemployment and mismatched employment in Motherwell and Lanarkshire at that time. We have had this problem in Scotland for a very long time, since we lost the integration of much of our heavy industry. We used to have an integrated steel industry in which all the skills were needed and used, but when the steel industry was nationalised—what followed was called rationalisation—all the good jobs went south of the border. Research and development went south of the border, too. There was underemployment: people in Scotland were doing some work but could, and would, have been doing much more if we had still had an integrated industry in Scotland. Let us not kid ourselves that the current situation is anything new; it is just that we have managed to get by and so have not paid it the attention that we should have done. Now that it is having an effect on our society, our behaviour to each other and the quality of the services that we can afford to provide, we are looking at it much more seriously. Having said all that, I am with Duncan McNeil and completely understand where he is coming from. If a person has no job at all, they will take any job, including selling from catalogues on doorsteps. My mother did that when she was a nurse. She sold stuff round the doorsteps and it was a dreadful job. In those days, there were a lot more tenements than there are now, and she had to go up and down stairs with a big, heavy case. It was dreadful work and dreadful money at the end of the week. She was not sure how much money was going to come in, so how could she plan for anything? Lots of people lived like that. Having said that, I am still with Duncan McNeil. Any job is better than no job, because having no job eats into the soul. Duncan McNeil wants an end to the contracts that pay the workers who work in this building rubbish money. So do I, but if we manage to put two or three firms out of work we will put other people out of work and into unemployment. We have talked about complexity, but it is that simple. Unless we get it right, we will create more unemployment. What do Duncan McNeil and the others who have pinpointed the problems want John Swinney to do? What should he cut from his budget to ensure that those workers are not being paid rubbish wages and that we do not underpay people who provide services? That question must be answered, and everyone here knows it. Unfortunately, we have an event happening next year that is dividing us when we do not need to be divided on this issue. We all know that there are two solutions: either a socialist Britain or an independent Scotland.

Rhoda Grant referred to affordable childcare and affordable housing, but what we really mean by “affordable” is the cheapest we can get. How do we get round the fact that having affordable childcare for some people who want to work or train means that other folk have to work for poverty wages?

I wonder whether the member agrees that there might be a connection between the complexities and difficulties of underemployment, unemployment and poor-quality employment and the fact that the British economy is slipping down on every single measure of economic performance that I can think of.

I thank the cabinet secretary for giving way, particularly when he was in full flow. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s remark about stakeholders, because folk who have chronic pain know that they have it, but many doctors who treat them do not know what like it is or how to treat it. Patients learn how to cope with pain, and I suggest that some medical staff should do a course of instruction, too.

Is there an agreed standard for the severity of chronic pain among the health boards? Is it staged and so on? How do the health boards judge the requirement for clinical services?

He never told me.

I appreciate that the member wants to make headway, but I note that two or three members have already referred to going to Bath as if it were like going to Mars. If I need specialist treatment, I will go wherever it is provided. It is simply unrealistic to imagine that either Scotland or England can contain all the centres of excellence.

Presiding Officer, I hope that I did not affect your nerves by leaving the chamber just before my speech—I just went out for a couple of co-proxamol. I assure members that it was not the quality of the speeches; it was just that the tablets also suffered from their postcode origin. If I earlier gave the impression of demeaning in any way the medical services in Scotland, particularly here in Lothian, I did not mean to. I am sometimes in a lot of pain and I receive wonderful support. Too many doctors rely on too many drugs. I was once sent home from hospital with a bag of goodies that would have kept half a housing estate happy for a month or so. At the time, I thought that there was a carelessness in that approach. I was judged to be a trustworthy and sensible person—they should know better—so I was given the drugs to take home. I could have easily become addicted, and I realised how many other people must fall victim to such an addiction. If I had the time, I would pursue two or three of the issues that Stewart Stevenson raised because the quality and types of pain are all important. I ask the minister to bear it in mind that not all pain is the same. That means that there will be postcode lotteries because some folk will live nearer to a centre of excellence, which might also be their drop-in centre. Talking of drop-in centres, I commend to the minister the health flat arrangement that he and I once visited where local people provide complementary services, such as aromatherapy, massage and so on. Such services can be a great help to pain suffers because they do not suffer pain on their own, and it is often the case that a group of people suffering from the same symptoms can be helped together. All those alternatives—the full breadth of treatments—should be considered, as should travelling abroad to England, if people need to do so. As far as I am concerned, people from England are also welcome to come here if they need to do so. Some members talked about their own experience of chronic pain. Stewart Stevenson reminded us that chronic pain can be a near-death experience. One of the most awful things for someone is for their life to end in pain, suffering and distress. I will not commend my end-of-life assistance bill to members, but they will see where there is a crossover. Presiding Officer, I thank you for giving me this extra time at the end of the debate. I am now trying to get my co-proxamol, but I cannot find them. [Laughter.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I hope that you are feeling well. I wonder whether the First Minister has had a chance to look at the Official Report of the debate that we had on Tuesday. In that debate, people whom he has classified as offenders were split into two camps: those who had electronic tags and could vote in an election; and those who had received a custodial sentence for the same crime, more or less, and could not vote. Does he agree that that raises a matter of equity that we should consider?

I say with all due respect that the minister has set out an absolutist, fundamentalist position. I cannot see how the Government can move from it, so I wonder why we are bothering to debate it.

It takes one to know one.

Will the minister give way?

I was being sooky, Presiding Officer. Why was it felt that such a provision would be defeated in court?

Will Annabel Goldie give way?

Will Annabel Goldie give way?

When Gordon Brown introduced his ideas for the referendum at yesterday’s press conference, he said that Scots in Scotland should feel as responsible for the wellbeing of people south of the border as they do for people here. Should that not extend to the franchise? Should expats not have a say? I wondered about that when Helen Eadie said that they should have no franchise.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am older than him.

Given all the care that is being taken of that group of electors—that is what we have decided that they are—if they are equally able to take the sort of informed decision that we more adult electors will take, why should they be protected?

Woo! Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I am with Abraham Lincoln. He accepted that people are individuals and that some folk would get too close to the fire while others would have the sense not to. This afternoon, we have made a wee bit of a meal of the difficulty of holding a referendum. I am old enough to remember the 1979 referendum. I am old enough to have taken part in it. Do you know something? We did not get into much of a fankle over information. Right at the very start, the Government of the day—Mr Callaghan, not of my persuasion—produced an information leaflet that tried to inform people evenhandedly of the different questions that they would have to answer. I regret that this Government has not done the same thing. If it is looking for somebody to write it, I will do it. I am quite serious about that. I feel that we have been a bit serious this afternoon in how we are approaching the referendum. A lot of people are quite joyous at the chance of getting a referendum on Scottish independence—that is what we should try to get young people enthused about. They are no different from old people—some of them will, and some of them will not. I have 10 grandchildren—10 of them, believe it or not—and, come the referendum, I cannot guarantee 10 votes, because they will all do their own thing. Like anyone else, in any other age group, they will have different levels of interest. We should not get too hung up on making exceptions. Talking of exceptions, I think that we are going down a very dangerous road when we start to make exceptions of prisoners—the ones who might vote and the ones who might not. Then, we start deciding what is a slightly worse crime than, say, drink driving. Is it worse for someone to beat up their wife? That is the sort of judgment that a judge or a sheriff will make; we should not make judgments like that. If we take the Government’s point of view, people are either prisoners or they are not, and if they are, they should not vote. On the other hand, if we take the point of view of some on this side of the chamber, and judge prisoners by a different set of criteria, prisoners are people about to rejoin society. We have not, by any manner of means, worked that out to my satisfaction. I thank the Presiding Officer for the chance to say that.

We are into heavy territory. Is it true or not true that someone could be serving a custodial sentence while someone who might previously have been in jail could be outside with a leg tag? Both will have offended against society. Why should we judge the one who is in jail according to our administrative arrangements more harshly than the person who might have previously been in jail after being sentenced?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the recent Foreign Affairs Committee report on the consequences of Scottish independence. (S4F-01370)

I am surprised that the First Minister was surprised. I do not know what he expected from such a committee at such a time. It struck me that, far from having an interest in Scotland—which it was meant to have—the report ended up being fraught with anxiety about what would happen to the reduced status of the rest of the United Kingdom when Scotland becomes independent. It talked about the reduced post-independence position in relation to the United Nations Security Council, the G8 and the European Union. Does the First Minister agree that that should not influence us when we come to vote in the referendum? Our job is not to prop up an ailing power but to secure the future for our children.

I regret putting this myth to rest, but I really must do so in all conscience. Mrs Thatcher did not dream up the poll tax and foist it on Scotland. It was the Tory MPs of the time in Scotland who, following a disastrous rates revaluation, demanded that it be put in place. I can tell the member later how I know that from personal experience.

I appreciate the quotation, but I hope that the minister does not set his store entirely by that. He sounded very much like what Labour used to sound like when it said, “Oh, the Scottish Parliament is the Scottish solution to Scottish problems.” It is nothing of the kind. It is the opportunity to make us bigger and better and to think more adventurously and more creatively. That is what we have a Parliament for.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Surely as a scientist who understands the importance of proof the member cannot be suggesting that because he was a socialist Arthur Scargill was a healer and a consensus-maker. What she is talking about can happen on the left as well.

It is important to make this point. Much of what has been said about Mrs Thatcher’s legacy in housing is true. I was the director of Shelter when the policies were introduced. However, she did not realise that she was trapping some people, such as in East and South Ayrshire. People were trapped because they did not have houses that they could go to. Even if they managed to go to houses, there was no job there for them.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Arthur Scargill was the leader of the miners only because Mick McGahey, who would not have led the same strike, was diddled out of the leadership. Diddling went on on both sides.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I appreciate the gesture. I wonder whether I can put something straight on Ravenscraig. The reason why Ravenscraig was closed, as opposed to the other three steel plants that might have been closed, was that the European Union changed the steel quotas, so it was very nice and tidy to get rid of one steel plant, and Scotland’s was the steel plant without representation in Europe. I was told that by Irish politicians who, at the time, managed to hold on to their teensy-weensy Irish industry, because they were in Europe and we were not. Even then, the consequence of not being independent was showing through. It is wrong to pick up the housing issue simplistically. Although I was up to my neck, I could see why Mrs Thatcher wanted to do what she did. She wanted to make people feel more responsible, adventurous and so on. Had she allowed councils to use their receipts to rebuild what they needed to rebuild, we would all have been applauding her today. However, she was short-sighted, and she was like a mule when she could not see something herself. On the mining communities, the minute that Arthur Scargill was elected president of the NUM, it was “Ta-ta” to mining. He was a dreadful leader: he took the miners out on strike when the coal stocks were high and the summer was coming in. Had Mick McGahey not been diddled out of the presidency when Joe Gormley stayed on for a few more weeks, which meant that Mick was age barred, I am sure that there would not have been the strike that there was and that it would have been an entirely different story. There are a lot of myths about Mrs Thatcher. She certainly brought about a social revolution in which some people became more adventurous and creative; some people became obscenely rich. However, my objection to Mrs Thatcher is that she divided society between those who have and those who have not. The Labour Party has done very little to correct that.

I thank the minister for giving way—he is taking a great number of interventions. Perhaps he should be absolutely bare-faced and honest: we will widen access to education when we have fewer poorer people. Perhaps the ball should start not in the court of people who are looking for education but in the court of those who are looking for jobs.

Those are good questions, but does the member have any answers to them? It sounds to me as though they could be issues for debate.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Colin Beattie must have had some of the same experiences as a young person leaving school and looking for a future as I had. I went on to higher education because there was a grant, or bursary; I had enough money and my mother could do without a wage. I put it to the member that exactly the same considerations exist in similar households today.

The member says that the bill is basically good and has good intentions and that he has no criticism of certain aspects of it. We have heard about the aspects that he has criticisms of—I do not necessarily disagree with them—but what would the member say is good about the bill?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I take it that Mr Russell is giving way for age rather than for beauty. If the minister accepts that there are flaws in the bill and the Opposition says that the bill’s intention is good, will he undertake to take out the parts that most of the Opposition agrees should be taken out because they are details, which need to be taken out of the bill?

I ask the First Minister whether he could raise the level of the debate. This is about our country’s soul. It is about our children and our grandchildren’s standards and place in the world, and we are talking about candles in case someone cannot vote. Many friends of mine on the Labour side of the chamber have let me down and have let Scotland down this afternoon by the way in which they have approached the debate. This is a big question and it needs big people and big answers. Can we big it up, Presiding Officer? [Applause.]

Although I agree that no Parliament should lend a hand to that, does the First Minister agree that a great number of people whose loyalty was found to be too strong to the wrong source were severely tested, and that we should feel a wee bit sorry for them now because they know they were wrong?

Sanctions were opposed because children were being denied medical attention and so on.

On a point of order.

In fact, I want to give information. I lodged my motion because it is the 10th anniversary of the war in Iraq. That had nothing to do with cynicism, with the Government or with anything else.

I heartily endorse everything that Elaine Murray has said. Does she agree that my sentiments and the sentiments of Willie Rennie are based on an independent view of the motion, and not on the view that she alleges the Government has?

I am grateful for small mercies, Presiding Officer. Notwithstanding Drew Smith’s remarks, and without wishing to patronise in any way, I have to say that good friends of mine, some of whom are no longer in Parliament, regret that their loyalty to their party took over from their loyalty to a much greater ideal. It would be easier on them and the rest of us if they just admitted it now, because we owe that to the Iraqi people. We must make sure that such a war does not happen again. Although I do not have the unalloyed hope of the previous speaker, I hope that what she said might be more true and that we would start off from the higher premise of understanding international law and what is meant when we say that regime change should not be an excuse for war. The Labour Government of the day did not understand those things and the Bush Administration ignored them. That is why I relodged my motion, which asks that Tony Blair be arraigned as an international war criminal. I believe that he, and George Bush, fought an illegal war and many of those members on the other side of the chamber agree with me. This time, I ask them to take advantage of the cover offered by the amendments but not to fool themselves. The final remarks of Johann Lamont’s speech were the most telling. How do bigger and stronger nations help weaker, poorer nations? At what point does it become intrusive? It is worth talking about that because there is a third way, and the United Nations probably has to be at the pointy end of implementing it. We have to talk about it and do so honestly among ourselves. In that way, Johann Lamont added something to the debate but many of her other remarks, which impugned the motivation of Willie Rennie, myself and, had he spoken in the debate, Patrick Harvie in supporting the idea of revisiting the issue 10 years on, did her no good. I see that she is shaking her head in disagreement and I look forward to seeing it noted that I officially disagreed.

Will the minister give way?

I beg the Presiding Officer’s permission to sit, as it is not a very good day for me. I do not want to congratulate Neil Findlay; I want to thank him and give him a great big hug for getting the issue on the agenda and for getting so many people to give up their lunch time, which, after all, is not that much to give up. During the miners’ strike, I was a reporter and I saw a lot of families give up a great deal that they did not want, but were forced, to give up. I was supposed to be neutral because I was broadcasting but, as one Bob Young will testify, I helped to conduct the forum for the miners that gave out news about what was happening where and when. At that time, I saw a great deal of humanity in the mining community. I also saw a difference—Malcolm Chisholm will know what I mean—between the leadership of the miners on the two sides of the border, which perhaps gave rise to the difference in attitude that existed. As far as I could work out, south of the border there was a 50:50 social split, more or less. In Scotland, you had to move much further to the right before you came to the split. I think that that had a great deal to do with the leadership of the miners in Scotland. Mick McGahey knew what he was doing; frankly, I do not think that Arthur Scargill did—he took the miners into a strike that they could not win at a time of year when the stocks were high and summer was blazing. However, that is in the past now. Why has it remained in the past for so long? That is because we do not find out about Cabinet secrets and do not get to know about secrets such as what happened in such an important social and industrial event as the miners’ strike until about 20 years afterwards, when memories have faded just a bit and events can be tackled more objectively. That is why we are right to say that we should have an inquiry now. It is possible to get justice now without hurting people unintentionally. I will give an example of how people were hurt unintentionally. It might sound daft, but this happened; I hope that Jackie Aitchison does not mind me taking his name in vain. The police wanted to have a line to keep the miners back, so someone got a bit of chalk and drew a line on the road. Jackie Aitchison—for devilment, I think—stepped over it and back again, and he was lifted. That was stupid—it was futile to try to have a line that would be respected by the miners. There was a wee bit of a breakdown between the miners and the police in Scotland, but it was nothing like what took place in Yorkshire. We must be grateful for that and acknowledge that it was the case. However, that is not to say that there are not genuine grievances that should come out in an inquiry and should be explained to people. I am very pleased to support Neil Findlay’s motion.

Can I ask the cabinet secretary to strike out on a new road and remember that we are talking about patients, who get flu or who trip and fall over and therefore cannot keep appointments, and doctors, who get caught up in traffic accidents and so on? We are allowing ourselves to be driven by targets that are unattainable, and everyone is getting far too neurotic about it.

I apologise for arriving in the chamber only just now, Presiding Officer. I want to put on record my thanks to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, who yesterday gave an undertaking to do what he could to give credit unions a kick-start. As I think Linda Fabiani suggested, quite a bit of training and recruitment will be required. If the minister could add his tuppence-worth, that, too, would be welcome.

Those measures will be felt directly by families who are being badly hurt by the cuts we have already undergone and who will be hurt by the greater number of cuts that are to come. To avoid people having to take out payday loans, the cabinet secretary knows that I favour an expansion of the credit union system. Can he do anything to kick-start that?

Does the member trust any Treasury in London to see through the measures that he is suggesting?

I thank Rhoda Grant for taking an intervention. I will try to make it brief. I agree with every word that Rhoda Grant has said, but she must say where she would get the extra money to put into the colleges.

Will the member give way?

Does my colleague agree that it would be no bad thing to remind people that there is a history of attention to human rights, with reference to the Scottish weavers and the people who fought for good contracts in the isles and so on? Attention to human rights in Scotland is not new.

3. To ask the First Minister for what purpose the Scottish Government has recently contacted the foreign ministries of European Union member states. (S4F-01158)

I thank the First Minister for his reply, but let me probe him on the issue. In her letter, the Deputy First Minister says that his Government considers there to be “a case for reform of certain aspects of the EU” and that “we are supportive of the on-going process of institutional reform”. Does that support of institutional reform mean support for the creation, as the Commission has made quite clear, of a sovereign united states of Europe based on fiscal and political union?

I refer to what the cabinet secretary said about hospital bed provision in Edinburgh in particular. It was obvious that the Royal infirmary was too small. What plans are there to increase the number of beds in Lothian?

Further to Jenny Marra’s question, is that difference in the accounting arrangements because there is specific intelligence about trafficking into Scotland during the Commonwealth games, or is it because of a more general warning?

Will the member take an intervention?

No one can steal the credit from Glasgow for getting the games: it was Glasgow that went out and got them, backed by the rest of Scotland. That is how Glasgow should graciously accept the fact that it is leading the games—not only it is involved.

Is the member able to say what the local authority has done to try to make it known throughout the Commonwealth that it has a facility that could be used for training camps?

Is there a plan for the future use of the new facility that is being provided?

Blantyre in the member’s constituency is not the most salubrious or wealthy area, but the people who live there have a great interest in cycling. However, in two years’ time we will be two years further into a depression. Is the member concerned about ticket prices and accessibility because of the lack of cash?

I appreciate Jenny Marra’s sincerity on the issue, but I caution her about placing too much emphasis on a direct parallel between what happened in London and what is likely to happen in Glasgow. The intelligence flow is different in relation to those cities. I will say no more on that at the moment, because I do not want to crash into this debate about the Commonwealth games. I support James Kelly—I usually end up supporting him—because the minister should really tell us from where the £40 million has been magicked. I do not imagine that she had that much spare change to play with. I, along with Patricia Ferguson, James Kelly and other members, would welcome information on where that money came from. If Chief Constable Stephen House is to account to the Parliament for the money, will he account to a committee? How will that be accounted for? I want to ask about the Barry Buddon facility. This might sound as though I am picking up on some of the more nebulous points in the debate, but I am trying to head off trouble. Unless there is a clear explanation of why we are spending the amount that we are spending on the shooting facility, what its future will be and what future provision will be made for shooting in Scotland, the Scottish Government will come in for the sort of criticism in the press that it usually comes in for as regards ill-spent money.

I am grateful for that assurance and I will watch to see what the result is. Like Graeme Dey, I have memories of the Robert Maxwell games, but mine are about a lady following a gentleman into the gentlemen’s toilet. Some other people may remember that, too—there were no medals awarded on that occasion. I liked what Graeme Dey said about Angus’s get-up-and-go as regards outreach, which I think is terrific. It made me track back to something that Willie Coffey said earlier about Kilmarnock. I wonder whether the local authorities are being given any hints or any template for advertising their wares to Commonwealth countries regarding what facilities they have and so on. The countries that have been allocated to Graeme Dey’s constituency are very small, so I imagine that the people in Angus might want to do even more to try to get a bit more of the athletic prowess in the games to go there. I think that only about six people—well, not many more—will come from those three countries. However, it still has an excellent outreach programme. As for Hanzala Malik, are no volunteers coming from the subcontinent’s communities? That is just a straight question that I hope he will be able to answer. My last point is on orienteering. I, too, am sorry that we do not put money into it. Let us have a proper debate on it, and we will find out why it does not get money from sportscotland.

Is it me?

There was so much noise, Presiding Officer.

Why does the Deputy First Minister insist on pursuing a line of argument that conflates the policy on Europe of the party in government with the principle? There is great confusion outside the walls of this place about the two. Why will she not meet the Governments of the European Free Trade Association, because that would be time better spent?

I thank the cabinet secretary for giving way, given the shortness of time for his speech. Before he moves on to talk about staffing, I want to ask him about policy making. I have in front of me the strategy and supporting operational guidance for policing prostitution and sexual exploitation that was agreed in September last year. It recommends that there should be a devolved or localised way of managing the issue. Will that continue under the single police force?

Can Graeme Pearson tell me what the clear notion in the legislation is on who fires and who hires? We have had mad and bad in that position before.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would it be possible for us to talk among ourselves for two or three minutes while someone fetches some people to sit on the front benches of the two Opposition parties?

I will pick up where my colleague Patrick Harvie left off. When speaking to people who say that they are not sure about which way they will vote, I say, “Think what you will feel like on the day after the referendum if you vote no.” That usually makes them think and focuses their minds. What Patrick Harvie says is absolutely true. From the point of view of people on the other side of the border, we will have created all this fuss, then, after getting the chance, bottled it. We will be disparaged and despised in some quarters and we will turn in on ourselves. However, one or two things have occurred to me as I have been listening to the debate—and I thank all the folk who have brought it to this stage. I wonder whether members have considered whether the bill could be challenged under European law. Everyone said that it could not be challenged, but we might find that there are wrinkles in EU law, so I would like to know whether we are looking at that. I also want to know what the relationship between the bill and the constitution will be. As I recall, the SNP had a party policy for a written constitution. Various things have been promised by way of policy from the party in government—for example, that the monarchy would remain—so who knows whether the constitution would have to be determined after independence had been established? Could another option—devo max, perhaps—be introduced through an amendment? I am not at all sure. Others have said that it could not be, but I cannot see why it should not be. I am a bit concerned about campaign spending. Richard Baker talked about keeping an even field, but we cannot keep an even field in campaign spending for something like this. Everybody pitches in, as we saw the American Government was willing to do.

I have to inform the member that, in this case, size does not matter. [Laughter.] Will all campaign teams have access to television, regardless of their size? There might be only one in my campaign team—that is why I am asking. What happens if opinions change and we bottle it? How will we face up to the second-rate place that we will have become? Although we are not at that stage with the bill, everyone should remember that the purpose of the bill is to make every Scot feel better about himself or herself in Scotland.

Did the committee consider whether the section 30 order was compliant with European law?

Is it possible that the First Minister had in mind not the interests of BSkyB but the 500-odd people whose jobs depended on the contract?

In describing that success story, does Marco Biagi completely ignore the fact that The Herald and The Scotsman will be very difficult to find and read in five years’ time?

I am a former journalist, and most journalists with whom I worked were very much aware of the truth that had to be told in stories. The member asked why Gary Robertson described members as “locking horns” on the issue. It was because members of the Parliament had put out press releases with the sort of terminology that would induce him to use that phrase, rather than suggest that we were going to have a consensual debate.

I am aware of the fact that I have intervened a few times, so I will try to keep my speech under three minutes. On the First Minister’s bank account, I can see why someone would want to keep their bank account secret. There is nothing wrong with that, and I think that we are being far too prissy if we say that there is. In the past, lots of people have decided to call it quits rather than have more publicity about something that was already embarrassing to them. In this case, I do not see why the First Minister should be embarrassed, but I can quite understand that he might have felt that he wanted to keep some of his personal affairs private. A free press is essential for a democracy—we cannot get round that—so we must take account of what Mr Biagi said about the changing nature of the press and the fact that the rules that we devise to ensure that it stays free and responsible must reflect that. Kezia Dugdale was absolutely right: it’s the economics, stupid. That is what is driving the debate. As we heard from Mr Robertson, there are journalists who are sent out to do jobs that they find utterly distasteful and which they feel dreadful about—they do them because they know that they will lose their job if they do not—because their paper is under pressure, is not selling copies and is not making money. We should not forget that that is what is driving the change in standards, along with a culture that Hugh Henry referred to and which the leader of the Labour Party alluded to when she had the courage to say that there were a few people in prominent positions who did not appear to have the sort of morality in dealing with other people that the rest of us have. I have worked as an investigative journalist for Radio 4. I took over after Roger Cook, whom some members may remember. He made his name by sailing close to the wind and breaking the law; I did equally good programmes, but I did not break the law. I had some thought for my responsibility. There was many a time when I did not do anything about a story because I knew that children were involved who were utterly innocent. That position is also representative of the press, and I ask the Parliament to remember that when it determines what to do about a regulatory body. I am sure that we can self-regulate without statutory interference.

I have worked in most of those stations. I hope that the minister is aware that the assurances that she has been given about Scottish content means only a Scottish presenter; it does not actually mean that Scottish words will be spoken. The news content is usually trimmed to news bulletins on the hour, which means that there is a very small news staff. I think that she must do more in pressing for much more advantageous decisions by Ofcom as far as Scotland is concerned.

Will the member take an intervention?

I speak as a former broadcaster and one who worked with the BBC when there were proper crews on the ground to cover stories. Just now, there are not the crews in Scotland to cover stories to feed into the BBC News Channel or the main news bulletins. That is where we must start.

James Kelly is absolutely right about papers going online—it is happening already, very quickly. Just as broadsheet papers dumbed down a bit to meet the market, so online papers will dumb down to meet the twittery twits and so on.

I congratulate the Government on its vision, but what methods are used to ensure equity of standard with regard to places on college courses that do not offer either apprenticeships or full training but which are part-training in nature? Who controls the standard in that respect?

Mr Findlay’s question made me think of this. Will the budget be affected in any way if the worst happens in Clydeside and a shipyard is closed?

The cabinet secretary has given an impressive list, but I wonder whether there could be something that is a bit more imaginative—a huge St Andrew’s day prize where everybody would know what it stood for. She has mentioned many events that are dotted about the country. They are all good, but they do not hang together well.

I am not in the least biased, so here is an idea. At Christmas, we wear Christmas tree badges, brooches and so on. I am sure that we could get something for St Andrew’s day that everybody could wear—it would not be wrapped in a union jack, right enough. That would be something through which we could all celebrate our common identity.

Will the member give way?

On a point of historical accuracy, we have nothing to be proud of in Scotland when it comes to the slave trade.

Can Roderick Campbell say who won the football match?

I thank Dennis Canavan in absentia, because he ensured that we would celebrate St Andrew’s day in Scotland. He did it against the odds, so I am sure that he will be celebrating, probably with Irn Bru. Although I appreciate the range of activities—when we heard from Fiona McLeod about the book week, I was even more impressed—the idea of a big competition is still on. Somebody should think about running that to pull everything together. St Andrew’s day should be a celebration of Scottishness. We should just enjoy being ourselves for the day. If Annabel Goldie wants to be British, she can be, but she will be left out of the party because everybody else will want to be Scottish. I do not see why they should not be. We have nothing to apologise for. Every other day of the year, we can be as international as we like. We can share our patron saint with whoever we want to but, on that one day, let us be Scottish.

I do not find it repugnant. I find it awful sad that, because of the politics that we have in the Parliament just now, Annabel Goldie feels that she has to be British on the day for celebrating Scottishness. After that expression of togetherness, I wonder whether I might offer just a little bit of constructive criticism. We are in danger of becoming very divided. We are not having a civil war. We are having a civil referendum. We are in danger of dividing ourselves, and we can gain nothing from it. Unless we run a good referendum, Scots will be much less inclined to celebrate St Andrew’s day following the referendum. By a good referendum, I mean that people must feel that they own it—that it is theirs and not the province of any party. It must belong to the Scots—to each and every one of us—and none of us is any more important than the others in how we interpret it. However, the basis of that is information. Every other member will know that too, because people are saying to us, “But I don’t know where the information is. I don’t know the answer to this, that and the next thing. I want to know about defence, the currency and Europe.” We have time to provide that information in a neutral and balanced way, and not in a party-political way. There are, of course, choices to be made on all the big questions that we will put to Scots, and they will answer them in their own way, but they can do that only if the information is there. To be perfectly honest, I am really disappointed with the Government for not having the gumption to realise that that comes before all the party-political nonsense that will divide us, I think to no good effect. Taxi drivers in Edinburgh have told me that they want to be able to discuss what is happening with visitors who come into their cabs. Foreigners who come to Scotland just now know that something is happening and they want to know what it is. The taxi drivers have told me that they would like to be able to discuss it, but they need information with which to do that. I therefore suggest, as another idea that jumps off from St Andrew’s day, that we provide that information for people who want it, because all Scots can be ambassadors for Scotland. That would be much more likely to stimulate interest in and knowledge of the real Scotland. Although Margaret McDougall gave a very funny speech about one-legged haggises or something, there is a real, deep Scotland about which many of our fellow Scots know little. One thing that we could do is stimulate interest in that. We will not do it if, in some way, we apologise for being Scottish and say that it has to be diluted by saying that we are British. I can feel just as British as anybody else, believe it or not, because I have a great deal in common with all the other folk on this island, but I have a friend in Barbados—she is perhaps my best friend—and I feel something in common with her as well. I do not think that there is any great merit in saying, “I’m Scottish and British,” compared with saying, “I’m Scottish and I feel all sorts of other identities too.” Those identities might be from all over the world, with different causes. Maybe we should start to think outwardly properly, instead of stopping our internationalism at Dover, because that is a gey limited way to celebrate the fact that, as we say, we come from the country that Rabbie Burns described as offering a brotherhood of man throughout the world. I realise that we do not celebrate Burns until January—although I celebrate him every month, to be honest. However, if we can celebrate St Andrew, his influence in the world and his influence on us just as Scots, that will be much more satisfactory than somehow making it into a half-baked British apology. I appeal to Annabel Goldie, whom I know is as Scots as I am and is just tainted at the moment because we have the possible divisiveness of a referendum, to get up, have a good shoogle around and be as Scottish as I know she is. She does not have to apologise to anybody for it.

We should not allow the member’s analogy with the West Indies to be forgotten. Britain and the British isles that we will have after a successful yes vote in the referendum will be very much like the West Indies. We call the islands the West Indies, but the people there know the difference between Jamaicans, Barbadians, Antiguans and so on. Relationships in the British isles—as I am sure that they will still be called in furthest China—will be roughly the same as relationships in the West Indies, if we want them to be like that.

Does Stewart Stevenson feel any further away, distant and separate from his family members just because they are in different states from him? In my experience of having a daughter working in Ireland and a sister working in England, I was just as close to both of them.

I could not agree with the cabinet secretary more. It is wonderful that Jamie McGrigor made that suggestion, because we can call it a “McGrigor supper”—[Laughter.]

Will the member give way?

I am not going to apologise for anything. The member has just said that additional money is needed for teaching. I agree, but where will it come from?

I thought that I heard just a hint of the criticism that Edinburgh gets too much. I put it to the minister that he must always remember that Edinburgh is the hook that gets tourists into Scotland, and it therefore deserves the money that is spent on it.

With all due respect to the cabinet secretary, I think that the priorities are wrong. I do not think that too many folk will be put off doing business in Glasgow or Edinburgh because of a few minutes on the journey between the two. It might be more imaginative to try to get into the high-speed rail link going down the east coast and to get in bed with some of the English authorities that would also benefit from that.

That is it.

Just before the minister moves on, what did the gentleman whom he met who organised conferences—or who knew all about them—say were the priorities for getting conferences?

Although the bid fund is excellent and good use of it has already been made, an internal programme of explanation and information for the smaller people in rural areas is needed. I do not think that they know about it, so a wee programme is needed.

I speak as a proud grandmother, whose eldest grandson just this week started as an apprentice in the hotel industry. He is a graduate and he is never going to get a job in teaching, so he is in the next best thing.

In no way do I think that the Parliament should interfere with the running or management of the new police force, but I hope that we will have a chance to comment on the plans before they are put into effect, and I would like to know whether there are plans that would take care of a chief constable who—I will be delicate—does not quite work out.

Further to that point of order, I appreciate that I may sound like a gamekeeper turned poacher, but there are other ways in which members can elicit information, accurate or otherwise. I always like to see it in black and white, so perhaps, in the case quoted by Gavin Brown, a letter would be better than coming to the chamber. The Minister for Parliamentary Business (Joe FitzPatrick) rose—

I am glad to hear the last part of the First Minister’s answer, but I have my doubts, because the people who are working at ground level on the integration of health and social care services are under great stress. They are trying to do everything at once, and I imagine that such work might be an extra task too far, so I will be getting in touch with the health minister to get an assurance about how that work will be carried out, if that is all right with the First Minister.

I thank the minister for giving way, because she is well into her speech. I interrupt to ask about cocaine. According to a United Nations report, Scotland has the highest cocaine use in the world. We should therefore be considering cocaine as a special case just now, because there are different qualities coming on to the market, and it looks as though there will be a repeat performance of what happened when we had different qualities of heroin coming on to the market and people were overdosing.

I thank the member for giving way, given that his time is so tight. I caution him against assuming that everyone who takes drugs is poor, because a strand of people with a lot of money have now started taking drugs.

Is it possible to have a national dispensing policy when a small chemist in the outer isles might dispense treatment to only a few but a bigger chemist elsewhere has much more business displacement?

Will Graeme Pearson give way?

In relation to the statistics, there may well have been confusion in some people’s minds because of the confusion in England about when it is and is not legal to take cannabis, for example.

I congratulate the Government on the road to recovery, but I think that it is work in progress, because it still carries the faint echo of Nancy Reagan’s just say no approach, which has bedevilled the drugs policies that we have had for the past 40 years. I was the chairman of the Scottish Drugs Forum in the late 1980s and, when I saw the number of drug-related deaths that there were in Scotland last year, I honestly questioned how much of an advance we have made. I have come to think that we have to learn to live with drugs. As Duncan McNeil said, some folk will continue to take drugs no matter what we do. We have to accept that there will never be a 100 per cent acceptance of any programme that we put in front of people. I do not think that the pharmacists who are dispensing methadone should be demonised in the way that they have been by some people. Jenny Marra is not here to hear this, but we must remember that there is a good reason why a small pharmacist would not spend as great a proportion of his time on dispensing methadone as a larger pharmacist would, even if he had the personal relationships with his customers that John Mason spoke of. Dealing with people on a methadone programme can take up a lot of the pharmacies’ time. That displaces business, so we have to compensate those pharmacies in some way. It is perfectly reasonable that there should be different payments. That is a personal opinion. Another one is coming up. As well as learning to live with drugs, we should do everything that we can to bring all our pressure to bear on London. We should do that after we have—as Richard Simpson and I suggested way back in the first session of Parliament—run our own study to discover what we need to discover about drug use in Scotland. We need to know who uses drugs, when they use drugs, why they use drugs, with whom they take drugs and why, for example, most people who start taking cannabis before they are 16 or 17 stop by the time they are around 32. Of course, we know the answer to that last question: it is because they can afford to get a good whisky then. We should admit that we could do a great deal about the classification of drugs, which is now far too old-fashioned. Should cannabis still be classified? I doubt it. Heroin should go through a medical route—I am sure of that. We can start to put pressure on London after we have got the information that comes from evidence.

This is when the tone of the debate probably gets lower. Is the minister aware of the chat in any surgery that he cares to go into, where people will be saying to each other, “Are you in for your jag?” “No—I got the flu because I got the jag.” There is a commonly held belief that people have to endure a bout of flu if they get the jag.

You’re no a guinea pig.

Do the minister and her colleagues feel the need to review the use of drugs in Scotland in a wider sense, rather than pick on particular initiatives as they pop up?

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will discuss with the further education sector the feasibility of establishing short courses on the setting up and management of community businesses and credit unions. (S4O-01422)

I thank the minister for her reply, most of which pleased me mightily. However, I am not absolutely sure whether I will be able to tell people that they will have local access to courses. After all, the important point is to encourage people to learn in order to enable them to come back and set up organisations in their own communities. Is provision likely to be local and to be spread right across the colleges?

I think that what Hugh Henry has just described is a culture change, not merely a behavioural change. If I am right that it is cultural, where does it come from and what do we do about it, because we do not want that to become embedded in our culture?

I risk boring everybody’s pants off at this time of night, but the question that has been raised is fascinating. I have my pet theories about it, and I wonder whether Nigel Don shares them. If there has been a cultural change, influences must have come from somewhere. Where did they come from and what were they? I think that they were transatlantic.

Will the member give way?

I thank the minister for giving way near the end of his speech. I was waiting for what I thought would be the crescendo. What is the Government going to do about the potholes that are left after the bad weather? They just get worse here.

Will the member give way?

I agree with everything that the member has said and take issue with none of it; the only thing that worries me is that we are not talking about the money yet. It is the money that prevents the local authorities from putting into effect the plans that the member is talking about. Everybody knows how to do it, but what do we do it with?

I appreciate the Deputy First Minister’s good intentions, but as an old lag from the first referendum on a proposed Scottish Assembly, I tell her that there is no such thing as an even playing field. For example, she said that the campaign will run from now on. When do we start putting the monetary restrictions on? When will the broadcasting restrictions go on? There are two styles of broadcasting: one is knowledgeable and aimed at Scottish viewers; and the other gives the view from the United Kingdom and beyond. I suggest to the Deputy First Minister that it is not all downhill from here. She should tell us now when the monetary restrictions will be put on the campaigns.

Does the member think that there might be a balancing act performed by television in court, given the uncensored information that can come out of court through the new media now?

Does the member agree that there is a potential hazard in the case of someone accused of behaving inappropriately towards children who is filmed in court, but is then released because there is no case to answer and goes back to their community?

I apologise for my question looping back a bit, but I wanted to get in before the member progresses his argument much further. Is there the possibility of having an intervention on the part of an accused who feels that media publicity has made his or her trial impossible?

That is an intriguing point. Obviously, the member was not in favour of witnesses blogging afterwards and giving a highly partisan account, but does not every human rights law that we have allow us to be wrong and to talk about it in public?

I have one query. The member said that we cannot expect everyone who uses the social media to be as aware of the law as others. I thought that ignorance of the law is no excuse and that, therefore, we might expect everybody who comments on legal matters to have a knowledge of the law that they are using.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I would be most grateful if you would look at the exchanges at the beginning of this item of business and compare them with the stated aim of this part of the working day, which is supposed to be for questioning of the Executive by back benchers. So much time is being taken up by ritualistic abuse from the front benches that there is no chance to get back-bench questions in. You did your best today, and we went five minutes over time. This is no criticism of the chair. It is a criticism, though, of how we are allowing this item to stray far too far from the original intention.

I think that it was a mistake right enough, but I think that I am the only one here old enough to have a bus pass. Members: No. The cabinet secretary gave the example of her constituent’s elderly sister in Inverness. My sister will kill me for saying that she is elderly but, although I believe utterly in the principle of universality, I would not mind having a certain number of passes per year that I could use to go and see my sister. The cabinet secretary was asking for ideas. She could tinker with the bus pass without giving up the principle.

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way—I know that she is under time pressure. I think that at least two of us on this side of the chamber agree with her absolutely in principle. We have to accept that we are making the best of a bad job. She said that we have been promised that the situation will continue for about 20 years. Does she now see why people want to vote yes in the referendum?

I agree that we should talk about universality as opposed to targeting if we are talking about principles, but if there is an urgency, we must look to see how we can cut our coat according to our cloth. There should not be any disagreements in the chamber over that, but having to choose between elderly people in care and children who need looked after is an odious choice. That is one of the reasons why I will look at getting universality as soon as possible. Incidentally, I will also look at putting a charge on some services that can be recouped through income tax.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

Are there international comparisons on women or girls who go into science-based occupations?

Ken Macintosh can come to my house any time.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Maureen Watt finished on that note, because that is where I want to start. This is where we get the start of cultural segregation in employment. We just have to accept that some men are bigger and stronger. Incidentally, Ken Macintosh can come to my house any time, if he is willing to do that. There is a reason why a lot of employment is physically segregated. Nature dictated that women could not do some things that men can do, and vice versa. Has any other woman here been on an oil rig? I have, and there is no way that I would go back; there is also no way that, if I could choose, I would put sons or daughters out on an oil rig. It is a terrible existence. The workers deserve every penny that they get. One of the reasons why the statistics on average wages are skewed is that the types of jobs that are being done by men and by women cannot be compared. I was unable to intervene, but Malcolm Chisholm gave us job statistics that were completely skewed, because we cannot compare apples and oranges. The point is that women are doing lower-paid and less-valued work, which is why they are getting less money. We cannot use statistics; we must use our personal experience, which tells us that girls are still not encouraged to do all that they can do. However, there are some things that they should never be asked to do, and we have to accept that. We have tossed around the idea of the amount of female unemployment that has been caused by local government paying folk off. Is that what local government is for—creating employment for women? That sounds to me like a something-for-nothing society.

Rather than beat ourselves up over stereotypes, should we not just admit that there is a cultural bias across northern Europe towards a certain sort of family structure and therefore a certain sort of employment outside the family structure? That is what we are trying to change, but we should not beat ourselves up about it.

Hear, hear.

I apologise, Presiding Officer, for not having been in the chamber for the opening speeches. As Jim Hume is as well versed as anyone in the chamber in the practical application of the CAP, will he say whether his judgment is that, in the years that the cabinet secretary has been going to Brussels he has enhanced the Government’s ability to speak for and gain results for Scotland, or whether it is much of a muchness?

Am I correct in thinking that the member is developing a thesis that runs parallel to something that we discussed this morning: the limitations of variability under the powers that we presently have? How much can what he has just described be variable inside the constraints that have been laid down because we are not a nation state?

Will the member say why?

Hear, hear.

I regret saying this to the member, Presiding Officer, but I cannot think of one occasion when a suggestion such as the one that she has just made, on a different treatment for Scotland in relation to what we are getting compared with other parts of the United Kingdom, has resulted in the other parts of the United Kingdom, led by England, coming down in Scotland’s favour. It does not work like that.

My question is from one city slicker to another. I think that we are both interested in the wide sweep of strategy and policy. Given that France, which has always been the driver of the European CAP, has great problems, does the member hold out much hope that we will see a fundamental transfer of resources from France to other parts of the EU?

I thank the minister for giving way. Before he goes on to develop his thesis, can he tell us at this stage whether he is hopeful that there will be a proper renegotiation of CAP and the modernisation of it that we have looked for before, or does he think that it might slip back a bit, as usual? If it does slip back, will he consider the European Free Trade Association?

I endorse what Dr Simpson has just said. I suggest to the health secretary that a prior step that could be taken to ensure the comfort and safety of such people in old people’s homes is the training and registration of people who will work with them.

In seeking to avoid a postcode lottery and to ensure a much more level playing field of policy among the health boards, has the cabinet secretary considered that we may have too many health boards in Scotland and that we could do with fewer?

This might be a completely ridiculous question, but I want an answer to it. Given that in Scots law different kinds of cases require different standards of proof, is there any reason why the crime—or an accusation—of rape should not be in a category of its own and not need corroborative evidence while everything else remains?

On the point about no one size fitting all, I am intrigued by why we are going for an end to corroborative evidence. Is it because we think that there will be a purer justice at the end of it? Is it to save money? Or is it more convenient in pursuing a case?

I apologise for not having read the same resources that the member has, but did the professor say what would constitute a sufficiency of evidence? Is there any way to define that?

I thank the cabinet secretary for prior sight of the statement and his billet-doux of yesterday. I will be at him later, though, to suggest some spending for very good community sports projects. I want to ask about the inflation rate in the NHS, which has been consistently two to three times more than that in the retail prices index and the consumer prices index, thus eating deep into NHS cash. Is it not time that the Government told private finance initiative groups that we can no longer afford to keep paying them the extortionate rates that they are extracting from the cabinet secretary’s budget. I suggest calling them all in and telling them—especially the banks among them—that we are all in this together and that they will have their payments reduced, as workers and benefit claimants are having their incomes reduced.

For the member’s information, I think that there are already volunteers available to take people through walking football. They are called Rangers.

Does the member agree that it would be a good idea to have some sort of national training scheme for officials, which clubs that do not have a lot of money could buy into?

I, too, regret that time is tight. However, thank you for the two minutes, Presiding Officer. I have brought with me a great gust of information from a recent seminar on this very topic at the cross-party group on sport. Obviously, I will share it with the convener of the Health and Sport Committee. The business of a tennis academy surfaced this afternoon. Instead of taking a decision on that right away, perhaps we could consider a broader academy—a racquets academy, because Scotland does well on racquet sports. People have had to leave Scotland to find badminton facilities. The world squash champion went to England and changed his nationality so that he could play. There is a good argument for looking at that. I would be careful about assuming that sport can be stimulated simply by the provision of facilities. The minister will know about Lochee. Because the right person was not there at the right time to be enthusiastic and to start building, they ended up with this thing like the Atlantis leisure centre in Oban. Twenty years ago, a group of people said that they would take over the swimming pool, and they now have the most fantastic set-up. That is why it is important that the issue of volunteers is looked at and that volunteers are given training to build confidence and knowledge. Many of them need that training before they can even begin to think about doing anything to help in their communities. There is a model that the minister might want to look at. The Robertson Trust, to which Jenny Marra referred earlier, is a successful trust that goes into small community development and support for sport. Lastly, I commend the speeches by Alison Johnstone and Mark McDonald as being chock-full of common sense. I hope that the minister and the committee convener read all of them.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I would like to get this right. Does the Government allege that it is spending £800 million or so more on the health service than was spent on the health service in the last Labour budget? By how much does Labour allege that the SNP has reduced the spending? I do not know that yet, so I cannot make up my mind about who is crying the crocodile tears.

Rather than going into the records, because we will never agree on that, could we try to find agreement on why there should be a shortfall on the wards? I spent three months in an NHS hospital this year. I know what the shortfalls are and I will tell the member if he asks me.

I have the greatest respect for Kevin Stewart and he has fairly boned up on his figures, but the reality for me was being in hospital during a night shift when there should have been four nurses under a sister but, instead, there were two nurses, one needing a hip replacement and the other needing a knee replacement. I was better able to lift the patients than they were. That was the reality.

Is the member implying that the fuel poverty that families in Scotland are experiencing is not in any way the fault of the energy supply companies?

I have forgotten what the Schleswig-Holstein question is.

Let me cut to the chase—does Annabelle Ewing think that community councils should have bigger budgets?

Anne McTaggart said that those projects will succeed only if the Government is willing to put money in. Is it not true that the projects will not succeed unless they correctly identify the right local people, in the right place, at the right time, who have enough confidence in themselves to go ahead?

Where did the people at Inchgarth come from? Were they already there on the ground? Did they have previous experience? How was the team put together?

I was impressed to hear that in Paisley they are playing tennis these days. It used to be tig with aixes, as they said. However, I would like to know who looks after the tennis facilities. Is there a council watchman? Is it the people themselves who look after them?

That amount of time is a surprise, but thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I was impressed by Mark McDonald’s speech—he sounded like a good councillor and that he knew what was going on in his patch. I am glad that he is submitting the information that he referred to to the consultation and I hope that the Government will listen to it because it sounded full of good sense, rather than long windy words. What did Margaret McDougall do? She put the cat among the pigeons when she asked for the definition of a community. If members were to listen to some of the other fine words and sentiments that were expressed, it would seem that we are going to embrace all communities in Scotland. However, if a community pops up that people do not like to have in their area, will it be looked upon with such kindness? I say that with some bitter experience—it was many years ago, admittedly—from trying to establish a halfway house in a leafier part of Edinburgh. The attempt was not particularly successful and, although it is an easier thing to do now, there are still lots of places that would shy away from communities of people who had difficulties in life and who were trying to get back on board again. What exactly is a community? What are we talking about when we talk about communities of interest, and how do they stack up alongside geographical or social communities? That is something to think about. Let us turn to the groups that call on our community assets or community good resources, as mentioned by Margaret Mitchell and Sandra White. We must look at how the new-found power of control over assets will be used. Alison Johnstone mentioned that the Government should think about transferring the powers to trusts—that is a sensible, down-to-earth suggestion that is not airy-fairy and must be looked at in every circumstance to see whether it works and suits the particular local community that it is rooted in. I had a part to play in the establishment of an excellent community empowerment project—community flats—in south Edinburgh, which has now been rolled out in another couple of examples. The need was for basic living and lifestyle skills. I know that sounds a bit hame knittit, but nobody could make a pot of soup among the young lassies who were given homes in the tower blocks. There were all sorts of basic things that people did not know how to do and that only needed basic home skills. There were a lot of elderly women there, many of them widows, who did not have much to do, and men, who could do stuff around the place. The council and the health board co-operated with the project and a nurse was seconded to it. We were given the use of a flat for a community flat, which became absolutely stowed out. We offered services which the council could not provide, including anger management classes next door to the soup-making classes. A cup of tea was always available when needed. It was a place where the community was able to mix and mingle and it acted as a catalyst for further ideas that were put into effect. I am not going to give the minister all the evidence from the project, because he knows enough about it, and it is all on the record at the council if he wants to find out more. However, what I have described is the kind of empowerment that is needed for our poorest communities. I very much support what Bob Doris wants for his area, and I like the sound of what is happening in Paisley with regard to sports facilities. Local sports facilities that are run and used by local people and their children are a form of empowerment for a community. However, in many cases the enthusiasts become involved rather than the whole community. I may be proved wrong in the view that I am about to give—there is, for instance, the swimming pool in Stonehaven that was taken over as a locally managed venture and is very diverse in what it does and in the groups that it appeals to—but it is not as simple as saying that if we have a facility, the community will be empowered and things will get better for people. We need to be flexible about the structure and we must be organised about training the volunteers, and do so without patronising folk, so that they are willing to step up to the plate, because people who live in a depressed area can be that bit more scared about taking on debt. I take the opportunity to say to the minister that I am looking for some support for a project in Edinburgh which will empower the community—the velodrome to which Alison Johnstone referred. There are heaven knows how many young cyclists in Edinburgh who do not have a proper velodrome. We are not looking for the bells and whistles of the velodrome in Glasgow; what is needed is a good working model where kids can learn and train. A bit of money is needed—it is not much. We are also looking for a bit of money to put a paddle sports facility into Leith docks because without it, the regeneration of the area will fail. I am grateful for the chance to inform the minister.

I want to prod further whether the co-operative movement in Scotland can provide the training that we need for local groups.

When the member says “we” does he mean the royal “we” or does he mean the people who have been operating the economic levers in London? Or is he referring to the members of the Scottish Parliament?

Will the member give way?

I was named.

How does the member think that we will get that expertise? Are the people grown in the universities? Where do we find them?

Will the member give way?

We need a bit of clarity around that answer to Mary Scanlon.

I genuinely thank the member for letting me in. It seemed to me that he was being diplomatic. He did not like to agree that we could not do what he wants to do if we had the constraints that Mary Scanlon mentioned. The way to get rid of those constraints is to get rid of this nonsense about the Bank of England deciding what will happen to the Scottish economy.

I will start by putting Helen Eadie right. My husband and I agree on a number of things, but we do not always agree on some of the stuff that he writes. If she wants to see me outside the chamber, I will explain which parts of his recent writings she can take as endorsing my thoughts and which parts I think are rubbish. [Laughter.] On a positive note, I agree with Ken Macintosh—there is one thing in the Labour amendment that I can agree with—that it is not wise to have combined in one minister responsibility for what are possibly the two most important portfolios. It would have been wiser to separate the referendum from the on-going business of governing. As I said during the last debate that we had on the issue, we should keep things separate. I came through the 1979 referendum, and the business of the constitution and the changes that were going to be made to it became entangled with party policy. As we had an unpopular Government at the time—perish the thought that the current Government might become unpopular—the policies that were associated with it, particularly with Prime Minister Callaghan, had no chance. Even those people who supported the policies on what was then called a Scottish assembly wanted more than that—

Yes, that is right, and he could not sustain economic growth either. [Laughter.] That is why he was unpopular, Presiding Officer. I caution the Government on that basic point. Mark McDonald said that wise borrowing is good—well, yes—and then he demonstrated the snakes-and-ladders nature of Mr Swinney’s job. It is not possible to achieve some of the things that everyone has said they want to achieve when only 10 per cent of spending is left for a department to decide on and use on its priorities. I just do not think that it is possible, but perhaps we will hear in the summing-up how that situation will change and improve. One important point was made in the debate in John Mason’s remarks about population size. We should not forget about that if we are talking about sustainable growth. We have more and more old people to sustain and look after with a smaller and smaller wage base producing the taxation that does that. John Mason was the only person who mentioned that in the debate, and that is realism.

I thank the member for his intervention because it underlines my belief in an independent Scotland that has sovereign powers over all the levers of social and economic change; I do not see how, in a sophisticated world, we can separate one from the other. Another down-to-earth point that I want to raise is the fact that although businesses are finding the current economic situation difficult, the people who work for them—or do not work for them—are finding things very difficult. There has been growth in the number of payday loans at exorbitant interest rates. Some time ago, Neil Findlay and I approached the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to talk about credit unions and the encouragement and support that we would like them to receive. We will not achieve any of the economic indices that we would like to achieve if we do not have a workforce that is fit to do it, and a worker is not fit if they are coming out of a home that is stressed because people do not know whether they can pay their rent. That is the reality. Finally, I hope that the Government takes the opportunity to clear up the apparent confusion that, when we become independent, the SNP Government would like the Bank of England to run everything. We should make it quite clear that that will not be the case and that all the economic leverage will be here in Scotland under the democratic controls of the people and those in the Parliament.

His tea is not in the oven. [Laughter.]

Do I take it that the member would be happy to add additional taxation in Scotland on the people who are working, trying to pay their mortgage and taking out the payday loans that I talked about?

Much has been made of the cut in the budget that is about to come. The Government will not have enough money to do everything that it has said that it would like to do, so what does it expect to cut?

I urge the minister to take a close interest in the project. I spent a considerable amount of time—and went into considerable detail—on having the same sort of facility installed in Leith docks because of shyness on the part of the funders. The Government can and should help Glasgow because the people there are further down the road on planning than we were.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I will be very brief. There is an alternative—we could be a parish council.

Christine Grahame showed why we should not talk all the time about the referendum. She talked about serious stuff that has to be tackled now. By the way, in my opinion Lord Carloway was wrong and Christine Grahame is right about corroboration. However, that is only one bill, and there are umpteen bills in the Government’s programme that require our attention. People outside the Parliament are not living for every wee discussion on devolution. They are fed up with hearing them. They want to know what is going to happen, because there is so much pressure in their lives and they fear so much for their children’s futures. We should get on with what we can do and make the best job of it, and we should reserve a space to discuss what might be. Ken Macintosh, who gave a thoughtful speech, suddenly bobbed up and asked Paul Wheelhouse what he was going to do about the Bank of England. The answer is nothing, because if we are independent we will not have a currency that is the English currency or the Bank of England determining our rates of borrowing. I think that we should have something called the Scottish dollar, because that will be a petrocurrency. It will be serious and it will be controlled in the interests of Scots, in Scotland and by Scots.

I wonder who is speaking. Was it a ducat? I think that it is a ducat that Mr Russell would want, which I think was a medieval coin. If we decide on that, that is fair enough, but I will go for the dollar. It is a bit more modern and it shows an intention to mix it in today’s world. We took a debate that was meant to be about the Government’s economic programme and we allowed it to be overshadowed by the referendum. It is going to be difficult not to have that situation, because a parallel argument runs alongside everything that John Swinney does when he produces his spending plans. I note the Government’s economic strategy is due to be published later this month, and I hope it will separate the reality from what each side in the referendum is promoting, because that is what is confusing people outside this building. We should not kid ourselves that people have a clear notion of where the demarcation lines lie between devolution and independence or sovereignty. They are not sure about these things and we need to explain them, and it is not fair to take up the time that should be spent attacking the problems of poverty that folk are experiencing now. We know it is impossible to do all that work on our own. Johann Lamont is far too honest a woman to try to make out that everything to tackle poverty can be done in this chamber. She said yesterday that she was concerned that we are not doing as much as we could do with the limited powers we have. I am with her on that point—we should be doing more—but we should not be kidding on that that would amount to the best we can do. We can do very much better. If we cannot, it means that the people who live in Johann Lamont’s constituency will be thirled to a life of misery, dying earlier than anyone else and with their children having worse health records than anyone else—the worst social statistics in the United Kingdom. That is the record of the union as far the people living in her constituency are concerned, and she cannot on her own, using the powers of this place, reverse that. She wants to tackle poverty, and I want to help her because it is my fight as much as hers. We have failed to stand up for these people through the British system. That is why I was very sarcastic about the better together and the better Britain campaigns and so on. There is a case to be proved. If the SNP is being asked to prove the case for independence, the people who support the union must prove the case for the union being a better option. We have the present record to judge it by and it does not come out looking very well. Jackson Carlaw knows that perfectly well. The record of the union does not look good, whether on social policy or economic policy. I give the member the chance to correct me and to tell me how it is. [Interruption.]

That was then and now is now. I give full credit to the people who created the national health service. I can see why, after two world wars and the provision that was available at the end of the industrial revolution, there was a coming together of the interests of working-class people—poor people—across the kingdom, but we have now reached the stage at which those groups are being denied the best possible remedy because we have allowed the institution to become something of a false god.

Ken Macintosh and I must discuss this much more, later.

I absolutely agree with the member, but there is a difficulty. In Edinburgh, a scheme to preserve the old buildings is waiting to be rolled out, which would create new jobs for stonemasons and so on. The plan is to have more apprenticeships, but nobody wants them—people who have or want to have the skills are not coming forward to fill the jobs. What do we do about that?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am prepared to concede that the minister has raised a number of points that are pleasing to the whole chamber—when we forget the party political rhetoric—but there is a point that does not please me. There has been a 7 per cent reduction in PE teachers over the past year. Why?

I apologise for coming into Johann Lamont’s peroration. I agree with very much of what she has said in the past three or four minutes, for example on the community empowerment bill and buyouts, and on the introduction of proper measures to stimulate participation in local sport. However, most of those measures do not cost a great deal of money. The difference between those measures and the measures that she criticised the Government for introducing is the amount of money involved. There is not enough money. The member must look at why that is the case.

The member mentioned the making of a better, fairer Scotland. How can we make a better, fairer Scotland when it is estimated that, in two years’ time, 500,000 Scots will be taking home food parcels? We are pushing water uphill if we proceed with devolution as a means of funding everything that we need.

Will the member give way?

I thank my friend. Although I agree with her that the Government has a duty to set out the possible routes that independence might take—in terms of policy, because of course it is up to whoever is elected after independence to determine which policy will be in vogue—does she not also believe that the Government in Westminster, which is currently backed up by her own party, should give us the facts of what they see happening in 10 years’ time?

I am certainly not an expert in this field—Mary Fee has obviously studied it much more than I have. I am interested to hear whether she thinks that the child of a person who is in jail should be told the truth about their parent’s offences and, if so, from what age?

I am interested in this subject and think that I might learn from Mary Fee. If such children need a supportive family background to replace one that they have lost, I presume that we might think about fostering. However, there is a shortage of fostering places. Should the children of prisoners have priority, or is it not a problem? I do not know.

My friend asks why there should be such a difference. I suggest that it might lie in the fact that one person who has been attacked can, after a period of recovery, return to their life more or less as it was before, while another cannot.

I find the member’s remarks fascinating. I would be interested to hear his comments on what Christine Grahame said about the newer means of communication. Does he share her concern that they might be misused?

On that point, the member seems to be envisaging a multidisciplinary role. That suggests that the job would be a new one. Would much cost be involved?

The First Minister will know that the greatest population growth is recorded in Edinburgh, Midlothian and Aberdeen. I am anxious to know that there will be a reallocation of resources, which this time will take account of that population growth. We would then avoid the mistake of underfunding the health boards, for example, which happened under the Arbuthnott review.

Oh, great! [Laughter.] Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. First, I add my support to what Patrick Harvie said about tax avoidance. Secondly, I have been looking at the papers and I think that HMRC is not all that keen on the business. It is not exactly touting to do the work, and I wonder why not. I imagine that we would be grown up enough to say that if HMRC could give us a good service, we would take it. However, revenue Scotland is probably the most sensible choice to make just now. I am, however, worried that all these proposals are subject to the same override clause as is every other decision that the Parliament takes, and that if some of our Labour members’ friends south of the border are ever in government, they might not want to go along with some of the measures. Can we—

I have asked it. Can we override Westminster?

The member mentioned broadcasting, which is a very important element in all parliamentary activity because that is usually what connects us to the people. The broadcasters do not really think that we are worth broadcasting now. Does that not worry the committee?

On broadcasting the work of the committees, did the minister approach the Parliament channel to find out whether it knows that there are committees in the Scottish Parliament? I think that so far the channel has not filmed any of the committees.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

The point that I wanted to comment on has passed, but in case I am not called to speak in the debate, I say in response to John Mason’s point that the Presiding Officer—or the Speaker, in the case of the House of Commons—can often determine whether a subject that is raised is relevant and whether a member is being apposite. Also, we should remember that, if we lose 40 minutes from a debate, somebody can move for an extension of 40 minutes in the next debate.

How do we lessen the grip of the whips?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that Westminster has a better way of doing that? If a member is known to have a track record on, or a good knowledge of, a particular subject, the Speaker—in our case the Presiding Officer—makes sure that they contribute to the debate.

Does the member agree that there might be a more democratic way of allocating members’ business debates? Perhaps it could be done by ballot, which is how it is done in Westminster.

Will the minister give way?

Can I ask the committee convener a question?

The member referred to the Presiding Officer’s role. Does he agree that the Presiding Officer would have the full Parliament’s support if they slapped down ministers who were being irrelevant or wandering from the topic that was at hand?

No.

I do not really agree.

Could we start as we mean to go on, with facts? Although Johann Lamont takes issue with Winnie Ewing’s statement that this is the Scottish Parliament continuing, the Speaker of the House of Commons has ruled that Westminster is the English Parliament of Simon de Montfort continuing, and Westminster is a very changed place. Parliaments do evolve.

Willie Rennie was quite wrong when he said that we would not be better just because we were independent. If people are dependent on themselves, they try harder, achieve more and grow bigger, so we would be better. Over the years, it has been usual in the arguments about independence to question whether Scotland could go it alone economically without the shelter and financial support of the big strong United Kingdom. We in Scotland must now address a very different question: can we afford to remain part of a UK that is anything but economically strong and which has changed from being a rich country to being one that is getting poorer by the month? When we talk about our relationship with the UK, we are in fact talking about the relationship between Scotland and England, and the latter is by far the significant political and economic senior. If an inequality of status is presently Scotland’s lot, do any of the people who chant, “Stronger together, weaker apart,” aspire to change that relationship to one of equality? If not, why not? If the unionists and their fellow travellers do not seek equality of status, that is, I presume, because they believe that, after the referendum, they will somehow be able to wipe out the wastelands and wasted lives in districts of Glasgow and the west of Scotland that have been identified as having extreme levels of poverty and deprivation, which proclaim the ever more impoverished state of the UK, as well as its inherent unfairness. Are we stronger together when young soldiers are sent to war without proper boots and with guns that do not fire and then have to travel in ineffective motorcades? Not at all. Are we stronger together in that we punch above our weight because the UK sits on the United Nations Security Council as a permanent member, while neglected old people live out their lives to sad, miserable ends in dreadfully miserable homes? We can do it and we know fine that we can do it. The question is, why do we not want to do it? The people who cry that the UK is rich and that we cannot afford to leave it should remember that the UK spends £126 billion a year more than it earns. Everywhere we look, the claim of its being rich collapses under the facts. For every £10-worth of cuts in the Government’s deficit—

Has the cabinet secretary found another way of correcting that imbalance than by transferring resources from the likes of Germany to Greece?

Does the member agree that we cannot reach the Valhalla that she has just outlined without having centralised political control and a loss of sovereignty?

Can the member tell me where the UK Government has squirreled away the money to fund these ventures without borrowing?

Can the member tell me what a previous speaker could not—which country is next in line after Spain for potential collapse?

Will the member give way?

I apologise to members for intervening, but I am not getting in to speak. What guidance does Willie Rennie have from Germany to suggest that Angela Merkel will lose the election and that whoever comes in will be willing to bankroll the rest of the EU and the euro zone?

I apologise.

Will the member give way?

Does the member think that Sweden managed to get away with it because it was first and because, as a result, the IMF and others were not alerted and were not so hard on it?

I apologise for having misunderstood in my communication with the clerks on the desk about my contribution to the debate. Regretfully, I have to inform members that I will not be supporting the motion tonight. Even though my favourite finance secretary gave an absolutely wonderful analysis of the contemporary situation, I believe that it is time for us to own up to the basic flaw at the heart of the euro. If we do not, we will simply mirror the endless and clueless summits on how to deal with the present crisis, which end with that most pathetic figure in Europe—although my Portuguese friends think that he is the luckiest politician in Europe—Manuel Barosso assuring us that all will be well provided that nothing is done to snooker the planned fiscal union. That plan was decided in 1969, when the then European Economic Community made economic and monetary union an official goal. That was before the UK went in, in case anybody was wondering. Pierre Werner, Luxembourg’s Prime Minister, mapped out a three-stage process leading to the creation of the European monetary union, which included, of course, a single currency. From the time the Werner report was published in 1970, the mantra that has emanated from Brussels has been “One interest rate policy for all”. People who chant it usually have fairies ensconced at the foot of their gardens. However, it was promoted with all the fervour of a religious belief, so there could be no criticism and nice sensible people such as me were dismissed as Eurosceptics.

Surely the member is not going to query that.

There is an even bigger argument that a bigger country called Germany did not comply. None of them complied. They all told lies. Be sure your sins will find you out. The refusal of the Werner report to face reality was obvious. There are people in the EU’s decision-making bodies—there might even be some in the Scottish Parliament—who either share the dream of a federal Europe or believe that it is possible to have a currency union without a central bank as a lender of last resort, which the European Central Bank is not. It could operate in tandem with a fiscal union, governed by a central political entity with the power to redistribute wealth from the rich parts, such as Germany, to the poorer parts, such as Greece. It would be what we might think of in the present circumstances as perhaps a debt union rather than a monetary union. David Cameron is correct to say that we either reduce the national sovereignty of states in such a union or we end it, with countries returning to their own currencies. People here and in Brussels talk of growth being the answer rather than austerity, but where, as Margaret McCulloch sensibly argued, is the plan or the big idea? I do not think that she was the only member to refer to that during the debate; I apologise for forgetting who the others were. Perhaps we should remember that a little bit of sugar makes the medicine go down. Only bail-outs are being considered for Greece, Portugal and Spain, while the people in all three countries are made unemployed and plunged into poverty. There is money that could be invested in those states if we were serious about it. Rob Gibson might be able to help me with this, but I think that we have identified that £700 million is piled up in the banks. There is therefore money for private investment. They are the same banks that were bailed out by Governments, so what are we waiting for? The game’s a bogey for the EU project. It is time to stop hurting people in pursuit of an impossible dream. The SNP has said for more than 40 years that it wants Scotland to be fully engaged with Europe, but it seems to have forgotten or overlooked the possibilities of meeting that objective through another route. It does not have to be done through the euro. If the terms offered by the EU when Scotland becomes independent do not meet our needs, what is wrong with joining the European Free Trade Association and the European economic area? In fact, why wait on fate? The Scottish Government could ask for an opinion from the European Court of Justice on Scotland’s right to continuing membership of the EU on our attainment of independent sovereignty. If the answer is a fudge—I would lay a fair bet on that—the logical place for Scotland to go is EFTA, with no loss of sovereignty and continued access to the EU’s markets. Of course, we would have to bring our regulations into line with European regulations, but that would only be fair. We would not lose sovereignty in doing that and we could pick and choose whatever suited us. I do not wish to upset my favourite finance minister, but although I support part of the motion, I cannot vote for the whole motion, because of what I have just said.

A propos the matter of testing the theories and the policies when they are implemented, why are we comparing ourselves with the rest of the UK when we already know the answer to that, because so many studies have been done? Why are we not comparing ourselves with countries that are like ours and societies that have the same roots, such as Ireland, Norway, Iceland and Finland?

With all due respect, I think that it will be difficult to separate the effects of the policy from the effects of the recession.

Could the member briefly examine whether that figure of 25 per cent is a mean figure across the country? I doubt that it is. I am sure that there are areas of the country where people drink a lot more than 25 per cent more than people in England do. In my area, they do not drink nearly enough.

I wonder if the member would like to answer a question for me. What does he see as the result of this measure? Does he see everyone drinking a little less or everyone changing from cider to wine? How does he see this measure having an effect on the individual?

I thank the Parliament for its welcome, although members might now not be too pleased at what they welcomed. I do not imagine that the First Minister had time when he was in Norway to ask the Norwegians how they manage their drink problem—they, too, like a drink. They come from the same sort of origin as we do and they have the same sort of history. Did he take the opportunity to discuss the possibility of Scotland becoming a member of the European Free Trade Association? Given our close relationship with Norway on energy, that seems a much better berth than the bill that would seek to absorb us in a common energy policy for the European Union.

Can we begin in a productive and constructive manner and clear something up from the start? I do not think that a single party or member in this Parliament would want to see anyone other than those resident in Scotland voting on the future of Scotland—the country to which they and their children are committed. It does not really matter whether they have a Pakistani or West Indian grandmother—if they live here, they vote.

Will the member give way?

Will David McLetchie give way?

I am proud to follow such a speech. I hoped that we would hear many such speeches in the Scottish Parliament. I do not mean to be patronising, but we have heard a few more this afternoon than we heard the last time that we debated the issue. Mary Fee said that she would have thought more of the Scottish National Party if it had signed the original claim of right. Oh no she wouldn’t. [Laughter.] We are bedevilled by party politics when we come to talk about the national question. I will come to that later. We can set one or two things straight this afternoon. It is only hours since the announcement on the consultation and already the misinformation, the lies, the hints, the nudges, the wink winks and the devious skills of spin doctors have been all over the airwaves and in the newspapers. Let us agree among ourselves to admit to a few basic truths. Let us talk about the party politics for example. David McLetchie is a Tory. It is not his fault—I think he was born like that—but we should evaluate much of what he says about the Scottish constitutional question in light of that. This afternoon, he presented rather a questionable thesis when he discussed constitutionality. Jim Eadie referred to the United Nations charter, and we know perfectly well that the Scots can say that they want to be independent. No one can gainsay that, provided it is a fair test of opinion that brings about that result. However, what the Scots cannot say while in partnership with other parts of the United Kingdom is, “We want to change this, that and the next thing,” without agreeing it first with its partners. That is what I was referring to when I suggested to the First Minister—a suggestion that I hope he took kindly—that he should ditch the second question idea because he can deliver on the first question if he carries the argument, but he cannot deliver on the second without the agreement of people over whom we have no influence whatever, if they do not want us to have influence. That is where I take issue with Jim Eadie. The intention of trying to include the people of these islands in our march forward is the correct one, but I fear that it cannot be done on the one ballot paper. An aspect of politics in Scotland that confuses the pure debate on our constitutional future is the issue of identity. We are still at it. I am a patriotic Scot but I am not a nationalist. I wonder whether a man from Mars could tell the difference. I went to Puerto Rico once. There were three groups in Puerto Rican politics: the people who were for commonwealth, which is what we would equate to devolution; the full-state lobby, which wanted to be another state of the union; and the people who were for independence. Do you know something? I could not tell the difference and nor could anyone else. They all backed Puerto Rico, but party politics was screwing things up for them. I remember that sort of thing when I hear Neil Findlay speak, because he knows, as I know, that it is no use having the ideals of alleviating poverty and creating a fair society if we do not have the delivery mechanism to do that. If we had that delivery mechanism we would not even need to pretend that the United Kingdom is perfect in what it has achieved—that is what is on offer as an alternative to the sovereignty that the SNP proposes in its document. If the UK had got the delivery mechanism right, Johann Lamont’s constituency would not have the social indices that it has, which are probably the worst set in the whole of the UK. If that is partnership, I want none of it.

I do not maintain that any or all of the parties in this Parliament have all the wisdom required to do some of the things that Neil Findlay and I would like to be done. All that I can say is that the current system has patently failed to achieve anything and that we can do no worse as an independent country. That is a negative way of putting the argument—Alex Salmond will not be pleased. There are very positive reasons for continuing to argue this case. For a start, we have let our fellow Scots wallow in second-rate debate. Some of the stuff that I heard on radio this morning would have made your blood curdle: “Oh, we cudnae do it. I think we’re too wee. We haven’t got enough money”. This is not about money; it is about having confidence, determination and a sense of fairness and being honest about whether we could not do better than the current delivery mechanism.

I take what the member says seriously, but I wonder whether he can find it in his approach to sit down with members from across the Parliament to discuss, for example, whether we should even attempt to take part in a joint defence policy. If we do not think that we should do that, that implies something constitutionally.

There is a difference between the sovereignty of the people being expressed and a treaty having been signed. In the case of the EU, treaties were signed, unfortunately. No such treaty has ever been signed between Scotland and England in the same manner.

I congratulate the First Minister on his statement and the clear intention, which he has just illustrated, to state that the Scots have a choice between the sovereignty of the Queen in Parliament—the Parliament at Westminster—and the sovereignty of the people in Scotland. Of course, we represent the people in only limited ways, because it was Westminster that decided how far we should be able to govern ourselves. I think that that is the issue in the minds of Scots at present—they lack the confidence that we could govern ourselves properly. Can the First Minister assure me that, during this fair referendum, a fair contrast will be put? We know what we can get if we vote for the continuation of the union: the worst health statistics in Europe; our men and women sent to fight in wars that we should have nothing to do with; low rates of growth; and continuous frustration, as exemplified in this Parliament by the many petty things that we are not allowed to do as a sovereign Parliament. If the First Minister contrasts that with what we should be able to do to achieve our optimum as a nation among nations, co-operating with those with whom we have most in common, he is likely to have the referendum outcome that he seeks. Finally, will the First Minister have nothing to do with a second question? He cannot deliver the answer.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive, in order to inform voters ahead of the proposed independence referendum, when it will publish its position on the issues that are currently reserved. (S4O-0048)

I apologise for having missed those two publications. I ask for something a bit more high profile, as it would take at least a year to embed any new concepts that would be inevitable if, for example, pensions were to be run from Edinburgh and not London. We see the confusion that has arisen over defence—at least, I hope that it is confusion and not the policy. People need to know not only about defence but about the euro. They need to know who will pay their pensions and how they will be paid. People need that sort of information and it does no members of the Parliament any good if misinformation is peddled.

On the co-operation that might or might not exist between the Treasury and the finance departments of the devolved Administrations, given the state of the euro, exemplified by Germany’s failure to sell all its bonds yesterday, I am concerned that this Parliament might not be properly informed by Her Majesty’s Treasury about the effects on the Scottish economy, and I think that the same fears might be voiced in Wales and Northern Ireland in relation to their economies. Does the First Minister plan to do anything about that?

On the question of what constitutes offensive behaviour, is it offensive for some people very occasionally to chant in the region of Easter Road “If you hate the”—expletive deleted—“Jambos, clap your hands”?

Will the minister give way?

I hope that the minister will accept this as being constructive. Scottish football does not have a problem. Two of the clubs that play in the premier league have a problem with some of their supporters. It is not Scottish football. Tell Auchinleck Talbot Football Club that it has a problem.

I seek more information. Did any of the police evidence suggest that the police think that the measures would make it easier for them to police such events? If so, would they require more officers on the ground or could they do it with the same number or fewer?

I wonder whether this point could help us understand the dilemmas experienced by Chief Constable House and, I think, my friend the convener of the Justice Committee. In introducing the proposed measure, she explained that the Government had felt that the proposed law had to be introduced because of the parcels that were sent to some people. She said that that happened because of their faith or which team they support. Can I suggest that those are not one and the same but quite different and that they require different approaches?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

How are we to define objectively the term “offensive behaviour” when standing at a football ground? One person is offended by swearing and one is not. In my little corner of my football ground, I tell people not to swear because I find it offensive—and they tell me other things.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I want to put it on the record that I said that Rangers and Celtic had “a problem”. I do not believe that it is sectarianism either.

I thank the chamber for doing what we should do more often, which is to adhere to the normal rules of debating. We should give and receive explanations and further examine the topic under discussion. I am sorry if that comment makes me sound like old granny grump. I accept—I think that everybody who has criticised the bill does so—that, in introducing the bill, the Government meant well. All of us, if we are honest, know that there are still threads of sectarianism in Scotland, but as we have heard clearly this afternoon the definition of sectarianism has not been pinned down in the bill. We must do that first. That was why I tried to correct Hugh Henry, because I thought that it was important. I did not say that Rangers and Celtic were necessarily sectarian in their behaviour or that their fans were—I said that they had a problem. I refuse to take seriously the idea that sectarian abuse is hurled by the Rangers fans at the Celtic fans when most of the guys coming out of the tunnel for quite a while were good Sicilian boys who crossed themselves before the start of the match. I am not making light of it; I am just trying to say that that is how it seems from this football fan’s point of view. I support neither Rangers nor Celtic—I hope that they always get beat. I know that such behaviour and attitudes can leech into other clubs, but other clubs do not have big problems. The big problems lie with those clubs and that is why I support the sensible suggestion that, if we move on with this legislation, the clubs should bear the burden of disciplining their supporters. We should take points from them: that costs them their place in the league, it costs them money and it means that they have to sell their best players. The people who know about football are nodding their heads. They know that that is the most effective method to use against displays of bad behaviour, hooliganism or whatever we want to call it—by which I mean the chants that are offensive to most people. As I have suggested, we also have to pin down the question of how we will judge what behaviour is offensive and what is not. Some folk grow up in houses where people swear all the time, so they are not particularly offended when they go to a football match and the guy sitting next to them knows only one adjective. I know that the convener of the Justice Committee was upset that not enough attention had been paid to the communications provisions in the second part of the bill. As Patrick Harvie said, once again, it had good intentions. We have had one debate, but we need more and we need it to be about the second part of the bill. That is where we can be effective. We can change behaviour by tackling such means of communication more effectively than by going to a football match and thinking that we might influence behaviour. At matches, people are hyped up and are not completely themselves. They cannot take drink into the grounds, but some of them have a good bucket beforehand and they do not behave how they would behave in other circumstances or other company. In short, I hope that the Government accepts that it made a brave effort. Nobody wishes its intentions or aims any ill. Many people were cited as supporting the bill, but they did not support it—they supported its aims. Perhaps the bill has not come up to scratch in achieving those aims and the Government will not lose face if it admits that. We can then all get back to thinking about how we can tackle sectarianism properly and over a much longer period of time than that in which we might expect one bill to make a change.

I say this in an effort to strengthen the protection of the elderly and vulnerable in their own homes: could the principle of a cooling-off period that is applied when someone takes on a financial loan also be applied to a contract for a repair to one’s home?

I am interested in what the learned professor thinks, but I am even more interested in what we think we could do with the answer to our question on a subject over which we have no jurisdiction. It is not in our gift to say what happens to anything other than an independence vote from the Scottish people. We cannot say how much devolution or what sort of devolution there should be. Why are we piddling about with the second question?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. While I fully accept your ruling as regards the responsibility of each member to be truthful when he or she speaks on any particular topic, do we not have a responsibility as a Parliament to the people who elect us and who may not be in a position to hear corrections being made? Should we not make a correction plain to the people outside here, particularly on such an important constitutional question?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Maureen Watt agree that, although the finance minister has done a good job in attempting to grow the economy, he should be making it clearer to Scots that he could grow it much more if he had control of all economic levers?

I thank the minister for prior sight of his statement but, before I address it, I must say how much I appreciated James Kelly’s contribution. I am sorry that he has chosen to leave the chamber at this moment; he should hear what I am going to say. I also appreciated what Michael McMahon and Jackie Baillie had to say. They attempted to analyse and offer alternatives from their particular perspectives and portfolios, which is what the debate was meant to be about. Having said that, I should say that my first impression of the minister’s statement was of an honest attempt to squeeze the maximum out of the system, considering the circumstances, which I hope we can all agree to change during the current parliamentary session. Party loyalties aside, is there anyone who still believes that we benefit unconditionally from being the fag end of the United Kingdom economy? Only yesterday, the IMF reminded us that the British economy is teetering on the edge. If we look at the resources that we would be able to tap into, there is no way that such a verdict would have been given on us if we were a self-standing economy that co-operates with the other parts of the British Isles. However, Mr Swinney has the duty to make the best of a bad job and there are many things in his statement that I commend. There are others that I do not. The gap in his exposition about how we will fund further and higher education must be attended to because it is the future. More time could have been spent on that, but I think that I understand the reasons why it was not. I also share some of the reservations about the commitment to freeze council tax for as long as promised. I cannot criticise the realisation of the importance of preventative spending, particularly in light of the comments that the IMF made yesterday. We were reminded that there is to be a decade of austerity. The situation will not get better quickly. It therefore seems that preventative spending is essential in the first instance to reduce the harsh effects of the current spending cuts and, in the longer term, to perhaps recalibrate the expectations of our fellow citizens about how much the country can do for them and what they can do for their country and community. For example, I think that it was Mr Hepburn who spoke about substituting exercise for pills as a preventative spending measure. I have been urging the Government for quite some time to follow up the proposal that exercise should be on prescription. It should have been worked on much more than it has been; some people have tried, but there has not been an all-out effort to make it normal for a doctor to prescribe exercise. There appears to be an omission in the package on preventative spending in the Government statement. There was no direct reference to helping people who fall into debt. That is the most debilitating factor in any family’s or individual’s life. I have written to the cabinet secretary, asking whether he will consider setting up a very modest fund to kick-start the expansion of credit unions. After speaking to credit unions in West Lothian and elsewhere, Neil Findlay and I have started work on this project and we hope that we will find support from members in all sections of the Parliament, regardless of party. After all, this really has nothing to do with parties. As the chamber might know, I had hoped to introduce a bill to outlaw excessive interest rates for loans; however, I have been assured that such a proposal is ultra vires. Once again, this is something that we cannot do in Scotland. It is another source of frustration. I hate to say it but, being smaller and more manoeuvrable, we could have tackled the issue quicker. It needs to be tackled quickly, given that we are facing 10 years of austerity. Like, I hope, other members, I will do what I can to support Stella Creasy’s bill in the House of Commons, but I do not give much for her chances of getting it through. I have gone with Neil Findlay to the other side of the equation and will try to prevent people from falling into debt. I am sorry that we have not been able to give the cabinet secretary more notice of this, but it has happened just in the past week. We believe that a modest start-up fund to enable the expansion of credit unions would be excellent. I have spoken—informally at the moment—to Pat Watters and have suggested that he encourage local authorities to make available to credit unions property that is lying empty. If they could get into town centres, they would do much better. We have a number of plans and will be delighted to discuss them with the cabinet secretary if he wants to hear them. We should also recognise the work that is being done to help those who are already in debt. We might focus on the grand scale, but the people who have lost their jobs or are working fewer hours will have thinner pay packets and an awful lot of people are falling into debt. In 2008, citizens advice bureaux in Scotland were able to help almost 20,000 people more than they would have had they not received a small grant from the Scottish Government. That was money well spent; it represents good practice as far as preventative spending is concerned; and I urge the cabinet secretary to listen to me asking—as usual—for a little bit more. On the whole, I commend the cabinet secretary for his statement.

I agree that the minister was quite correct to say last week that the decision on Europe will be based on the conditions of the day. Will the First Minister say, with reference to contemporary conditions and given the openly expressed determination of Chancellor Merkel, President Sarkozy and the European Commission to form a single economic Government and eliminate the sovereignty of member states, whether EFTA, which retains sovereignty for its members, and the European economic area are better bets for genuine Scottish independence than the Franco-German model of the future EU that appears to be developing?

I have two reasons to be grateful to Johann Lamont for her speech. I thought that I might have been the only one here old enough to have actually marched, but she says that she was a teenager when this was all going on. She also talked about the legacy, and I will touch on that later, too. The legacy is what we should understand, which is why I am so glad that Jimmy Reid’s speech is going to be circulated to schoolchildren. It is part of our history, as we were saying in the chamber last week—a part of our history that all of us can take pride in. The speech should be disseminated throughout the schools so that young Scots realise that this came from Scotland. It was a remarkable achievement. As I say, I was a bit worried that I would be the only one old enough to have marched. I am certainly the only one who has sat and heard Lech Walesa express his thanks to the people of Scotland and to the men of the Clyde for having given inspiration to shipworkers in Gdansk—and we all know what an important part in the story that played. He knew about Jimmy Reid—much more so than many young Scots do today. So, once again, thanks for getting the book publicised. My part in the UCS campaign was to speak on the draughtiest town-centre corners in central Scotland. The boilermakers’ man Joe Black and I were usually lumped together. I am not sure why, but we both shouted a lot; we certainly attracted attention and we collected a lot of money in buckets. We also made a lot of friends who understood, for the first time, that we were all in it together and that, if the Clyde yards went down, an awful lot went down with them. I was very grateful for that learning and growing experience. Another experience I had as part of the campaign was with Billy Wolfe, who was then the chairman of the Scottish National Party. We had to go for a meeting with some of the stewards to discuss how the Scottish National Party could support UCS. We met the stewards but we ended up in the back room of a pub—closed—with Jimmy Reid himself. We sat and we talked, and I remember seeing the sun come through the windows and thinking that this was really quite lyrical. What the man was saying was pure gold. When we came away—and this tells us more about Billy Wolfe than it does about Jimmy Reid—Billy said to me: “What a man. If only that man could be leading the national movement in Scotland.” However, he is still leading. His legacy is leading. He gave the notion of self-respect for the workers, and of the mutual respect needed for there to be good industrial relations. Jimmy Reid’s soul and heart and spirit and intellect march on, and I am very proud to have marched with him.

Surely there will be no bevvying, minister. [Laughter.]

Following the discovery of documents in Tripoli that relate to co-operation between Colonel Gaddafi’s intelligence service, the Central Intelligence Agency and the British intelligence service, will the Scottish Government investigate the illegal use of Scottish airports for illegal rendition flights? Apart from anything else, regimes in the middle east are changing. We have an interest in ensuring that incoming Arab Governments realise that they can expect a much better deal from a Scottish Government than they got from Westminster.

Oh, dear—thank you. The cabinet secretary said that more elected members will have a say and instanced Orkney as an example. Those people have legitimacy because they are elected. Could not that lead to some confusion as regards operations and the general strategic direction in that part of the country? The cabinet secretary also said that there will be no political interference. How can he presume that there will be no political interference, when elected members will have the right to question the local commander?

Okay. Can he also say who is going to tell the chief officer where to stop?

The question is why we need a stronger presence in Europe. Why, indeed? Why does not the Government consider the European Free Trade Association instead of the EU? We are much more likely to be effective in EFTA and to get more out of it that suits Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I am rendered breathless by the member’s description of the demands of the Basques and Catalans, but I want to ask him whether he thinks that Mr Cameron’s response to the Scottish Government is born out of respect for the Scottish Government or a knowledge of how to use power.

When I listened to Liam McArthur’s speech, I thought that I was back in Maastricht a few years ago, when a brutal German professor of politics and economics explained that one had to have power to play the game and be in the power game to win in Europe. We were there from the Scottish Parliament, all bright eyed and bushy tailed, to explain why we should play a bigger part in the Committee of the Regions alongside Antwerp’s mayor and somebody else like that whose name I forget. That panacea was absolutely no use. We seem to have forgotten it and moved on to direct representation. The cabinet secretary sounded like a girl guide, playing by the rules and citing good behaviour for the past 12 years as having earned us the right to statutory representation. She cited Belgium as having given Flanders the whip hand at one point. Oh, quelle surprise! If we knew anything about the politics of Belgium, we would realise why that was a political bauble or crumbs from the table. That game is played in Belgium as much as it is in the United Kingdom. The cabinet secretary cited Richard Lochhead’s experience as proof of the fact that we are overlooked in Scotland. The man knows the Christian name of every haddie in the North Sea, so of course he should be at the European fishing negotiations. Of course he could and should lead for the UK—I do not doubt that—but the rules say that states count and we are not a state. Power counts, not influence. Richard Lochhead has done his very best, as did Ross Finnie before him. Ross Finnie was the same: he was on first-name terms with the fish. As a result, he was well respected in Europe and listened to. He did his level best to represent the interests of the fishing communities and others in Scotland, but we do not have power and will not have it until we are a state. Although I wish the Government well in trying to improve the lot of those who have to deal with the European institutions, I warn it to guard against hoping for too much. Even Catalunya wants full representation, and it has an awful lot more than we have in relation to Europe.

I am intrigued by the member’s contention that the EU is moving towards more devolution of power. Can she outline briefly how she sees that?

Will the member give way?

I am very grateful, because this is a very important point. We have heard over the past few weeks with regard to the trouble in the euro zone that what is intended for Europe by the leading states in Europe is federal union. Now, is that not at odds with the idea of devolving power as far down as possible to what we call sub-nations?

It happens elsewhere because in Germany, for example, the federal Government depends on regional Governments to keep it in power. That is why it happens—the politics of Germany. The Westminster Government does not depend on us.

I thank Richard Baker and I sincerely hope that he does not regret giving way. Just for clarification, will he say whether the Labour Party maintains that the Parliament does not need more economic powers?

Was there any mention of the clubs taking much more responsibility for the behaviour of fans, in that clubs could be fined, either in points or in money? That would make fans behave.

I want to draw on the member’s experience. Is there a great difference between the advantages in efficiencies and savings to be gained from having one police force and the advantages to be gained from having two or three?

Will the member give way?

It’s the way he tells them. Although I agree with what the member says about capital investment being required and so on, this Government—like any other Government—is beholden to the people who set the interest rates and give credit ratings. Does he suggest that the UK Government should have ignored the potential loss of its triple A status, which would have meant that it would have to pay more for borrowing?

I urge members to read John Mason’s speech. He exemplified the difference between pick-and-mix devolution policies on taxation and full powers. He took the example of corporation tax. If that is all that we can use to try to help business, we cannot move the pieces around the chess board and, for example, do anything about regional grants. I urge members to look at his speech because it contained the essence of what I think the Government should be doing: comparing and contrasting what is possible with the full range of powers and what they will do with the limited powers that they have. The constitutional question will run throughout this session of Parliament: it is absolutely unavoidable. We now know and have witnessed on television the changes that have taken place in English society and communities over the last generation and generation and a half. We are a bit different. The difference is one of degree—I do not say that it is an absolute difference—but the degree is enough to call for a different management and a perhaps more sensitive range of policies than is possible if we use the one leverage from Westminster. I should make a point while I am talking about Westminster. The Government was urged to come clean and say how it would make Scotland better. I think that Westminster should be asked to come clean and say how it means to make Scotland better. It is not a Scottish Government that produced the health statistics that we saw last week and which showed that Scots live shorter lives. It was not this Government or the previous Governments in the lifetime of the Scottish Parliament that provided the baseline for the health statistics that we should all be ashamed of. As well as calling ourselves to account, saying what we might do and admitting that there are limitations, we should not hesitate in calling Westminster to account and asking it how it will come up with a better idea. One or two speakers on the Labour benches said that we could expect more from Westminster. Is that from this coalition Government or the next one to come? I do not think that we should be too shy in saying that sort of thing, either. There was a tendency in the debate about the police to skip over the alternatives. I look forward to the statement from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice tomorrow, because I think that the alternatives are not simply one police force or eight; there is any number of variations in between. There are various ways in which operational tasks can be shared among the forces. I am utterly opposed to having only one police force, but that is because of the implications for civil liberties more than anything. Of course, we need to save money in all the services, but can we afford to compromise on civil liberties? We should remember that the forces are the only coercive power in our public services and they can make people do something.

It is because we have to legislate for contingencies; we do not legislate for only the conditions that exist at this time. What happens if we get an absolutely rotten police chief and we have only the one? What happens if that police chief is corrupt or has to report to a less-than-efficient or less-than-honest minister? That has happened in other communities. That is why we lay down basic standards regarding the civil liberties that the citizen has a right to expect in a democracy as old as our own.

No, I am sorry—I know that the member took an intervention from me. For those reasons, I cannot be persuaded of the argument that one police force is better than two or three. I want to hear the arguments tomorrow and urge members to pay great attention to them because the issue is fundamental to the temper of the society that we live in. One thing that was skited over a bit at the beginning of the debate is the Government’s intention that Scottish studies should be taught and absorbed by Scottish pupils. That is a very good idea. We have a skewed identity, in many respects, and measure ourselves against our much bigger, very different southern neighbour in a way that another country that I know well and love—Portugal—fails to measure itself against Spain. It is the same situation: two countries side by side, one very big and one very small, both with proud and different histories. A man from Mars who visited the Iberian peninsula would not really know the difference between the two; however, if he lived there, he would come to appreciate the nuances that make for a much richer society. That is the sort of thing that we can learn through Scottish studies. Many of our pupils leave school knowing much more about obscure places in Europe than they know about this obscure place on the periphery of Europe from which many inventions and proud additions to the world’s culture have come. We should not be ashamed to say that.

There is nothing wrong with appreciating ourselves and knowing what we have done in the past. Only when we do that can we say what we might do in the future.

10. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to legislate for the election rather than appointment of judges. (S4O-00091)

I am relieved by that reply. My concern was that, during the recent exchange of opinions with some on the Scottish bench, an inference was drawn that the First Minister had referred to the possible election of judges. I am glad to hear that that was a wrong inference.

Why does the member think that there should be such a different attitude in England when Alex McLeish gets death threats because he is going to another club? Does the member think that the Westminster Parliament will rush through emergency legislation to deal with that?

Is the legislation specifically targeted at the two clubs in Scotland that are identified with sectarian chanting or does it encompass behaviour at other clubs? For example, I have seen my club drawn into this net and cannot think why.

Will the member take an intervention?

Would that offensive behaviour extend to the chant that one occasionally hears on Easter Road: “If you hate the”—expletive removed—“Jambos, clap your hands”?

Does the member believe that we have to do something for the sake of doing it? In the park today, I passed a car on which was an Irish flag flying gaily in the breeze. It was there really to tell us to get our act together and not be so silly with this legislation.

Will the member give way?

The member is lucky to have four minutes.

If the First Minister and the Government were, at this late stage, to be persuaded by the arguments that the bill must be given greater scrutiny, would the Opposition find it in their hearts to applaud that step back rather than condemn it?

I remind the minister that the Terrorism Act 2006 requires to be renewed every year. Perhaps we could consider that device?

The First Minister might recall that the Parliament’s cross-party group on sport warned about the loss to Scottish community sport that would occur because of the Olympic games, so I heartily back his efforts to claw back some of that money. However, I ask him to take account of the legacy for Scottish sport if the Olympic committee has its way as regards the football team. Will he add his support to the Scottish Football Association in advising young footballers that it would not be a clever move for them to play in a British team?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Although I accept your ruling in this case, I think it advisable that, in future, when people propose the sort of policy that today’s time for reflection speaker has done, the matter be discussed further with a representative group of members.

Does the minister agree that it would be a good idea to introduce a certificate of competence for everyone who works with old people, whether in care homes or in hospitals? I believe that no minimum requirement of knowledge, expertise or experience is required at present.

Will the member give way?

Does Murdo Fraser agree that drug replacement could happen if exercise was available as a prescription in a much more imaginative way than it currently is?

Can I look forward to Drew Smith’s support for my argument that funding for roads should be based on usage? Usage in Edinburgh is of course very much higher than that elsewhere.

I invite the member to sign the motion that I have before Parliament. I think that it is the 10th time I have asked the Government to set up a commission to look at who takes drugs, why they take them, why some people stop and in what circumstances, and so on. We have much to learn and we could do it if we had a mind to.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for giving way during his short speech. However, I must have an assurance from the Government that in no way will the replacement for the Edinburgh sick kids hospital be undermined by the current difficulties in funding it. I would like to have that assurance now, because there is much concern in Edinburgh about that situation.

Is the member aware of the number of PE students who have managed to get full-time posts in Edinburgh and the Lothians? If not, I can tell him that it is zilch.

The member talked about physical activity, sport and physical education. All three are different. It might be that, in an effort to do well, we have got them out of kilter. Does the member agree that instead of a target of having two hours of quality PE a week—whatever that means—every child in every school should have a period of physical activity every day? That might take account of the expertise of teachers who are not PE qualified and inadequate facilities.

Ten years ago.

From the member’s experience, can she explain why coaches are in short supply?

You are more generous than your predecessor—thank you. I congratulate Shona Robison, and I would like to say how glad I was that she was appointed as the minister responsible for sport. She knows that I did a fair amount of earbashing, and I should tell the minister that the cross-party group on sport—which reconvened this afternoon—also sends her its best wishes. The group will be looking for lots of things from her. Before I go on, I want to explain why I will be supporting the Conservative amendment this afternoon. The minister’s motion is a blank canvas; the Conservative amendment fills in some of the detail and, by now, we should be getting down to detail. But before I do, I must remark on George Adam’s fantastic speech. He talked about the time—I think that it was 1959—when St Mirren won the cup. Jim Rodger, who I think scored the winning goal, was my maths teacher. Patricia Ferguson—to whom I pay tribute for the work that she did in the role that the present minister now occupies—said that physical activity is embedded in our culture. We wish. Deep-fried Mars bars are more likely to be embedded in our culture. However, attempts are being made all round the chamber to change that. A point that I made during an earlier intervention could be taken on board by the minister. We know that we cannot achieve—for all sorts of different reasons—the two hours of physical education in different schools in different parts of the country. However, in order to embed the idea of physical activity and sport eventually, it would be good to consider having a period every day for every schoolchild during which they get their sports kit on and perhaps sweat a wee bit. Zumba dancing and all sorts of other things can be done in a small space with the help of teachers who may not have the confidence to tackle other kinds of PE. I want to commend the minister on the schools national award scheme; I am anxious to hear much more about it, and I hope that she can tell us something when she sums up. That is the sort of direction towards which I think we should be heading. I make a plea about the football legislation that the Government is considering just now: do not rush into it. The issue is much more complex than simply saying that Rangers and Celtic are to blame for sectarianism, and it is much more complex than simply saying that all we have to do is fix the issue with refereeing. There is no need to rush into this. Things have been as they are for a long time and I think that a bit of thoughtfulness now would improve the legislation that will come out at the other end. When they go into schools, footballers could be much better role models than they are at the moment on a Saturday afternoon. Of course, I exclude Hibs from that comment—I say that only because I hold a season ticket. However, we could use the current crop of footballers much more: they could go into schools and explain to young people why they should not behave towards referees in the way that the players behave on a Saturday. There was a mention made of golf. It may be that there are some terrific golf courses and golf clubs in Scotland, but most golf clubs are suffering. They are finding that, instead of having waiting lists for memberships, they are having to cleek people in the door. We should look at golf before it goes beyond us, because that is where sport integrates with our economy. Golf is a very important sport for us. I wonder whether, when we talk about sport, it is borne in mind that we do not get elite athletes unless we have wide community participation in sport. The way into that is definitely through the PE teacher. Far too many PE teachers have qualified but have no chance of getting a job given the cutbacks over the next few years. I ask the minister to consider putting it to her education colleagues that we should have a moratorium for two or three years on churning out even more PE teachers. If they cannot get work, they will drift away from the profession, and all the investment and expertise are lost.

I will. I do not know why we were arguing about free swimming at seven or eight years of age—I was in my school team when I was seven. However, the minister is bang on with the free school swimming.

Will the member give way?

I am interested to find out whether Richard Baker considers that the taxation from oil now would be of benefit and whether it should come to the Parliament or go to the Treasury.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. For the guidance of old lags as well as newer members, can you rule as to what the protocol should be for maiden speeches? Should there be any interventions on those speeches? If there are to be no interventions, should those speeches be controversial?

I am interested in the state of preparedness of volunteers in the local constituency, who might well learn new skills, including job skills, thanks to the Commonwealth games. Is that preparation as far forward as the member would like it to be?

As someone whose family got a new house in East Kilbride, I can remember when East Kilbride was accused of skimming off the best of the development money from Lanarkshire, as it did. Good came out of that, but if some of the money is now going back to the older parts of Lanarkshire, I would understand that.

I endorse everything that Mr Harvie would wish for in terms of equity and fairness in Scotland. However, this Parliament is a creature of Westminster. We must abide by the rules that it has bound us by. How does he suggest that we break the rules in order to find the capital to invest in services to the extent that both of us would want to?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Suits you—sir. [Laughter.] I believe that there is more than one way to be addressed in the chamber. I very much appreciated Patrick Harvie’s speech, almost all of which I agreed with. That was also why I liked Alex Salmond’s speech. They both aimed high—they were thinking big and beyond the Parliament’s day-to-day work. We should all do that now. The one thing in Patrick Harvie’s speech with which I disagreed was the implication that we could somehow buck the trend that is set from Westminster. Westminster has decided on a strategy that means curtailing expenditure—people there hope to shrink the deficit. Patrick Harvie and I might disagree on how that should be done, but Westminster is the sovereign power. We should not start by saying that we will not try to make the best of a bad job; we should explain—as Alex Salmond attempted to today—what more could be done and what could be done better with sovereign powers in this Parliament to cope with the economy and to secure the employment expansion that we hope to have. I was glad that Alex Salmond concentrated on that, because notions such as improving employment prospects and expanding the workforce are not divided from political independence. Everything that we have heard today underlines the fact that, if we do not have the independence of action to customise strategy and policy to suit our condition, we will not achieve the optimum. I loved Iain Gray’s speech, too—it was thoughtful, obviously considered and humane. When he spoke, I thought that it was marvellous that we were on the same track and were beginning to think of the optimum that we can do for Scotland and not of doing a little more or a little better. Then he went and spoiled it. He talked about a single police force—no way, as long as I am here. We cannot think of having a single police force, because of the civil liberties implications. We could have two or perhaps three forces; I would settle for more than one. That is not said in a spirit of anything other than my hope for a consensual opportunity. The other comment by Iain Gray that disappointed me was the implication that the United Kingdom was okay. If the United Kingdom is okay, why is one in four children born to fail? Why is that endemic? That situation did not arise under the previous SNP Administration and it would be wrong of Ms Dugdale to suggest that it did. I am old enough to remember the production in the west of Scotland of a publication called “Born to Fail?” Previously, one in 10 Scots children was born to fail; the figure is now one in four or five. As far as I can recall, the SNP was not in power and we did not have independence of action on social policy at that time.

As members know, I am an old girn. I will give no Government in here the credit for doing as much as could be done—we can all think of different and better things that could be done. However, within the limitations of the powers and the spending powers that it had, the SNP Government did not too badly. I will say no more than that. Ms Dugdale’s party leader asserts that the United Kingdom is the best that we can do for Scotland. If it is, why do we have such a health record? Why do we continue to lag behind even the rest of the United Kingdom, never mind similar communities or nations? The legacy of the union relates to growth and the opportunities for young people. The one issue on which I really agreed with Iain Gray was that people who believe in the union will have to prove that it is the best that we can do before we opt for it, just as the SNP will have to flesh out much more the difference between sovereign power—and what can be achieved by and through it—and devolved power from Westminster. Annabel Goldie disappointed me, because she said that her unionism was an emotional thing. She said that, when we get down to it, the issue is how we feel about the situation. No—it is not touchy-feely at all. It is about delivering quality of life, delivering opportunity for people and doing the best that we can. That is very practical—it is about how we organise our economy and social policy. Incidentally, I point out to the person who did not understand the emphasis on the social wage in Mr Salmond’s statement that Harold Wilson first used the term. I agreed with Harold Wilson then and agree with Alex Salmond now. We can point to too much in Scotland that suggests that our present system of governance does not work. If it does not work, we must find something that does. Before I finish, I will make a special plea—as I usually do—to the very nice finance minister. I add my voice to that of Linda Fabiani, who spoke about credit unions. We will need credit unions and a fund for them, because—like it or lump it—we will have cuts, unemployment and more poverty. The folk who have least will get least, unless we do something to ensure that we even up the score.

The member has raised the matter of the importance—or lack of it—of the constitutional question. How are we to improve on all the situations that he has just outlined if we do not improve our system of governance? All of those things currently depend on a stitched-together system of governance.

This issue has been troubling me for quite some time. I accept 100 per cent the cabinet secretary’s sincerity when she says that she will protect the NHS, but how can she give a 100 per cent guarantee when she does not control interest rates and does not know what will happen to the pound—in other words, when she does not have the economic levers to ensure that she can move her finances around?

I, too, give my good wishes to the front bench team and the ranks behind them. However, I must first offer a word of comfort to Willie Rennie: we do not have to choose between picking fights with Westminster and picking up the economy—we can do both. That said, I do not expect Mr Swinney and his team to be able to undo all the damage that has been done to the economy by people in another place. I congratulate the First Minister on Shona Robison’s appointment. I would like to be able to say something of comfort to all the ministers but I do not have the time and perhaps what I had to say would not be all that welcome. However, Shona Robison is the correct person in the correct job at the right time. So much is happening in sport in Scotland that someone such as her can genuinely act as a spearhead and pull together very disparate threads. I want her to do more—for example, I want her to see to the teaching of physical education—but we will talk about that later. I wish everyone the very best.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. A N Other—it is okay. I expect that the First Minister will be as surprised to hear congratulations from me as Willie Rennie was to be making the statement that he did, but I wish him all the very best—he had a wonderful victory. What Annabel Goldie said is absolutely true: the First Minister was elected by the Scots to govern as well as he could within the constraints of devolution. However, he has another responsibility because the Scots knew what they were voting for when they voted for him—they voted for a man who believes in independence of sovereignty. I hope and expect that, as well as governing as well as possible, the Government will run a commentary comparing and contrasting what we do with what we could do had we the full panoply of powers that most Scots are coming to realise we should have. Patrick Harvie and I had a big fall-out. We were going to go for a job share and he thought that I wanted it with him, but I wanted it with the First Minister. I wish him and the Government party all the best.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Try and follow that! I ask of the cabinet secretary and whoever is the cabinet secretary in the next session that they look again at how drugs are classified and that they carry out a study into who uses them, when, where, why and why they stop. We have never looked at that properly. I hope that the next cabinet secretary will undertake such a study.

Presiding Officer, I wonder whether I can set a precedent, even as late in the session as this, by telling you that I will hurry up—instead of having you tell me. However, this is not an occasion for casting up. Annabel Goldie can refer to the 300 times that she has had a chance to ask questions of the First Minister; I will not remind the chamber that it has been two years since I got the chance to ask Alex a question. Bitterness aside, my only real regret about the Presiding Officer’s time in the chair is his attachment to an unworthy Belgian—d’Hondt—who should have been hunted from this Parliament. I hope that the Presiding Officer’s legacy paper will recommend changes to our procedures, where they have proved to be too constraining. I think that perhaps Mr d’Hondt could be called in to give evidence. Until we meet again—in the white heather club or in a jobcentre plus near you—I thank Alasdair Morgan, Trish Godman and Alex Fergusson for their commitment to the Scottish Parliament.

I want to say how much I appreciate amendment 15; I congratulate Ted Brocklebank on lodging it. We will sorely miss him, but the amendment will be a good testimony.

The minister said that, within the limits of devolution, the Government was doing its best to cope with unemployment. I infer from that that he thinks that a measure greater than devolution would produce a better result. Can he tell me how he will get there?

I greatly appreciate the analysis, but I wonder why the member would go to such lengths to ensure that we do not have sovereignty. We can enjoy equal sovereignty in a better way than we can enjoy federation in an unequal partnership.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Jeremy Purvis take an intervention?

I associate myself with those who have thanked Wendy Alexander for what she has done. I am sure that she will do more in the future; she is not off the hook. I will turn the debate on its head. What is the reason for staying in the United Kingdom? As far as I am concerned, there is only one reason—that doing so provides better governance and delivers better public services than a Scots sovereign Parliament would for the Scottish people. That is the reason why we are here. Unless the people who promote the union at all costs can guarantee that position, they stand on no firmer ground than the idealists who say that the Scots could do as other nations have done. Does any MSP present really believe that they are somehow inferior to deliver the most suitable and customised set of policies for the people who they are and the people whom they represent? I doubt it very much. I do not want to believe that sovereignty does it all and that we will automatically do it all because we are sovereign—that is not the reason. The reason comes from what sovereignty would do for us once we exercised it on our own behalf. Sovereignty releases creativity and ambition. To be frank, the ambition that we heard from the Government was too limited for my taste. We heard more ambition from some people who are supposed to oppose the onward march of self-government. I will take no more time for my speech. I simply ask MSPs to think on whether we are bound to do less for Scots if we govern ourselves, according to our own criteria and in fellowship with the people with whom we have shared the United Kingdom. We can maintain the social union, but we must change the political union in favour of the people. I identify myself with the open-mindedness of Tom McCabe.

I pay tribute to the work that Nicol Stephen has done in the Parliament, but why do we have to wait for a stable Europe? Do we not have to deal with the world as it is?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I will take as short a time as possible, Presiding Officer.

Are you feeling well, Presiding Officer? Gosh, things have changed—and I thought it was all the same.

I want to support most of what has been said by my Edinburgh colleagues, in particular Dr McKee and Malcolm Chisholm, and Robin Harper—och, I may as well chuck in Margaret Smith as well. We do not really disagree in our analysis of Edinburgh, which is that as well as being Scotland’s capital and rather a special place, it is also a place that mops up many of the people who are in real difficulties during the recession. They drift into cities—that is well known—so the call on the city’s services is even more pronounced. The employment and help to get into work projects to which Malcolm Chisholm referred are the key to this. If even one of the projects in group 5—the group least likely, it is analysed at this stage, to obtain the funding that they have at present—is lost, there will be a considerable loss to the city. As Robin Harper reminded us in relation to the up-to-date figures, we have not yet felt the tsunami in Edinburgh. Because of employment patterns, we have not yet felt the worst of it. More and more young people in particular are being robbed of a future. I know that the minister shares my sympathy for younger people, particularly those from more traumatised areas who have even less chance of making it through. Even though we have had acknowledgement through the capital city supplement, I still urge the minister to see Edinburgh as a very special case—a particular case that needs just that bit more help because it has more to cope with in the way of creating jobs for young people. The facts are undeniable and I hope that the minister will bear them in mind. I acknowledge that those of us who urge further spend on the Government are supposed to say where the money will come from. I am not as clever as that—I just hope that the minister has some in reserve.

I greatly appreciate the effort that has been made on apprenticeships, but many of the schemes that the motion refers to are ones that are needed to prepare people for apprenticeships—they do pre-apprenticeship work.

2. This one is something of an old chestnut. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether Enric Miralles’s authenticated, original drawings, designs and plans are catalogued and stored in an accessible manner in the parliamentary complex. (S3O-13103)

Although I am disappointed to hear that the SPCB does not retain the original competition entries, I am more interested in the ones that I was assured were produced when Enric Miralles was in hospital in Houston. There was the small matter of who was actually designing the complex, but let that remain in the past and let us see the up-to-date drawings from that time. I am sure that visitors to the Parliament would love to see them, given that they are told so much about them.

I want to stay with the question of how procurement might affect this Parliament if the House of Commons decides that a particular route should be followed. I am referring to the security arrangements that members of the security forces suggest to us. It seems to me that we always take their advice, so I would like to know how the corporate body—

No, it is about—

Was it anticipated that the High Court of Justiciary would be overruled by the UK Supreme Court when we signed up for it? I commend the suggestion made by the Conservative party about a review of the ECHR.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In his answer to John Park, the First Minister admitted that local authorities have full responsibility for policy making in their areas. With the greatest of respect, I question why the leader of the Opposition and the First Minister were allowed to hurl insults at each other about what local authorities should or should not do. I ask you to call together the leaders of the parties and remind them of the standing orders.

Will the member give way?

It occurs to me that the member already has a team on his side. Campbell Christie’s commission exists to examine the sort of process that the member has outlined. The member is right, and he should use Campbell Christie, who is on his side.

I will not pretend that I like every last jot and tittle in Mr Swinney’s budget. However, had it not been for our ban on fox hunting, I would have been sure that the start of the Labour Party’s contribution to the debate sounded like foxes being shot. In later speeches, though, I realised that there was something more to what Labour had to say. In an echo of something that Wendy Alexander alluded to, we could start by calling the budget by its correct name. It is not a budget, so why do we not settle for a name that does not flatter to deceive? How about the Scottish Government’s spending programme or cap-in-hand day? I would even suggest kidology day, because that is what just about every member has been doing, with the honourable exception of Patrick Harvie. However, the minister is to be congratulated on his sense of fairness in doling out the local authority share of his spending money, especially following the unprecedented weather that has probably left every council in Scotland with a bigger roads repair bill than it might have anticipated. One of my personal tests of Mr Swinney’s performance was how he met a genuine dilemma on how best to use whatever amount of the block grant he allocates to Scotland’s cities. It is almost impossible to calculate a share of the money that is available to the minister that everyone would agree is fair, when our local authorities have such different locations, needs and other factors. The cabinet secretary knows the case that I have made for an enhancement of the capital city supplement, given the extra effort that is required to address the damage to the capital city’s appearance and infrastructure that has been caused by the severe winter weather. I thank him for the extra money that he has levered in via the capital city supplement. There are quite a few weeks left, so he might find that there is a bit more left in the kitty. I am willing to share with Margaret Smith, who made an excellent case for the city partnership. I know that other members from the Lothians region agree. However, I am mindful of the fact that members have a duty to contribute to policies that impact on areas outwith their constituencies and regions. It was a happy coincidence that Dalry baths was there to provide an excellent case study for Campbell Christie’s commission’s consideration of ways in which we might better deliver public services and keep services in the public sector. I thank the cabinet secretary, because he smoothed the way towards my having a meeting with the commission last week, and we are well on the way to using Dalry baths as a template. On the subject of the responsibility of members to contribute to wider interests, I have asked the minister to instigate a review of private finance initiative and PPP contracts. I am extremely serious about the issue, and I am certain that people outwith Parliament think that it is ridiculous that some companies are making profits while other people’s contracts—whether commercial or personal employment contracts—are having to be renegotiated. I have not given up on that.

The short answer is yes. The public sector and the public are being ripped off and—we are told—it is going to be 10 years before we get back to the economic circumstances that we had in 2007. It is just too long to be taken for doolies. That said, I am almost entirely persuaded to support the spending programme, especially the move towards the colleges that I and others approve of and which Jeremy Purvis—to give him his due—has pursued. My views in that respect are sympathetic and positive. However, he has been lucky; it looks as though we have the best of the Liberal Democrats north of the border. It is just a pity that their colleagues south of the border do not take their example from them. I also thank, and am grateful to, the cabinet secretary for levering a bit of money into the Midlothian ski centre, through sportscotland. In the end, I did not do all that much swithering. I have swithered in the past about voting for the plans that have been set out by Labour and the SNP, but this time, at least, the SNP put figures to its proposals. Labour did not and I suggest that its members listen to Douglas Alexander’s comment that they might well be a Government in waiting, so they should not only be oppositionist but offer alternatives. They did not do that in this debate.

Does the member believe that the money that is available in the devolved circumstances under which we govern is enough to do what he thinks should be done to redress the imbalances that exist and to grow the Scottish economy?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, you ruled earlier that the leader of the Conservative party should keep her point of order until after questions had been taken. You said that that was because in this chamber we do not accept point of orders during question time. Is that a convention or a standing order?

As another Lothians member, I am intrigued as to how much it is estimated the 12 stores in Princes Street will lose. Does the member have those figures to hand?

Each?

The cabinet secretary has just given a great deal of information on the impact of the proposal. Is that why he did not have an impact assessment? Would it have cost more than it cost to put together those figures?

The cabinet secretary will forgive me if I do not identify a source from which I hope that he will find enough money to help to pump prime an initiative that sportscotland is undertaking, to help Midlothian Council to develop the ski slope at Hillend. Hillend is a national facility and a national treasure, which a small local authority is trying to develop on its own. It hits all the health, education and growth objectives that we are trying to hit. May I have an assurance on that and other matters that I have discussed with the cabinet secretary?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I detect a common thread between the member’s speech and Jeremy Purvis’s speech. The members think that the priority is growth and not the protection of universal services. Do the Liberal Democrats advocate selective or targeted services?

I am with Patrick Harvie when he says that we are not here to manage Tory cuts and that we must resist them, but what with? Two hands tied behind our backs punching at each other? I am also with Mike Rumbles when he says that Government must compromise and the other parties must compromise, too. The Government could, for example, compromise on the matter that Malcolm Chisholm raised but, as yet, I do not know in what way or in what area the Liberal Democrats are willing to compromise. I asked about that and tried to find out what their feeling is on the provision of universal services. Would they target them? Do they see that as a way of saving money? The Tories have indicated some areas in which they would save money, so they are halfway towards a compromise. I am well aware that we are asking the nigh-on impossible of the cabinet secretary. There is just not enough money to do what we would all like to be done. However, I ask the cabinet secretary to look again at the real cut of £1.7 million for the poorest students in higher and further education. Ignorant people never ever set in train a programme for growth—educated people do that. I also ask him to take a leaf out of Her Majesty’s Government’s book and perhaps create an alternative source of revenue by clawing back money from contracts, the terms of which have been overtaken by economic recession. HM Government is currently renegotiating the terms of contracts that were struck with its major suppliers of goods and services. Could the Scottish Government take the same action in relation to the companies whose PPP contracts now appear to be ridiculous in their generosity? Those contracts are generous with public money that is being drawn away from education services and other services that directly impact on Scotland’s ability to withstand a double-dip recession. By the way, I remind everybody that the recession is not driven from Edinburgh, but is instead a result of London-made policy. Could we agree that London has not exactly provided a shining example of economic management? Is it right that a market has been created in PPP contracts? Companies bundle them up, which greatly enhances the value of their interest in the projects through economies of scale. The PPP contracts are not sacrosanct. They are commercial contracts that are open to renegotiation. If we are all in it together, why do we exclude them? That is a scandal and I urge the minister to see how much could be recouped from that source. This year’s budget alone shows the cost of PFI/PPP payments to be £800 million, some of which goes towards contractual agreements that were struck well before the economic slump. For example, there is a hospital that is costing the health board and the Scottish Government three times its estimated value. I am not a latecomer to the issue. My election leaflet of 1999, under the heading “RIE ... RIP OFF”, said that I would “demand that the Scottish Parliament investigate the terms of the PFI deal which hands control of, and profits from, the new Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh to private companies.” We have waited 10 years and those companies have had a fair shot at it. Why do we not take the bull by the horns? I urge the cabinet secretary to do that. I should, however, thank the cabinet secretary for being understanding of the special pleas that I made on some constituency interests, such as the ski slope in Midlothian. I know that members would be disappointed if I did not mention that. Another issue is the wonderfully imaginative and ambitious project for watersports in Leith docks. I will tell the cabinet secretary much more about that if he gives me hope this afternoon that there will be some money left in the kitty—it does not need a lot of money at all. To be fair to the cabinet secretary, he has tried to make the best of a bad job. Gavin Brown was critical of the Scottish loan fund, but I wonder what else the cabinet secretary could have done. I did not hear clearly from Mr Brown what the cabinet secretary could do.

I am half-satisfied with that answer; the member has obviously thought about it. However, in the new era of co-operation—late in the day though it may be—perhaps the issue can be thrown into the pot. I am quite serious. It does no one in Scotland and no party that is represented in the Parliament any good to denigrate our ability to get ourselves out of the mess that has been made for us. It is foolish to point to small countries and say that, somehow, we cannot do what many of them can. I will not waste my time chastising the people who do that—except Mike Rumbles. I remind him that the “Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland” report concluded that in the financial year 2008-09 Scotland had a surplus of £1.3 billion, or 0.9 per cent of GDP, which included a share of oil revenues and of UK support for the banking collapse. The UK, by comparison, had a budget deficit of 3.4 per cent, which included 100 per cent assumption of oil revenues, so we are not all that bad really; we start from a much higher platform than Ireland. The committee’s report talks about the protection of universal services. The Parliament must address that issue. I agree with Patrick Harvie that there are services that must be protected, but there are some that we must look at again. Someone must bite the bullet on the issue. I urge the Government to take the lead and Labour members to be honest, because they know that perfectly well. Can we leave the matter to Campbell Christie’s commission? Perhaps, but we must give him some feeling of confidence that the Parliament will make a realistic assessment of how national and universal services can be delivered in a new way. The budget does not say much about that; perhaps it should.

Does the member recall the heartfelt pleas that various businesses made before the referendum to establish the Scottish Parliament? Whenever someone suggests that the Parliament should have more powers, businesses say that they are going—but they stay.

Will the member give way?

I normally refer to fish with a twist of lemon and a shake of black pepper, but, if I am allowed to intervene in this debate, I suggest that there is an alternative to the suggestion that Maureen Watt made. If Alex Salmond has been trying since 1988 to make sense of the common fisheries policy, does he not draw from that some sort of lesson that maybe we should just get out of the European Union altogether?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, and happy new year. Will the cabinet secretary say who will hire the chief of police, and who will fire the chief of police? Will the cabinet secretary take responsibility for that?

I speak as someone who has never been to university. I support the cabinet secretary when he says that it is wrong to go for paid further and higher education because of—I paraphrase—the mistaken belief that only graduates benefit from higher education. I also completely endorse the statement that higher and further education is  about who we are and what we seek to be. As a result, I wonder whether he thinks that the options can be anything other than a wish list without total control of the fiscal and monetary levers in the economy to allow the Government to move as much money as is required around in favour of an idealistic and, if we like, ideologue's idea of what education should be. I do not think that he can do it and I do not think that anybody else can. We should get that into perspective.

To ask the Scottish Government whether the recently announced increase in the climate challenge fund, or any future similar funding, will be available to groups who have temporary or short-term leasing. (S3O-12251)

There might have been a feeling abroad that short-term leasing was not a good idea and did not give groups enough time to dig in—literally—and produce better reasons for their use of the funding. If we consider, for example, the evidence that has been produced by Royal Edinburgh community gardens, we can see that, over one year, there have been many benefits. People get into the idea, and where they have only short-term use of land, they are likely to go on to another area for leasing.

I put on record my support for the Christie commission, which is the correct way to look at how we deliver what are currently totally publicly delivered services. We may need to use our imagination a bit more over the next decade. With that in mind, I wrote to the cabinet secretary this morning, suggesting three projects in Lothian that might act as templates for the commission. I ask him to look kindly on those.

We have had a good debate today. I said that I was proud that the Parliament was dealing with the issue and have had no reason to change my opinion, although obviously differences of opinion and morality have been expressed. I sincerely hope that the Parliament can encompass all of those. I thank the people who have made an effort to be here, because some of them have made an almost superhuman effort to bear witness to our proceedings. As I said at the start, we are not alone in our deliberations. In a Radio Europe broadcast last week, the presenter informed me that assisted death, among other end of life issues, is being discussed across Europe. Interestingly, he also told me that our poll figure of 77 per cent in favour of assisted death was consistent with similar polls that have been conducted elsewhere in Europe. I understand why members have argued that we should not be influenced too much by opinion polls, but the polls that have been conducted on  the issue have been consistent—so consistent that they are guiding the deliberations of the people who are considering the matter in England. I am glad that at the end of the debate there will be a free vote, as it signifies that each MSP is free to use his or her judgment on whether the bill would enhance or harm the whole community. In a free vote, MSPs must also balance their own conscience with the need to reflect their constituents' wishes. Most, if not all, MSPs who adhere faithfully to the teachings of their church, mosque, synagogue, temple or meeting place will find themselves fundamentally opposed to the bill because, according to their beliefs, it usurps the place of God, whom they believe to be the only giver and taker of life. In short, they find the bill morally repugnant and ethically unacceptable. MSPs who find the bill as I have described can never vote for assisted death without setting aside their conscience. I hope that Mr Rumbles will take note when I say that none of us has the right to expect them to do so. The correct action for them is to explain to their constituents why they could not vote for a measure with such a proven level of support among the general public. Many MSPs are probably not opposed to the bill in principle but have been inundated with communications from faith-based organisations. My advice to any colleagues who are in that position is to vote for the bill to proceed to intensive scrutiny, during which they and I will be able to amend provisions that need to be sharpened or explained better. I am grateful to Anne McLaughlin for making that point. Whereas colleagues whose opinions and beliefs derive from their religion will continue to oppose the bill regardless of any amendment, others whose beliefs are not based on a particular religion are free to respond to their constituents' suggestions and ideas. That latter group of MSPs, their constituents and I know that, if they oppose the bill and neither their conscience nor their firm belief that the bill is so bad that it cannot be improved by amendment stands as a barrier to the public's desire for the Parliament to support and act on the bill's principles, they have opted out of offering the leadership that the electors have a right to expect of their elected representatives.

A different quality has been obvious in some of the campaigning on the bill. I quoted Care Not Killing's card in my opening speech, and the parliamentary briefing that Inclusion Scotland circulated says: "the 'means of administration' might conceivably include gas (carbon monoxide or helium), ... a bullet or a push off a cliff." Am I meant to think that that takes seriously a matter that, as members have admitted, causes great concern to a number of people who, as Mike Rumbles said, could be disappointed if the bill is stopped in its tracks?

Roseanna Cunningham said that we had to accept what Inclusion Scotland informed the committee as being the opinion of disabled and vulnerable people. That is why I quoted the publication. I appeal to MSPs who have perhaps been overly influenced by that campaign but not convinced by its spurious claims about the bill to examine their own conscience. I urge MSPs whose beliefs allow them to contemplate improving the bill not to duck for cover but, instead, to take account of the weight of public opinion and either vote to continue the bill or abstain from voting.

I already explained that I fully respect the right of MSPs to individual conscience—indeed, I guard it—but if that conflicts with what appears to be a fairly obvious public point of view, it is up to the member to explain that to his constituents. That seems to me to be perfectly moral and honourable. Jeremy Purvis went to the heart of the matter. He also talked about the difference between the practical and the moral. That is what has been difficult about the debate. Some members are more concerned with the morality of the debate, and others are concerned with the bill's practical provisions. I freely concede that, if we go on to stage 2, amendments will be made that will improve and clarify the bill. Mary Scanlon talked about the lack of guidance that is given to doctors, but the General Medical Council usually gives doctors good guidance on matters that involve sensitivities beyond those that they encounter in their normal, everyday practice,  so I have more trust in the professions than was expressed in some of the speeches that we heard. Members also asked how doctors would know whether a patient was coming under undue pressure. That is the sort of professional judgment that doctors—including general practitioners—psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, and consultant nurses make every day. I do not have the same fears that others have expressed. If those fears were relevant to the debate, I am absolutely certain that we would have found an echo of them in regimes where this practice has been in place for 10 years.

The member put better than I have done the inequity of approach to the moral question that we have seen demonstrated in some cases. The bill is about not only morals but people. A lady from Dundee whose husband died two years ago got in touch with me today. She said that "he had insight into his condition knowing he was losing his personality, his talents and eventually his dignity. He hallucinated regularly"— The lady gets to the quick of it. She mentions dignity, but there seems to be an unwillingness on the part of some members in the chamber to accept that dignity is a subjective notion. I fully accept that many members have a different sense of dignity from me, but who is to say that their sense should be preferred to mine in relation to legal protection? That does not seem equitable to me, and is one point that I sought to establish with the bill. The lady from Dundee went on to tell me that her husband "was treated like an errant child, being told the GP did not 'do' euthanasia but he would be treated with dignity and respect when his time came." She denies absolutely that that is what happened, talks of the hell that her husband experienced at his death and wonders who benefited from the law being applied in that way. The bill questions whether the present law protects sufficiently the minority of people who cannot be assured of a dignified and peaceful death. We have heard much about palliative care in the debate. There is no conflict between palliative care  and someone at the end of such care saying to a nurse or doctor, "I have had enough. I want to go now." I believe that that is their decision to make. Opponents of the bill do not believe that. I am not at all sure that we will be able to reconcile the gap between us. I am working on the assumption that there are MSPs who feel that there is more that has to be delved into. My appeal to them is this: do not dump the bill at this stage. We have said what we have said about opinion polls, but we all know, as do people on the street, that there is public support for the principle of autonomy in a person determining the last act of their own life. That principle may not have majority support, although I believe that it does. Opinion polls—much derided as they are—guide us on many other things. We can derive from them some feeling of decency in the questions that they asked and put some sort of faith in the answers that they came up with. If we do that, we will not kill the bill this afternoon.

Will the member give way?

Can the member name another forum in Scotland that allows people who are not elected representatives to have their voices heard directly?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I wonder whether the member could clear up a couple of points. First, can she point to any section in the bill that says that she will not be properly supported and nursed up until the point at which she wishes to end her life? Secondly, does she find the bill morally repugnant?

No.

No.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is it a sin?

I thank my friend for giving way. The point is that our differing views do not enjoy equality in law.

I reiterate my respect for the consistency of Michael Matheson's views, but he and I differ on autonomy. I would like him to hear what Dr Jack McPhee, a retired general practitioner, said: "At its heart, this bill is about compassion for patients and respect for self-autonomy, and opponents of the bill should therefore have very good reasons for opposing it."

Does the member recall that that point was put clearly to the witnesses who came from the Netherlands, and that they said that there was no record at all of that trust between patient and doctor being harmed?

How does the member define the use of a dual-effect drug at the end, if not as physician-assisted death?

The question of dignity has come up again. The minister says that she agrees with Mark Hazelwood, but does she accept that dignity is a subjective concept?

Would the member care to elaborate on two points before we go very much further? The first is about autonomy. The bill does not talk about absolute autonomy. It talks about the autonomy of the individual concerned, and we all understand that that is bound to be constrained in certain circumstances. Why does he think that should count against—

—the bill?

Will the member give way?

I thank everyone who had considerable difficulty in getting here today. I confess to a wee bit of pride in opening the stage 1 debate on the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill. We, the Parliament that represents the wishes, beliefs, hopes and determination of our fellow countrymen and women, are doing something today that Parliaments are meant to do: we are trying to find an honourable, fair and equitable solution to a problem. Put another way, as an institution, we are meeting a challenging situation head on and doing so in a manner that reflects well on the inherent democracy that exemplifies Scotland and which underpins our parliamentary processes. The idea of assisting someone to achieve a peaceful death within the law, in what that person considers to be a dignified fashion, is alive and well and is being discussed in countries all over the world. In this part of the world, the Isle of Man is in the initial stages of a bill and in England work is being done to prepare a bill for the House of Lords, but the Scottish Parliament is leading the debate. One or two opponents of the bill say that the law of Scotland is quite clear on assisted suicide and that the bill is not needed. That is to assume that the law sits well with contemporary attitudes and beliefs about the circumstances of our own deaths. Interest in the cases in England in which people might wish assistance to end their own lives before nature decrees and seek assurance that those who help them will not be prosecuted is just as strong in Scotland. Although the law is different on either side of the border, opinion polls consistently show the same level of support for the idea on both. In case I forget later, I acknowledge the professional commitment of David Cullum's non-Executive bills unit and thank its staff for getting the bill to this stage. As ever, I am indebted to my colleagues Peter Warren and Mary Blackford. I am also, recently, indebted to our intern, Kush Govani, and our work experience student, Joe Somerville. We have all enjoyed the support of the Humanist Society of Scotland, Friends at the End and  hundreds of individual Scots—medical and nursing professionals, clergymen and women, lawyers and people with a personal or family interest in the bill's intentions. My pride in the Scottish Parliament's approach to the issue derives not only from the time and effort that some MSPs and their staff have put into consulting their constituents; Parliament staff have also contributed. I especially acknowledge the unique contribution that was made by Jeremy Purvis when he started the ball rolling with a bill proposal that failed but, nevertheless, was the platform from which my bill was launched. In the same vein of getting my retaliation in first, I cut to the chase and condemn as unworthy and cheap the contribution from the publishers and authors of the catalogue of linguistic contortions I have here, headed "Care Not Killing". The postcard that I am holding up was distributed in churches, and it caused alarm among frail elderly and disabled people. One lady, Frances Robson, from Edinburgh, got in touch with my office to say that she had done a latter-day Jenny Geddes in her church. Someone had preached from the pulpit using the card as his text. She stood up and challenged what he was saying, which she said was political and not what a church is for. She was one of many good, churchgoing people who contacted my office to say that they could incorporate the idea that I propose today within their belief system. The organisers of the campaign were no doubt delighted to unload 10,000 filled-in postcards into the arms of MSPs who oppose the bill. However, as most, if not all, of those concerned are churchgoers, I confess to being puzzled about how they squared their conscience with the statements in the card. Care Not Killing says: "The Bill will"— not maybe, might or could— "put large numbers of sick or disabled Scottish people at risk." From whom? The penalties will remain unchanged for smothering someone, even when asked to do so by the person wishing to end their life, or for helping them to drink a lethal dose of opiates. Even qualified and registered medical professionals, doctors and consultant nurses will require to follow the procedures laid down or they, too, will be breaking the law and will face prosecution. This tacky little card dismisses those safeguards as "illusory". According to Care Not Killing, the need for witnesses to the requesting patient's application to a doctor for assistance and the requirement for psychiatric assessment before the person concerned makes a second request are merely "so-called safeguards".  The first claim on the card must be dismissed as heartless scaremongering. If even one MSP in the debate can prove a logical, inevitable link between people who are defined in the bill as having the legal right to seek help to end their life prematurely—provided that the safeguarding features of the bill are observed—and sick or disabled people who do not wish to comply with the bill's procedures, whether or not they are terminally ill or suffering from a degenerative condition, I look forward to hearing their justification of the statements on the card. If the tightly prescribed legal rights of the bill could reasonably be expected to pose such a risk to vulnerable groups, presumably a similar pattern of behaviour would exist in places where assisted suicide is legal. None of the witnesses questioned by the committee gave house room to that claim by Care Not Killing. Care not Killing also states unequivocally that vulnerable and depressed people will "be put at risk of self-harm." Who says? Where are the studies or statistics to prove that the bill, which rests on the legal right of a requesting patient to seek professional help to bring life to an end, will have any effect on the behaviour of people who do not seek help? Do the opponents of this limited, defined measure claim that more people will attempt to take their own life than at present? Why? Would they be outside medical and social-work support programmes, as many people who attempt suicide are at present? How would the bill change their circumstances? Another claim that is made as a statement of proven fact in the leaflet is that "(assisted suicide) will come to be seen as an easy, low-cost alternative to good care." Who will see it in that way? According to Care Not Killing, elderly people in care will feel that it their duty to die. Some elderly people stuck in below-standard care homes do wish for an early death, but the bill's provisions do not cover them. I hope that we do not hear a litany of sanctimonious remarks about improving care provision. We have had more than enough time to do that.

I will come to my views on the committee's report at the end of my speech; Tricia Marwick might wish that she had not asked for that.  In his evidence to the committee, Dr Georg Bosshard said: "Doctors will never be happy with assisted suicide and euthanasia, and it is important that they are not. As my colleague said, that is an important safeguard."—[ Official Report , End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill Committee , 7 September 2010; c 23.] That is how doctors feel about it. If we are to believe Care Not Killing, however, doctors are without morals, feelings or sentiment. Perhaps Care Not Killing was referring to the powers that be—perhaps it meant that the state, or even just doctors, nurses and hard-up health boards, will view assisted dying as an easy low-cost alternative to good care. Is Care Not Killing claiming that even hale and hearty old people, or people who are living fulfilling lives in wheelchairs, will be snuffed out even as they do their best to hang on to life for as long as is possible for them? Perhaps Care Not Killing had in mind the caricature of greedy, heartless family members, who it is sure will change character and depart from the normal behaviour of caring relatives who do not want to let a loved one go. Doctors and nurses who have dealt with people who are in the very last stages of their life have told me that the family want the person to stay. For the opponents of the bill's principles to have any credibility, they will require to back up the assertions in the card with facts and numbers, and explanations of the processes that they claim will be set in motion if the bill becomes law. Supporters of the bill can cite the evidence that the committee has heard from witnesses. For the predictions of the bill's opponents to be credible, Oregon, the Netherlands, Belgium and Switzerland must be heartless and inhumane societies. The card concludes with a hypocritical assertion that assisted dying is contrary to good medical practice. Members and their constituents know that, for generations, and perhaps centuries, terminally ill people have been assisted to die through the administration of a double-effect dose of—usually—opiates to relieve suffering, in the knowledge that life is likely to be curtailed too. Quite apart from the proof that doctors took that decision as an act of care, it is plain from what we have heard throughout the whole debate that the British Medical Association does not speak for all doctors when it declares itself to be against the principle of assisted dying. I refer members to the evidence that was given to the committee by medical witnesses. Opinion among clinicians and other registered medical professionals differs on assisted dying, as it does among the general population—and why should it not? Their ethics, religiosity, beliefs and  creeds will be as varied as those of the rest of society. Indeed, there is evidence that, when asked for their opinion on assisted dying, the liberal democracies in our part of the world—some Roman Catholic, some Lutheran and some Calvinist—show a remarkable similarity of attitude.

I believe in the goodness of people, and that is why I am bringing the bill to the chamber today. I hear a call for evidence; I regret that I have run out of time, but I have the evidence with me and I am prepared to offer it throughout the debate. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill.

I have a point of order, Presiding Officer, on which I will be brief. I seek your guidance on whether I should ask permission to move a motion without notice. I can do so now or tomorrow, if that would be more convenient. The motion that I seek to move concerns the outcome of today's debate on the Scottish variable rate of income tax. I propose that all the papers relating to the debate should be sent to our two previous Presiding Officers asking them whether they will give us a commentary on everything that happened.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

As the reason for the cabinet secretary's switch of resource from revenue to capital spend is his determination to protect jobs and, consequently, to retain skills and capacity, which I support whole-heartedly, would he look favourably on a request from me that would involve a modest investment of capital—just over £500,000—in the refurbishment of the Midlothian ski centre, which is a national resource that is supported by one small local authority, and the proposed white-water sports complex in Leith docks, which is another potential national resource? Finally, if required, will he make available a small amount of capital to keep Dalry swim centre open until its long-term future is assured? That echoes the point that he made at the conclusion of his previous answer about the redesign of services involving agencies that, until now, have not been involved.

I appreciate the amount of consultation and conversation with stakeholders. Did many tenants tell the minister that they thought that landlords should have the sole opinion in deciding whether their benefits payments to catch up on their arrears were satisfactory?

At the outset, I should say that I greatly appreciate the general policy thrust of the bill. That is why I find it a bit puzzling that there should be such a constraint on the rights of tenants in respect of the equality that they should enjoy with their landlord, whether it is a social landlord or not. The minister's final few remarks give rise to an obvious reason why my amendments should be agreed to: he said that secondary legislation would spell out what is required on equity and reasonableness. Why on earth are there expressions in the bill such as "in the opinion of the landlord" and "acceptable to the landlord"? There is unilateral decision making in the bill, but according to the minister the secondary legislation is likely to be much more equitable. If I can have an explanation of that and how it would work, and the words that will appear in the secondary legislation, which are just as decisive as the words in the bill, I may consider not moving my amendments.  However, I think that the bill is tilted in favour of the landlord, and I do not see why it needs to be.

It is a fact that no protection is given to tenants that is similar to the protection that is given to home owners under the legislation that Mary Mulligan mentioned, and in which there is no unilateral decision making. The minister said that "meaningful dialogue" between tenant and landlord is needed before a decision is taken to apply to the court. That seems to be equitable to me, and such an approach is taken in the legislation that affects home owners who are unable to pay mortgages.

Will David McLetchie give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to conduct a review of the range, quality and relevance of courses on offer in further and higher education institutions. (S3O-11706)

I confess to being slightly puzzled. Speaking as someone who does not think that the attainment of 50 per cent of school leavers going to university is a holy grail, I am interested in the quality and content of courses. In chapter 2 of the position paper that was published  by the cabinet secretary's department today, he says: "There are also opportunities for the further development of articulation arrangements with colleges to encourage entry to the later years of degree study." Why? We first have to work out whether or not the college can deliver a preferable product. As regards all the physical activity and sports educational courses that are now on offer, I put it to the cabinet secretary that the colleges do a very good job, whereas the universities are still working out how they should be doing it.

Would Robert Brown's remarks apply equally if more than one person were being detained? I am thinking of a smaller police facility in which a number of people were being detained for 12 hours or more.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point of order refers to the code that is established when members are sworn in as members of Parliament. The clear implication is that we will produce to the best of our ability legislation that is required by the people whom we serve. I suggest that we are not doing that this afternoon. What we produce may be correct, but it will be subject to much less scrutiny than such an important piece of legislation requires. I request that we consult standing orders to see whether there is any other way of treating the matter properly.

Prior to my question, I feel that I should offer an apology, as this is the education minister's literacy action plan day: the syntax of my question appears very strangled, and for that I apologise. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it has identified a figure or a percentage of total expenditure feasible to achieve the budgetary savings it has identified as necessary. (S3O-11767)

He would say that, wouldn't he, Presiding Officer? I wonder whether the member can assure me that the non-Executive bills unit will be judged no more harshly than any of the other departments in the Parliament. If we are to serve the public and to enhance the quality of the work that is contributed by the members of the Parliament, NEBU is essential.

Will the member give way?

I put on record my thanks to James Kelly for bringing this debate to the chamber. If he and others care to look back at the previous debate on sport, they will be gratified to find that the sort of thing that Ross Finnie described has come on a bomb. It used just to be about what medals we would win at the games and how we would get on in the Ryder cup, but tonight we have heard about sport and the people who take part in it. I thank Hugh Henry for his kind and flattering remarks about the cross-party group on sport. I also thank Michael Matheson for saying that it is  about fun. Many folk who are not in the best of health still take part in bowls. There are all sorts of sports in which people can take part even if they are a bit impaired in their physical movements—I should know. It is important to put on record that sport is not all about beating health targets—we must ensure that people enjoy it. That is what I told Christine Grahame when she said that she was put off the idea of sport when she had to run around a cold hockey field with her big blue knickers on. Now she does not need to do that—she can buy a nice wee skirt. The cross-party group on sport has been able to influence some members; in part, that is what cross-party groups are about. We had the biggest turnout when the biggest hunky rugby players came to a meeting with the Calcutta cup; I think you were there, Presiding Officer. There was not a seat to be had. However, there was also a big turnout when Rangers came to talk not about its glorious history but about what it is doing in the community and the fact that it is reaching educationally the parts that many of our education authorities have not managed to reach. There is a growing programme to knit the affection for and ties to the sports clubs that exist in local communities into ways of coping with many of the social challenges that people face. We had some cracking meetings when we discussed community sport. I confess that that is where my interest lies. I am of course glad about the people from Scotland who win Olympic medals and I am glad for some of the wee countries that go to the Commonwealth games with two or three athletes. That is great for them and it is good that there is room for them, but my real interest is in community sport and in getting everybody to join in. I would like the benchmark for success under our sporting policy to be a wee country such as New Zealand. I do not know whether New Zealand has ever hosted a tournament like the Ryder cup—probably not. I do not know whether it has ever hosted the world rugby championships either—probably not. However, just about everybody in New Zealand gets out and plays some sort of sport. The same is true of Finland and Norway. Whoops—I nearly said "arc of prosperity". It just shows that we do not need money to enjoy sport; countries can still develop a decent sporting policy anyway. Jim Hume spoke about the importance of the governing bodies. That is where our priority for investment should lie. Sportscotland, the Scottish sports alliance and the people at the Scottish Sports Association can help to professionalise the management and administration of sport at community level. That is what gets kids in—if they can go along to a well-run local facility where there  is good coaching and some local connection that they can identify with, and if it is not too rarefied for them. I was glad that Jim Hume mentioned the governing bodies, and I am glad that we have talked about that at the cross-party group on sport. I am not meaning to criticise anybody, but spending money on extravagant opening ceremonies sits ill in countries that can hardly afford that sort of thing, where the organisers feel that they have to put on a show at the big sporting occasions. We will have to market Scotland to the world during Glasgow's games, but we should use imagination more than cash if we do not want to run foul of the people who depend on us to make their lives a bit better—we should ensure that the legacy fits in with their needs. The more people run, jump, throw and kick, the more people will become good at it and the more medal winners we will get. We do not need to work at it all that much, provided that we are all in it together, to coin a phrase. All I ask all members at this debate to do is ensure that our other colleagues sign the pledge for sport.

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to its decision to support tax increment financing for developments on Edinburgh's waterfront, whether it is aware of the plan by XStream Scotland to build the world's first indoor white-water rafting facility there. (S3O-11575)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply, but he did not talk about the white-water rafting facility and its direct relationship to the money that has been promised. However, I simply seek an assurance that the business plan for that world-class water sports facility will be considered on its merits, in relation to several Government policies around health and outdoor sport. Will the cabinet secretary investigate whether his department, or whichever department is more appropriate, can arrange a meeting with all interested parties—Forth Ports, the City of Edinburgh Council, sportscotland and so on—to ensure that this national, state-of-the-art facility does not slip through our fingers?

You still have six minutes to go.

Will the member give way?

Are the Scottish university principals panicking? Do they have time to wait until the cabinet secretary sorts the situation out, whether with a review or a green paper, or must he come up with the sort of mid-term solution that Hugh Henry suggested?

Will the member give way?

Will Bob Doris give way?

I appreciate the member's contribution, but there is a niggle that members might have heard from members of the public who have not attended university. What happens to all the students who come here from abroad? They go home and do not pay any progressively higher taxation or, indeed, any taxation at all.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. She picked the nicest-looking one. Has any work been done on the drop-out rate? Is whether a student drops out dependent on their financial circumstances or on whether they had the academic background to start the course in the first place?

It has taken us an inordinate amount of time to get to the point at which we are to have a panel chaired by Nicholas Shott to explore what needs to be done to make local television commercially viable. We are aware of the need to conserve public money and we already know what we need to make commercial television viable: we need advertising and, for about the next decade, we ain't gonna get advertising that would allow us to launch a new television system. Will the minister look seriously at the other proposal by the new UK Government to allow the ownership of local newspapers and local television and radio? As someone who worked in local radio and then worked in local television to see whether it was possible to replicate the success of local radio in television, I do not believe that it is.

The minister could save a bit of money by tackling the issue the other way and starting from newspapers instead of television.

I endorse every last word from my colleague Malcolm Chisholm on the Edinburgh trams project. I remind the cabinet secretary that we are prepared to support the notion of two aircraft carriers, for which there is a very dubious use. We know that a use is marked out—I see Mike Rumbles, who has armed services experience agreeing with me—and there is a use for trams. Indeed, I would like their use to be extended.

I have a question on the matter of an inquiry. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, in an inquiry that will be specialist and detailed, the Auditor General for Scotland will need some specialist buttressing? Perhaps the cabinet secretary might consider that for any future specialist inquiries, as ones such as the forthcoming one on this will be.

Will the minister give way?

I apologise for not being here earlier—I was at another meeting with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. Given what the member has just said, does she disassociate herself from a rumour that I heard that around Clydebank and Milngavie way there is a feeling that Edinburgh should not be counted in the statistics on homelessness? There is a complete disregard for the fact that on average 130 families apply for every house that comes up in Edinburgh.

Does the member believe that the supply of heroin through the medical route has any appeal? Might that be relevant to the wider attack on drug misuse?

Will the member give way?

rose  —

Bill Butler referred to recreational drug use. We have heard of problem drug use and of drug use. Does he agree that reclassifying drugs might help us to get on a better strategic footing?

On the classification of drugs, does the member advocate that if members agree with his analysis, this Parliament should approach Westminster about a reclassification?

I thank the member for giving way; I was late to the debate. Like the member, I think that there has been a great improvement in how we are tackling the issue, but do we not need research into the reasons why people do not take drugs? We have not really established why some people start and why most people do not start—or if they do experiment, they stop quite young. We need to know.

Will the member take an intervention?

I ask the cabinet secretary to engage just as constructively as he is asking everyone else to do. Malcolm Chisholm made excellent points, which echoed points by Ross Finnie. They asked for priorities to be set out. In my view, the cabinet secretary cannot put a figure on those priorities while there is so much debate in London and the money markets about the exact state of the economy, so I understand his position, but he must understand that Malcolm Chisholm and Ross Finnie also have a valid point of view.

I, too, heard Wendy Alexander's speech, from outside the chamber, and I thought that she raised the pertinent points, as the member has done in reporting on it. Does he also believe in what Alan Greenspan says with regard to fiscal responsibility and capital investment? Alan Greenspan says that every economy and every country will find its own way out. A country cannot do that unless it has the comprehensive range of powers.

I disagree with the member, as local authorities and health boards are making plenty of moves to rationalise their services and to ensure that they dovetail. With all due respect, it is a bit of an insult to them for us to tell them what they should do. They are at the pointy end and will be the first to get it in the neck. They are trying to do what is suggested—certainly in Lothian.

I apologise for being late. I was detained elsewhere. It is possible and reasonable to expect the cabinet secretary to say how much he would like, but I do not think that it is reasonable to ask him to make the judgment that the people who lend the money make, because they look at the whole economy and decide what the risk is, in the same way that anybody who lends money does. He cannot say that until he controls all the money.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to drive forward its various fitness campaigns when local authorities are signalling reductions in budgets for fitness, sport facilities and related programmes. (S3O-11292)

Is the minister considering using high schools as community sports hubs? In Edinburgh, the closure of quite a number of sports facilities has been signalled. Let us not dance around the issue—there might be an obstacle to using high schools. I would like the minister to comment on whether the private finance initiative contract might put high schools beyond the reach of clubs. I also urge on her the need to support clubs. Facilities are one thing, but we must have the club structure if we do not have the original plan that we hoped to have.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Before I start, I apologise to Murdo Fraser—I was humming under my breath Mungo Jerry's great hit "In the Summertime". However, that was not the only confusion that I have felt throughout the debate. The First Minister's speech had good parts, which I appreciated. I did not appreciate them as much as I should have until I heard Bill Wilson's speech—I did not know about all of the things that are being done to deal with beetles and so on. Obviously, there are good things in the Government's programme. To be serious, I thought that the First Minister's analysis of water as a resource with the potential to become a tradeable commodity—a money earner, in other words—was excellent; in fact, I thought that it was inspirational. Other members will have been intrigued, if not inspired, by it. Instead, party politics took over and, as a result, Jeremy Purvis, on whom I can usually depend to make a good, thoughtful speech, merely kicked in with a good quip—that the First Minister was getting his oil and water mixed—that, however, was not up to the occasion. The member knows that he can do much better than that, and I hope that after the election he will do a lot more about the business of water.

I thank the member for explaining his position, because I was unaware of it. On the other hand, it could well be that the proposal was a Liberal Democrat manifesto commitment and because the Liberals did not get enough folk elected they could not actually put it through. Of course, that is similar to the position that the Government has just found itself in. Des McNulty talked about specifics. Unfortunately, he is not in the chamber at the moment.

I apologise—I did not see the member. I agree with Mr McNulty on this matter. It is unfortunate that the Government did not go into greater detail about specifics but I  guess that it knew perfectly well that we were into the pre-election period. The reason I am spending so much time on this issue is because everyone is talking about manifesto commitments. We all know that this Parliament is unlikely to produce a Government with a sufficiently large majority to see through such commitments. Before Jackson Laidlaw—Jackson Carlaw, rather—gets upset—[ Interruption .] I am really doing it today; I was not thinking of him. Anyway, before he gets upset, I should say that I did not produce a manifesto; instead, I had a list of things to do and explained to folk in Edinburgh and the Lothians that these were my priorities and that I would, if possible, try to do them or would certainly support anyone else trying to do so. That was as much as I could honestly promise; indeed, I think that that is as much as any of the parties can honestly promise. We have missed an opportunity today to begin to investigate an important issue. However, the SNP had a manifesto commitment to have a referendum on independence and everyone seemed to think that it was a good idea. I have to say, though, that I never agreed. That is why the SNP got fed up with me. The Deputy First Minister will remember the conversation—it was, I recall, conducted at a very high decibel level—during which I explained that a referendum was neither a policy nor a strategy but a tactic. I have maintained that position and I bet the SNP now wishes that it had listened to me. In any case, the SNP said that it was going to have a referendum and it should do so. I am very much in favour of that. In fact, I am thinking of lodging a motion that there should be a referendum and all the members of the other parties who want one can sign it. The SNP should be campaigning for independence and the only way it can do so is by explaining it in the terms that Des McNulty outlined—that it is a policy of interest to people all over Scotland—and by telling people what they can aspire to. Yesterday's front page story in The Herald shows what people have at the moment; according to that article, 21 out of 24 schoolchildren in a primary 7 class in Glasgow have been committed to failure, abject frustration, danger, shortened lives, brutishness and unemployment. That is the union's legacy and the legacy that the unionists in the Parliament will have to defend. If that is the Opposition, why is the SNP not prepared to fight for independence? I do not understand the SNP's tactics and think that it is selling itself and Scotland short by failing to introduce the bill now. No one can be bothered with constitutional things if they are just put in a box and if folk do not know whether they are going to be in a job next week or whether they can afford to stay in their  house. If the SNP cannot explain why we need the constitutional powers to ensure that the exchange rate, for example, really suits our economy, it will never be able to get people to understand the link between the mechanism for delivering decent policies and the decent policies themselves. We were told, "Ah well, we were getting close to thinking that maybe we should have greater powers," but, the minute the banks failed, the unionists said, "We knew we couldn't do it as Scotland." What would have happened if we had been independent when the banks collapsed? What would we take as the date of independence? Would we take it as two days before the banks went down or, say, when the Parliament was set up in 1999? What would the state of the Scottish reserves have been if we had been independent since 1999? What ability would we have had to cut our financial coat according to our financial cloth? What ability would there have been to regulate, given that the consensus in this Parliament is a bit more left of centre than that in the Westminster Parliament? I do not think that we would have had a lack of regulation; I think we would have followed the Swedish model. The Swedes knew what they were doing and, as a result, their economy is doing well. The Norwegian economy was in a different situation and adopted different policies. That is the whole point. There is such a difference between the Scottish economy and the British economy as a whole, or even the English economy, that we should have different policies. That does not mean that we will separate or be antagonistic or have gun towers at the border; it just means having policies that are suited to our condition. That is what the SNP should argue through its referendum bill. That is what the other parties have to deny and, right now, the other parties have never been in a worse position.

Done it. No, I actually said that I did not want to. I should not stand for the leadership. I am happy to be elected to the Parliament and I am proud to have the restrained mandate that I have been given by electors in Lothian. I can maybe do a bit more good, because I am genuinely interested in the Parliament and all the parties in it. I am not interested in one party rather than another. Therefore, I should not stand for the leadership of the SNP. However, I am interested in what is going to happen to Scotland. I could not believe that story in The Herald  yesterday. All of us should be much more concerned about that than about scoring party-political points. That was the point that I was trying  to make about manifestos. Do not stand on our dignity in here—for goodness' sake, we should be trying to work together. We can maintain differences and do things in different ways, but we should try to work together for the good of Scotland. Had we been independent, we would not have avoided all of the downside of the recession—I do not claim that we would have. However, I believe that we would have come out of it in a better condition than we are in now. We do not know even yet how long the recession will last or what the effect will be on our economic prospects. People are talking about countries beginning to come out of recession, but that is not said of the Scottish economy or society. We are impoverishing ourselves by failing to take the step that would make us equal in self-responsibility. I do not see how we can lose from that. All members of the Parliament could work in our own ways and with our own priority choices on policies. Scots cannot afford to be in the union any more. We know what the legacy is. We have the worst health statistics in Europe. I do not need to go into the litany, as every member should have it burned on their heart.

That is the society that our system of governance has produced. Our system of governance is through the union. The Borders might be doing better and have better health statistics but, while the health stats in Glasgow remain, we are not getting it right in any part of Scotland. Therefore, we can hardly do worse than we are doing with the union, so let us have a referendum and vote for something much better.

I hesitate to interrupt the member's speech, which is highly amusing. He has touched on a point that has been at the centre of the debate, which was also mentioned by Mike Rumbles: what does a Government do when it does not have enough members—when it is a minority Government? He has committed the next Conservative Government and Mungo to introducing this, that and the next thing—I am sorry: you know who I am talking about. I mean Murdo Fraser. He would be doing that in exactly the same circumstances as those in which the present Government tried to introduce policies that could not be carried through because they did not command support in a Parliament with a minority Government.

Yes, here it is. I appeal to the Scottish Conservatives to ditch manifesto  promises and do what is possible once they see who has been elected.

Will the member give way?

The member mentioned a number of promises that the SNP has broken. He is right, of course, but those promises could never have been kept. They were manifesto promises that were made when the SNP probably did not think that it would form the Government. Perhaps Mr Rumbles could say what is more important for members: that they keep nagging on because the SNP has broken promises that were not feasible, or that they try to ensure that it governs better by helping it.

Will the member take an intervention?

There is a one-word answer: Westminster. It holds the money bags.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Is Jeremy Purvis aware that Aberdeen City Council has taken the same type of approach to discussing the basic choices that are to be made? Is he aware that we could use STV to ensure that all of Scotland is incorporated?

David Whitton said that we live in unusual times. I could not agree more. Is the minister willing to produce separate budget cut scenarios, as suggested by David Whitton? I would like those scenarios to be communicated  not just to the bodies that will take the decisions but to the public. Perhaps STV could help the Government to ensure that the people who will feel the cuts get to talk about them and prioritise.

Does the member accept that, even with the best will in the world, Mr Alexander cannot be held to the prognosis that he gave?

I am interested in the detail of this. Which groups of offenders were identified in the research as recidivists?

Should I repeat my name for the benefit of the member in the front row? I have never taken part in any lap-dancing, couch-dancing or pole-dancing activity. That does not make me a bad person. I am interested in Sandra White's amendment, and I realise how seriously she takes the issue. I am fortunate enough to have learned most of what I know about the issue from having lived—for the past 30 years now—in Edinburgh, where there has been a system of regulation and policing that provides proper intelligence about what goes on in what some people think of as burlesque clubs. I realise that Glasgow has not quite got it together, so I would support anything that required such places to be licensed if the template was the way in which the saunas in Edinburgh are dealt with. That does not mean that I approve of lap dancing as a career, or anything like it—I do not—but I think that lap dancing is perhaps like the fashion that there used to be for topless dancing. People in Edinburgh will know that there used to be topless dancers in every bar, but that is no longer the case. The fashion passed. Amendment 198 provides—I refer to proposed new section 45A(3)—that the licensing would apply to clubs that were judged as having solely or principally the purpose of sexual stimulation. Without wishing to go into the fine details—subsection (4) is quite graphic—would that include telephone sex, given that there are telephone sex lines now? If the purpose of the provision is to dissuade people from participating in an activity that Sandra White perhaps deems to be antisocial, should we not be looking at the role that telephone sex and the internet play in such adult activities? I will certainly vote against amendment 198 because, although well intentioned, the provisions do not fit the job and they could do with more scrutiny.

I feel a Danny Alexander moment coming on: I can scarcely add to what Stewart Maxwell said on the amendments in this group. I appreciate the intensity and belief that lie behind much of the opposition to what I have campaigned for. However, we must define our terms. What are sexual activities? President Clinton's idea of what amounted to sex was different from Monica Lewinsky's. I am not being facetious: we have not attempted to say whether "sexual activity" means full intercourse or applies to people who want to engage in rather deviant behaviour but not sex. Are they allowed to pay for that or not, and what does "payment" amount to? Is it a nice night out at the casino and a visit to the races, getting the rent paid or gifts of jewellery? That is real life and real prostitution. We do not have evidence of trafficking in Scotland because the police here are much better informed about what goes on in what we now must regretfully call the sex industry. Therefore, I urge all the members who want the Parliament to improve the legislation on coercion and violence against women to reject all the amendments in the group and to tackle the issue holistically at a proper and later date.

Will the member give way?

Will the member now give way?

Will you define "sexual activity"?

Would soliciting be an example of that?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that we saw the last of the razor culture in Glasgow without mandatory sentencing, but with judges doing their job?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does yesterday's budget not show that, if we are to have fiscal responsibility that provides the Parliament with real—not pretendy—power, so that we can customise economic policies to suit our distinctive and different needs, as opposed to the needs of the economy south of the border, we will need not only tax-raising powers but control of pensions and benefits, as those have a significant influence on the level of demand, especially when we take into account the size of our public sector and the cuts that we know are coming? I am interested to find out what the cabinet secretary thinks about that suggestion.

Does the member agree that that traditional power balance might be upset if women become more violent in their behaviour? We might be at that stage of development just now.

Will the member give way?

When we talk about the gender element in all of this, I think that we are talking about the unequal power relationship, and I think that that is changing culturally. I would like to see an investigation of that and its impact on violence in the domestic setting.

Will the member give way?

I do not disagree with a word that the member has said, but does he concede that we are undergoing a cultural change, in that more women are more violent and there are now statistics to show that?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Has the minister's office had a chance to investigate whether the increase in levels of violence among women that has been noted by the police has fed into the figures that he has given us, to enable the minister to say whether the issue is that there is more violence or that more men are reporting violence?

I apologise for intervening again and thank the minister for taking my intervention. As the minister may be aware, a petition has been lodged with the Parliament on the need for proper research on the issue of violence. Will he look kindly on that petition, which I do not think would cancel anything that he wants to do?

I would not wish to push a wages policy on the First Minister, particularly as could not carry one out in any case—he does not have the powers to do so. What will he do to encourage people in the private sector to exercise restraint and to show some sensitivity to the folk who are losing their jobs?

I wonder whether the minister could bring joy to us all by saying that the next business in the Parliament will focus on building the co-operative movement.

rose—

I simply want to suggest that the financial plight of some of our football clubs might be alleviated by an element of co-operativeness being introduced in the way that they are run.

We are asking the banks to do something, but perhaps we should also ask the Government to do something. Perhaps we should ask it to produce a programme to encourage the development of the co-operative movement.

Yes.

I will. I apologise, because I have only just joined the debate. Will Mr Macintosh say which degrees might not be worth the paper they are written on?

rose—

I apologise for joining the debate so late. I wonder whether, as Derek Brownlee said, we should consider the quality of regulation. We could start by putting a prescribed number of Government representatives on the board once a bank reaches a certain size. We could do something short of cutting the bank down if that is not advisable.

Presiding Officer, can I move that we suspend the standing orders?

The Calman commission's proposals are an important step towards more responsibility. Are they an important step towards proper, full fiscal responsibility?

Will the member give way?

Oh, thank you, Presiding Officer. I was thinking that an alternative title for this morning's motion could have been "Half a loaf is better than no bread." Then, I came up with a better one: "Forget Calman—Uriah Heep got it right." We will talk about the Calman proposals, as that is what the motion before us is about. It will not matter what else is going on—we will talk about Calman. What we will really be talking about, however, is the fault line that runs through Scottish politics, between those people, true Scots all of them, who, like Bob Doris, believe in independence, and the other folk—I will not embarrass them by saying their names—who believe in the union. I am not sure that they actually do believe in the union. I think there might be other forces at play. This morning's real debate is about that fault line. The pro-union parties have to prove the superior wisdom of Scotland continuing to be part of a political and economic union that the United Kingdom's Prime Minister has described as all but "bankrupt", "broken" and "bust". What is the argument for remaining in this union, if that is how the Prime Minister describes it? Unionists are members whose first loyalty, or greater emotional attachment, is to their party, rather than to Scotland.

In a minute. Those members must show that there is no alternative other than to remain as a region of the United Kingdom economy that cannot ever reasonably aspire to have a better rate of business start-ups, a better growth rate, better health statistics, better housing or better transport links than the best-performing regions of the United Kingdom. Why can we just get a wee bit better, but not aspire to be the best?

I am sorry if I have offended members who think that that is what I implied—I did not. I am trying to be as honest as I can about many people whose contributions to the Parliament I respect. Their greater, deeper loyalty—the one that they perhaps understand better—is their loyalty to their party, rather than to their country. That is because they have been able to indulge the one, rather than the other. We can talk about that another time, however. We hear calls for the findings and recommendations of the Calman commission to be adopted. Why? Because it might be a little better for this Parliament to take more responsibility for our decisions on health, education and social policies. But why not full responsibility? Why not responsibility for pensions and benefits? Are we really so lacking in natural, manufactured and human resources that we cannot do as Denmark, Sweden, Iceland, Norway and Ireland do—to name only five countries that have experienced the same economic storms and financial tsunamis as Scotland? The Governments and people of those countries are making the most of what they have in terms of resources and capacity to reboot their economies to a pace and programme that suits their needs, as different communities. They will all perform differently. That is not to say that one will perform better than the others. As is glaringly obvious, not only are there now two different economies on either side of the border; there are also two communities, or countries, which expressed their differences in their votes at the general election. That was not all about money. It is about the difference in the communal approach to social policies. If those policies are to be delivered differently, Scotland needs a different, customised delivery mechanism, and it cannot have that without sovereignty or independence.  We have heard much about respect. Michael Matheson, in his curate's egg of a speech, was correct on respect, but he was wrong about the motivation on the part of the Tory and Lib Dem people in London for giving Scots more responsibility. They are not doing that because they have suddenly decided that we are worthy of it. I am sure that lots of them have thought that for ages. They are playing us like fish on a hook. They are being a lot more fly at managing us. Scotland's politicians, even good ones such as Gavin Brown, will have to face the fact that the retention of power over the entire United Kingdom is what motivates Westminster and what has motivated successive Governments. They have been going for 1,000 years, and they know how to operate power—and Westminster is operating us. We should have a modernised, new co-operation or union, or a confederation, if that is what is needed—I have no objection to that—but let us not talk about respect without equality.

1314.

Will Gavin Brown take it from me that, had the levy been on anything other than fossil fuels, we would have received it? However, there is far too much of a political connection between fossil fuels, oil and money that flows right past us.

Will the member give way?

I wonder whether it helps if I suggest that the full fiscal autonomy that we talk about is no such thing unless it encompasses the collection of money to pay pensions and benefits. They are two sides of the one coin.

Does the member agree that heightened awareness of the joint meetings, which should have been part of the statutory requirements, has come about because of the political situation and not because of a great shift in emphasis between the two layers of government? If there had been such a shift, we would not have been forgotten when it came to fixing the date of the five-yearly Westminster elections.

Will the member give way?

I thank the minister for giving way, because his answer might determine my vote this evening. Inside what timeframe could he find out where the fixings would go?

I thank Shirley-Anne Somerville for referring to my remarks. The other thing that would be of great help to lymphoedema sufferers is better provision of special compression stockings and other things that they need to control the condition. It can be problematic getting things to fit.

I, too, have reason to know about the lymphoedema service. As far as I can see, the best way to spread the benefits of self-management would be to teach carers or family members who have patients with lymphoedema, whether or not they got that after a cancer operation.

Earlier speakers talked about the amalgamation of services. Was there any discussion of amalgamating authorities? As we have so much to save, it seems that we should be looking at making savings in that league.

Will the member give way?

On the need for a strategic overview, I could not agree more. However, did the committee consider whether that should include the ending of some services or whether the savings should be achieved through percentage cuts across services in order to keep a residue for the future?

In common with most people outside the Parliament, I was not terribly interested in that last exchange. I am interested in the question that Cathie Craigie asked: who runs the police service? I thought that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice set the parameters within which the police work operationally. I suggest to the cabinet secretary that he should forget the width and consider the quality of the service. If he is correct to say that crime figures have fallen and clear-up rates have risen, he should concentrate on that and not on 1,000 policemen. Who cares how many policemen there are, provided that they get the work done?

I warn the Minister for Parliamentary Business not to wish for too much. He might get a referendum that is held from London. Under "6. Political Reform", the coalition agreement says that "a binding motion" should be tabled "before the House of Commons in the first days following this agreement" to hold Westminster elections on the same day as the Scottish parliamentary elections. As a Parliament, can we urgently approach Westminster now to stop that?

The Cabinet Secretary referred to the co-operation between his office and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Is he satisfied that a similar level of co-operation is in place at European Union level for the information monitoring and management system to cover the potential eruption of the second volcano? We have learned from the situation that we did not know enough beforehand. What about the second volcano?

I, too, am interested in whether the Scottish Government is modelling. Based on the admission of all three parties that are likely to be in the next Government that there will be reductions in services, there will be big effects on the employment scene. Edinburgh is the financial, governmental and administrative centre and will inevitably face big unemployment. Will the First Minister assure me that modelling on future unemployment trends is being done for Edinburgh and its travel-to-work area?

No one wants to make a drama out of a crisis, but the event has huge implications for the economic wellbeing of the UK. This has happened at an unfortunate time in the political cycle. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to form a small group with his equivalents in the Treasury, in Wales and in Northern Ireland, to keep an overview on what is happening to the economy? Jeremy Purvis mentioned insurance. It might be wise of the Governments of this country to make an approach to the insurance companies.

I am delighted to hear of the measures that have been taken to address offences that have already been committed, but I am interested in the prevention of such inhumanity towards my fellow men and my fellow women. USDAW, representing the workers who are abused, can play a role in re-educating children  about how they behave towards folk who are just doing a job of work.

Can the member tell me whether USDAW goes into schools and similar places to talk to pupils about how they should behave towards people who work in shops?

I was shocked when I heard the total number of assaults on people who are working. Has work been done to determine the percentage of assaults that are caused by people's reliance on alcohol or misuse of drugs, or pure bad manners? Have we categorised the problem? Do we have any idea why assaults happen?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The member is addressing the issue of unemployment to come. There must be a higher unemployment percentage in Scotland because of its relatively larger public sector. I am particularly concerned about Edinburgh and its travel-to-work area. Edinburgh is the administrative and governmental centre of Scotland. I would like to know that the Government is undertaking modelling to find out what is likely to face us.

I do not mean to take issue with the member, but can he assure me that he is confident that whoever wins the election at Westminster will be able to stick to the plans that he outlined a few minutes ago? Every commentator whom I have read says that there will have to be another budget and another spending round because the money is not there to be spent.

Will the member give way?

The cabinet secretary has said that the performance of the Scottish economy mirrors that of the United Kingdom economy. I confess that I found what he said slightly difficult because of the difference in the sizes of our relative public sectors. What modelling and preparation has the cabinet secretary done for the rising unemployment that is likely in Scotland as a result of what will happen after the financial markets decide what they will peg our interest rates at?

Thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer. I will support the bill tonight not because I support power grabs by executives, but because the Government has demonstrated enough good will towards the points that Derek Brownlee, Malcolm Chisholm and others have made. The position will depend on how ministers exercise their new powers under part 2. We heard today a willingness from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to accept the suggestions of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, for example, which makes me think that he will bring pressure to bear on the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, who must assure us that the inspection of services for vulnerable children will be as good as we want it to be.

I completely accept your ruling, Presiding Officer but, with all due respect, I wonder whether this issue points to a gap in our practice. Perhaps attention should be paid to the point that Karen Gillon raised about the secrecy around the proceedings of the SPCB and the fact that two types of business may be enacted there—some that must be reported to the chamber and some that may be conducted discreetly.

He's nane the waur o a guid hangin.

I have a short query. There are cases that are time barred for various reasons. Is there any obstacle in the form of time barring of evidence?

Will the effect of the crime on the victim be the demarcation line between what is serious and what is trivial, or will there be some other measurement?

In that instance, if the person were not prosecuted in the original trial for the real crime, would it not be a simple thing to prosecute them when evidence became available?

No, no.

Would that test of whether there was a compelling case for holding another trial apply to all types of crime?

I suggest that that point is now wider than it might have been in the past. We are not talking merely about newspaper files and reproductions of past stories; we are talking about the internet, which is an unfettered opinion outlet. We must therefore consider seriously how public opinion will be influenced.

Why has the member departed from the basic logic that a tainted trial or a wrong verdict should qualify as a reason to set aside double jeopardy in any case at all? What is his logic in seeking to make exceptions?

The member said that the proposed legislation should apply only to very serious crimes and trials. So far, we have heard about crimes of violence. Is there never a case for a serious trial for robbery of some sort?

Before the cabinet secretary moves off the point about new evidence, does the proposal have implications for the publicity surrounding any potential second trial?

Will the minister give way?

I am sorry that I missed the excitement of the debate. I want to say something that is tangential to what the minister is saying. In addressing the initials to signify a body, will he also consider the names that are given to what we used to call white papers and green papers in another place? Those papers said on their front—on the tin—what we were getting; they did not have imaginative literary names such as "A Curriculum for Excellence".

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point of order refers to the motion.

I wish to ask why this has happened.

A special committee was set up to deal expeditiously with the bill. I therefore wonder why there should be such a long period before it reports.

On the quality of food served in restaurants and hotels in Scotland, are we absolutely sure that the food is Scottish?

I apologise for not having one foot on the ladder; both of my feet are planted firmly on the ground. What does authenticity mean?

Will the minister give way?

Like the minister, I mean to be as positive as I can be—I agree with him about that. Selling Scotland abroad now is relatively easy in the countries that are close to us, but how will Scotland be sold as an efficient and great place to go for a holiday if we have the bad news that we expect about the facilities that must be constructed for the Commonwealth games?

Will the cabinet secretary outline the timeframe for the process?

From what I know of St Margaret's—not nearly as much as someone local would know—it is an excellent facility. That is why I am worried about why NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde would take the attitude that it is taking. Is it down to an economy of scale that will be achieved with the new provision? What rationale has it advanced?

I very much appreciate it, Presiding Officer. I had no  intention of taking part in today's debate, as I thought that I would still be in hospital—that is my excuse. Although I may have appeared to kick a few shibboleths during the debate, I merely asked questions because the purpose of debate is to test the assertions that are made. One that has been made today unconsciously—we are all guilty of it—is that it is a great idea for us all to learn foreign languages. In fact, it is a necessity—an imperative—and must be right at the top of the agenda. Must it? It needed to be previously, although I take on board what Chris Harvie said. I speak poor-quality Portuguese and even worse French, and I can also have a shot at some of the other Mediterranean languages because I was lucky enough to be taught Latin alongside English, which is an idea that I have commended to previous education ministers. Nevertheless, I still think that other things should take precedence in the budget for Scottish education. The main point, which we have heard about today although it was skipped over, is whether the quality of our teacher training in colleges is what it used to be—not what it should be, which is probably better than what it used to be. According to many an old teacher, in attempting to cover too wide an area we have diluted the quality of our teacher training. I suggest that, if Finland is the benchmark, we should see how it and other countries are training their teachers. I am grateful for the time to speak, but I will finish on this point. I mentioned America because, as far as I know, in most comparative tables of attainment America does not do all that well. However, there are specific areas in which the American education system excels. We should find out in what we need to excel. I commend Portuguese, because Brazil is a growing market.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I just want to know why it is harder for us.

Cerveza.

It is called "I'll Do Anything For You".

Will the member give way?

Je voudrais parler en français.

There you go—everybody speaks English. I hate to sound like a prophet of doom, but more and more people across the globe are learning English for business and industry as well as for cultural exchanges. We should glory in the fact that we have been lucky enough to inherit the language. Learning other languages is  important, but I put it to Christina McKelvie that it is not as important as it was 20 years ago.

Everyone seems to agree that it is a great idea for all Scots to speak as many foreign languages as possible. How many foreign languages do American pupils learn? They do rather well in any competitive test of the results of their education programme.

Will the member give way?

In answer to the member's rhetorical question about how we can benefit from the international dimension of education, perhaps we should concentrate on the teacher training that is to be found in other parts of the world rather than on what schools are doing. We should look at what is being done with teachers elsewhere and whether they are better than our teachers.

This is one of the kernels of the debate. If secondary 3 is too late to test and the purpose of testing is to support the child in its further learning, at what age does the class teacher have the best chance of cottoning on to which children need special support before they go to secondary school?

Will the minister give way?

I thank the cabinet secretary for being generous with his time, and I hate to sound like a Cassandra, but, while I thoroughly approve of the philosophy of international education that he has outlined, I hope that we will also hear how we are going to learn to read, write and count. That is what the current concern is about, not our internationalism.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I have written to you, Presiding Officer, and I apologise if my letter has not yet reached you. You said that a paper that went to the bureau determined the outcome of yesterday's proceedings. On the basis of what you have ruled, is there anything that says that the whole Parliament cannot now know the contents of that paper?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether there has been a breach of our standing orders. In summing up, Mr Rumbles hinted—rather than spelled out—that I had somehow taken advantage of the rules of the Parliament in asking for the bill to go to a particular committee. I put it down in the recognised way and invited my colleagues to vote in support of that notion. I am quite prepared to accept that they did not, so in what way have I had any advantage?

In speaking to my amendment, I stress two points from the outset. First, I have absolutely no animosity towards the members of the Health and Sport Committee or the proposed ad hoc committee either collectively or individually. Secondly, I put on record that I regret that voting this evening will follow party lines. In asking Parliament to choose the Health and Sport Committee as the preferred committee to scrutinise and investigate the bill, I am doing nothing more than the business team did when it recommended to the Parliamentary Bureau that the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill go to the Health and Sport Committee, as it was best placed to deal with the subject. I hope that Mr Rumbles will explain why that recommendation was not accepted. Members should not infer from my amendment that I think that the Health and Sport Committee is the only committee capable of investigating the bill. However, I think that it is the best prepared to do so because of its experience of working in a collegiate fashion over a wide range of health-related issues and, as a group, being prepared to agree to disagree over detail A while showing, when necessary, complete unity of purpose in facing down the Government over detail B. The  committee's credibility is enhanced not only by the membership of two general practitioners but by the bonus of one of them having specialist psychiatric experience. I also believe it to be a bonus that, although she does not know where she comes down on the bill, the convener thinks that there should be a public debate because of the public interest in the matter. That I believe that the balance of opinion is probably against the bill is of no import, but it is very important that the committee's composition should result in balanced scrutiny. That is relevant because, with such a bill, on which members will have a free vote that they will cast according to conscience, the expected outcome is not a report signed off in the committee's name that has the support of the majority of members but an in-depth summary of the information that the committee's investigation has uncovered, which will be presented to MSPs as a neutral document, not as a recommendation. I also presume that the Health and Sport Committee will be considering the forthcoming bill on palliative care. Perhaps the strongest reason for MSPs to support the amendment is that, if they do not, the impression will be transmitted to the public in Scotland and beyond of the Parliament as a latter-day Tammany hall, when we could instead demonstrate our ability to deal with sensitive legislation in an efficient and intellectually and morally robust manner. The Parliament is quite capable of doing that, thereby recovering some of the respect and hope that our political and public institutions have lost during the past few years. We will lose that opportunity and create the impression that we are out of our depth when we are dealing with anything other than the mediocre, mundane and unimaginative, which could be the charge that is levelled at us if we vote to demote the Parliament's trust in its Health and Sport Committee's professionalism and probity. As the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill's sponsor, I would obviously like it to pass, but it is just as true to say that the way in which the Parliament processes the bill is as important to me as its eventual decision on whether to pass it or not. I move amendment S3M-5710.1, to leave out from "establish" to end and insert: "refer the End of Life Assistance (Scotland) Bill to the Health and Sport Committee under Rule 9.6.1 of Standing Orders."

I thank the cabinet secretary for his good sense in expanding the apprenticeship scheme for stone workers. I am sorry that, since I am short of time, I cannot say more than that. I return to a topic that came up last week: constructive suggestions. "To put it politely, Gordon Brown and David Cameron are being less than candid about what it will take to fix Britain's public finances." That view was expressed in the Financial Times on Tuesday and it is accurate. My first suggestion is that everyone should read the financial pages because the reticence of the UK party leaders cannot hide the deficit: £178 billion this year alone, with total Government debt heading for more than £1 trillion. Anyone who thinks that cuts can be avoided this year probably thinks that things can only get better and that Tony Blair told the truth at the Chilcot inquiry. If there are cuts, they will bear heavily on local government. Councils already face cuts of £270 million and job losses that are forecast to mount into the many thousands. I propose an area of expenditure that should be considered for cuts by the cabinet secretary but which, to date, has been ignored—the enormous sum our councils and health boards dish out to the PFI owners of what look like but are not public assets: schools and hospitals, to start with. We have to realise that the Parliament is not spending taxpayers' money; we are spending their debt. Every penny that we have spent in our £30 billion-plus budget is borrowed  money. If we were a commercial organisation facing that situation, we would seek to renegotiate contracts in order to shrink our debt. I propose the same principle, given that the people we represent now face deep cuts in their public services. If we are all in this together, no organisations can be excluded. We are in the ridiculous situation that the Royal Bank of Scotland and the Bank of Scotland—which are Government owned on our behalf—extract money from local authorities and other public bodies while causing misery for thousands. In the meantime, we keep the banks alive with borrowed money that, eventually, the taxpayer will have to pay, on top of what is paid on PFI. Is that freakonomics or crazy economics? Members can take their pick. From 2010 to 2012, Midlothian Council will pay £21.3 million through PFI, West Lothian Council will pay £25.3 million and the City of Edinburgh Council will pay £85.6 million. Those councils could be forced into sacking people whose taxes saved the banks and the financial system in the first place. PFI contracts were negotiated when money was rolling in and prudence was the order of the day, but the world has changed. The UK's national fiscal deficit is huge, and the local government purse—

I return to what the First Minister said earlier about constructive suggestions. I suggest that he should not back himself into a corner as regards the size of government. We should be talking about effective government and what is needed at the time. What we need right now is a full-time finance minister. That should be the focus of everyone's attention. I urge him—

It is a helpful suggestion, Presiding Officer.

I urge the First Minister not to listen to people who say that small is good. Some departments could be made smaller but others need more attention and bigger people.

Is there evidence to show how a campaign to reduce smoking among young people should be presented to achieve a successful result? Should smoking be presented as something that is bad for your health or as something that isn't cool, to use the vernacular?

These are unreal times. We meet to debate and vote on a budget that is not a budget, but which, structurally, legally and politically, is a Scottish Government spending programme that cannot be delivered as planned—the circumstances that will pertain following the Westminster election will see to that. The budget is Mr Swinney's wish list, which was written with the same honest, modest hope in his heart as guided his hand when he used to write to Santa. Our good and trusting finance minister would be as well writing to the agony aunt of his choice—

You write to me often, but I do not think of myself as being an agony aunt.  The spending promises that the minister makes will be amended as a direct consequence of decisions that will be made by a Government—which is most unlikely to be supported by Scots—that will have no choice other than to cut public spending to avoid economic disaster. If it does not do so, the UK's credit rating, along with the pound, will go through the floor. We know the story. Some of us—Mr Chisholm and I—are old enough to have been here before. Given that we are shackled to the British economy—the strong economy of Great Britain—Mr Swinney can do little to soften the blow without our having the sovereign powers that are needed to allow us to customise a recovery programme that is suited to our needs, as other economies have done. Despite being smaller and less generously resourced than Scotland, some of those countries are now out of the recession in which we will remain mired for anything between five and 10 years, so it ill behoves any member of this Parliament to be nasty about little Iceland and the Icelanders, and to say that the First Minister is wrong to compare the success that Ireland enjoyed with the success that we in Scotland might enjoy if we could customise our own policies. I am old enough to remember Ireland being used by the Labour Party to suggest that we should not have independence, because if we did so, we would end up as poor as the Irish. It is inevitable that we look to countries around us, whose people look very much like us and who have the same dreams and aspirations that we have, to find out how they managed to achieve more than we did. As Mr McLetchie admitted, we in Scotland must always anticipate there being an achievement gap between the Scottish economy and the economy of the rest of the UK. I am not prepared to hide from the realities that are resulting in unemployment for the constituents whom Shirley-Anne Somerville and I represent, increasing numbers of whom are having to cope with the cuts in public spending. A very high percentage of the population of Edinburgh and its travel-to-work area in the Lothians and Fife are employed in the public sector. That fact alone makes a nonsense of the think tank report that was published a few days ago that claimed to have research data that showed that Edinburgh—the only Scottish city in the group of cities that was identified—would lead the UK out of recession. That is absolute bunkum. We do not know how high unemployment in Edinburgh will be until the cuts are made in public spending. The result will be unemployment, underemployment and part-time employment, which means part-time wages. What ails the Scottish economy, and the part that is played in its stimulation by our capital city,  cannot be cured by optimism alone, even if it comes wrapped in Mr McLetchie's union flag. However, at this juncture in our pre-sovereign state, a number of low-cost initiatives might help to mitigate unemployment and add value to our human and built resources and our skills base. To that end, I urge the cabinet secretary to read carefully Wendy Alexander's speech in the Official Report , because she made some excellent points that resonated right across the chamber. I hope that in my pre-budget discussions with the cabinet secretary I have persuaded him to set aside a modest sum for a pilot project that will draw on the experience of a scheme administered by Historic Scotland that has instigated a small number of stonemasonry apprenticeships for young people. The skills entailed in working with stone are in danger of being lost. None of Scotland's cities, historic burghs or monuments can endure without those skills being on hand to maintain our built heritage. Apprenticeships in the stonework crafts should lead to jobs for life and the preservation of the distinctiveness of our towns and cities. Spending money on a pilot scheme in the capital and Lothian region would be a sound investment at this time. Like many local authorities, the City of Edinburgh Council is concerned that its capital budget will be knocked sideways because of a number of factors. Mr McLetchie referred to our meeting with councillors earlier this week. The damage that has been done to our roads by the current severe weather comes to mind. One capital spend project that must, of necessity, come in on time is the refurbishment of the royal Commonwealth pool, which is a Commonwealth games venue in 2014 and is currently closed for a complete refurbishment. The diving pool must be brought up to the required international standard, and that costs money. I appreciate that some £5 million has already been spent, but observing the standards and specifications that are dictated by the building's listed status costs a bit more, and I think that the costs will continue to rise as the project goes on. The cabinet secretary knows that the council, the capital's council tax payers and I hope that he will accept such special-case pleading for a modest financial contribution from him for exceptional one-off expenditure on a Commonwealth games venue. I apologise if that sounds a wee bit like pork-barrel politics, but it is just a little of what I might be able to do.

Is there no alternative to the gap that remains between economic prospects and growth in Scotland and those in the rest of the UK?

Will the member take an intervention?

Structurally, should the blame for that lag lie with a Westminster Government and the strength of the British economy, or with the make-up job that any Scottish Government has to do, without the correct tools of management?

I remind the cabinet secretary to include in his calculations our much greater dependence on the public sector. The cuts to which he referred are likely to happen in that sector, thus impacting on our GDP.

Did the possibility of R and D being located in Livingston, to which George Foulkes referred, come up in the course of the discussions? If so, does money have anything to do with the decisions that will be taken on the matter?

I am intrigued as to exactly what more the member thinks could be done than is already being done and whether that would amount to very much without the fiscal powers to which Angela Constance referred.

T-h-e c-a-t s-a-t. Will the new Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning reintroduce synthetic phonics into the teaching of reading? He will find that it is much easier to get people to read then.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take a brief intervention?

Does the member foresee any Chancellor of the Exchequer at Westminster being able to allow much leeway on borrowing in legislation, given that he must keep such tight control of borrowing and economic management?

Will the member give way?

I am surprised that Rhona Brankin has the nerve to say what she has just said, having heard what Gavin McCrone said about past mismanagement of the oil revenues that should have come to the Scottish economy and which, even 30 years later, would have seen us through the effects of the current recession. When I read the motion and the amendment, I thought that I could vote for both of them. They demonstrate recognition of the necessity and the duty that we all have to provide the best governance in the circumstances for our country and people. We do not have the ability to govern to the optimum because that will only come with independence, but until we have it, we have the duty to do as well as we can with what we have.  However, having heard the debate, particularly the exchanges between Mrs Craigie and Mr Thompson, I no longer think that it was such a good idea to attempt to achieve a consensus. There is no consensus here; there is a fault line running between two sides and between two sets of Scots. They should forget the Westminster election and tackle the difficulties and dramas that Scotland will face in the next few years. Therefore, it is not good enough for Cathie Craigie to say that Mr Thompson advocates drink-drive powers for the Parliament only because he wants to get one up on Westminster. It is also not good enough for the SNP to say that the decision not to send Stewart Stevenson to the Copenhagen conference is purely because Westminster is being mealy-mouthed. If we have any self-respect or pride in what we have done in the legislation on climate change, we should talk as a Parliament and say that we should be represented at the conference because we have something to contribute, and not just in our own kailyard.

If he is going to represent the Scottish Parliament and Scottish people, I am highly delighted. Debates such as this should lay the basis for the new co-operation that we must have, not just in the United Kingdom, but among the offshore islands of Europe. We should be where the action is. The Mediterranean Europeans have common interest in their contiguous countries and they are building up ways of working together inside the much-enlarged European Union. The Baltic states and the Scandinavians work together, and even France and Germany are beginning to do so. We have common interests with Ireland, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. We should think about a new union, but before we do, we must break the bonds of the old one. The old union was based on a centre of empire that was perhaps the most powerful the world has ever seen. Psychologically, legally and politically we must establish equality. Once we do that, we can start meeting the need for co-operation in all sorts of ways. However, we will not get that equality if we continue with the small-mindedness that I have heard in the chamber this afternoon. I freely accept that the United Kingdom has a legacy and that many great things were accomplished on behalf of the United Kingdom throughout the world. However, there is also a legacy of the United Kingdom in Scotland, which has always had lower growth, is staying in recession for longer and has one child in three born into poverty and unable to get out of it. That  is the legacy of the United Kingdom—it is not a proud one and I do not believe that we could not do better. That is why I am a nationalist and want independence. We need the delivery mechanism to put right the lack of progress by United Kingdom Governments in times past. Derek Brownlee said that the union is flexible, so why not keep the good bit of the union, which is the social union? There is no animus north or south of the border when people are allowed to get on with it. At present, our institutions provide barriers and are threatening the social union. If we have a political solution that serves the needs of the two different economies and, I would argue, societies, we are likely to have a much better social union that will survive the upheaval of the 21 st century.

I am not in the least interested in the strength of the political union of the United Kingdom, because it is poured into acquiring nuclear weapons that we cannot afford, do not need and should not have, and into posturing on the United Nations stage. We try to play on a world stage on which we should no longer claim the space. We are a different sort of country and society.

In conclusion, as the SNP knows, I cannot be bothered with the referendum because we must make the case for independence before we ask people to choose. However, I remind George Foulkes that the SNP was elected on the promise of having a referendum, so what he said about the SNP's ability and right to carry out a referendum is absolutely irrelevant. People voted for the SNP. I agreed with Iain Smith's case against the amendment, but I will wait for the minister to sum up the debate before I decide how to vote on the motion.

Will the member give way?

Where are the member's references to back up his statement that there is a "hunger for change" and that our fellow countrymen and women are desperate to do something about it?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the member believe that any of the states that have such federal relationships have successfully separated taxation and the system of benefits that they operate?

Will the member define "strong United Kingdom"?

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank the member for letting me in. I do not think that the First Minister is as stupid as he was made out to be. Some of his troops have turned up here today, but the turnout in the chamber probably shows that most of the people in Scotland are not all that interested in a referendum either.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Is Richard Baker in favour of the short custodial sentences that are normally imposed on women who fail to pay a fine that is incurred for soliciting? Would he continue such measures?

I share Derek Brownlee's concerns about the time that it might take to have a final review of the distribution of funding formulae. Taking up the point from the previous question, is there room in the 2010-11 spending plan or in the current end-year flexibility for a little pump priming for exceptional projects of benefit to the whole country, which of course have to be located in one local authority area?

I am thinking of another.

Does the minister agree with what David McLetchie said about the requirement for a debate on the principle of the matter, particularly given that the amount of money that is available will change, before we get down to the process that we are debating?

Will the member take an intervention?

Briefly, to help the minister over his embarrassment, I point out that the Flemish and Dutch schools of painting were not all stuffed full of Flemish and Dutch painters. They were located there.

I have too much respect for the member to disagree with a great deal of what she says, but I tried to make the point in my earlier intervention that there will always be at least two views of historical events. For example, some children were taught in Scottish schools—I do not know whether they still are—that Winston Churchill was a great war leader and that we should remember that that was his contribution; other children were taught that he turned the guns on the miners at Tonypandy. Both views were correct, but both indicated a bias, or perhaps not a bias—

Will the member give way?

I am interested in what the member says, having known him since just after he left school. I put it to him, and ask him to agree, that we are children not only of our country but of our era. While the Scottish nationalism that he talked about was beginning to develop in the 1970s, there were similar national movements throughout the world—we could even include the black consciousness movement in America. We  are children of our time, so Rob Gibson and Murdo Fraser should get together and work out how our history as taught in schools would exemplify that.

The member has just given a very good example of history being written by the winners. She said that Scottish merchants took advantage of the opportunities of empire, which  can be interpreted in two ways. I submit that it is impossible to have an unbiased view of history.

I agree with most of what Murdo Fraser said but, talking about our history in the context of global history, what are Scottish and English schoolchildren taught about the British empire? Was it a good thing or a bad thing?

Will the member give way?

I find it a fascinating concept that we can somehow learn about ourselves without being taught. Can Ken Macintosh explain why it is that, south of the border, where great numbers of people come from a great array of histories, people should mainly be given access to learning about the history of England? The Government there seems to understand that it is important for people to know where they have come from and where they have arrived at.

If I may, I will return to the question raised by Tavish Scott. Glory, glory to the Hibees, I could say from a partisan point of view, but I urge the First Minister not to take so lightly the position of Scottish football in our economy and our identity, because it is part of the Scottish promotion of what we are. Tomorrow, a member of the Scottish Premier League and a senior official from one of the Scottish clubs are coming here to meet me because they—

Yes.

I am looking for the First Minister to wish the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on sport well in its efforts to provide a forum for this discussion.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Questions 5 and 6 were excellent questions, but they were asked by people who represent their parties in those particular portfolios. I would like to know what the convention is with regard to who gets to ask questions of front-bench members, as I thought that it was the back benchers.

I thank the cabinet secretary for taking an intervention at this late hour. I fully appreciate the Government's attempts to protect the Scottish economy. However, I am unable to support the Government's motion tonight because it asks us to recognise the Government's actions "to ensure that the nation is ... protected from the worst of the downturn". To "ensure" means to guarantee, and the Scottish Government does not have the fiscal powers to do anything like that. Therefore, I shall not support the motion.

I apologise for introducing a more philosophical note at this stage in the debate, but does the member accept that, if we controlled all the levers of economic management, we would not fear a rise in oil prices?

The Parliament cannot restructure the banks. Does the member have any idea how it can influence the powers that be at Westminster?

Does the member share the opinion that was voiced by the previous speaker, Ms Alexander, that we were in a crisis?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that we could summarise the change for which he asks as "From each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs" and that we could transfer power and wealth along the way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am intrigued by Derek Brownlee's explanation of the Scottish Government's attitude to taking on more borrowing, which will increase debt and prolong the agony. He suggested that the reason was to annoy the UK Government. I think that the Scottish Government wants to try to persuade the Scots that they are not as badly off as they think they are, because it believes that only optimism and determination will get us through. I think that that is wrong.

Does the member agree with what the governor of the Bank of England said about restructuring the banks in Scotland? That is such an important sector in our economy.

Before the cabinet secretary develops his point, I would like to backtrack to the effect of the recession on our financial services sector. Has the Government given any thought to the recommendations of the governor of the Bank of England on restructuring those banks that are more or less nationalised and owned by us?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The principle of equity must be maintained in law. If there is to be a diminution of judges' qualifications, should we not pilot that first, to see whether more cases go to the European Court of Human Rights? I know that the member is interested in that issue.

It may have been a slip of the tongue on the member's behalf, but McKenzie friends are not lay representatives in court; they are lay supporters for someone who is litigating on their own account.

I will press the minister further. Has he identified areas where we might start?

How urgently must the matter of clients in Scotland choosing to use the English jurisdiction be addressed? There is talk of large English firms doing much more business in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it shares the Prime Minister's vision of supervised homes for poor, young unmarried mothers. (S3O-8071)

I am relieved to hear that the Scottish Government is not thinking of punishment blocks or gulags for bad girls. Will the minister impress on his colleagues that the programme that is aimed at preventing pregnancies among young teenagers has fallen behind the reality and that there should be a Government programme for it?

Given the member's experience, does she think that there are enough lecturers in place to do the tasks that the colleges have taken on?

With all due respect to Keynes, I am not sure that we are dealing with the same level of inherited debt. Is the member suggesting that more should be spent on college education? If so, and thinking of our fixed budget, where will it come from?

Will the member give way?

Has any work been done on establishing whether it is reality or simply a folk tale that people who might well have the qualifications to go to university are choosing instead to go to colleges, which offer more vocational courses that increase the likelihood of their finding a job? After all, quite a number of university graduates are going without jobs.

Does the Government have a strategy with regard to its priorities for learning in the colleges? We have heard about the concentration on skilling young  people for the jobs that are available. Have you identified the priorities with the colleges, or is each college free to determine them itself?

I, too, thank Rhona Brankin for bringing the issue to the Parliament for debate. I state an interest as the patron of the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign for about eight years—it just seems like 80. Some of its members are in the public gallery tonight. I was attracted to the SBCC because it is not just a shake-your-can voluntary organisation; it tries to shake the establishment and shake up the policies that affect breast cancer services. Partly because of its questionnaire 2000, which was a record that the SBCC compiled of the treatment and experience of every woman in Scotland who had been diagnosed with breast cancer over the previous two years, we were able to contribute to the improvement of services. However, as Christine Grahame pointed out, the letter still takes far too long to get to the women concerned—the letter that every woman dreads. Whether it takes a weekend or two weeks, it takes a horrendous time to arrive. Surely that could be bettered with today's instant communications.  Services have improved in other areas. Treatments have certainly improved—the better survival rates prove that—and the SBCC's focus has therefore moved to prevention. I take a bit of an issue with people who say, "If you just take your fruit and vegetables, exercise and lose weight"—that would be difficult for some of us—"you'll go a long way towards preventing breast cancer." People might go a bit of the way to doing that, as they will help their general health and be in a better position to resist breast cancer if they develop it, but I am interested in the possible connection between breast cancer and the chemical imbalances in our lifestyles nowadays. The SBCC is particularly interested in endocrine-disrupting chemicals that are found in plastics, cosmetics, body care products and cleaning products. We do not yet know whether there is a direct connection between environmental factors and the development of different cancers. We strongly suspect that there is such a connection, but we need much more research on that.

I could not agree more, having had my own wee lump after trying HRT. However, that is another story. Some ladies in the chamber will probably know aspects of the problem from their experience. Prevention is the big thing that we should be thinking about, and we could also think about lymphoedema services. There is now a lymphoedema nurse and, unfortunately, I have to use the service in Lothian, but I cannot speak too highly of it. There could be many more pilot schemes, and much more research could be done to discover the benefits of manual drainage. I am talking about the sort of thing that can be done by a helping carer or partner. Self-management would be involved, and people who have had cancer know that being on top of it and helping to manage it for themselves helps their general health and wellbeing. I urge the Government to consider more research on chemical imbalances and the environmental factors that may affect breast cancer, and to extend further the lymphoedema nurse service. I again thank Rhona Brankin for lodging the motion.

With regard to Tom McCabe's reply about the advice that the SPCB gets from consultants, does it receive any counter-advice, or go to other consultants to get different advice? It appears, to many of us, that a huge amount of money is being spent on security measures that not all of us think are essential. In view of the £300,000 for the turnstiles and the exorbitant figure of £375,000 a year for unplanned maintenance, might it be a good idea to have an ad hoc group of back benchers, elected through a free vote of their peers, to act as a sounding board for the corporate body? I am sure that we would be willing to do that, because more and more people are taking more and more of an interest in how the Parliament spends money and the impression that that creates with the people who pay for it.

Given the member's comment that members should engage with each other on the matter of IT upgrades, particularly in their offices, do I take it that the member agrees with and endorses my suggestion of establishing an ad hoc group to act as a sounding board for the SPCB?

Neither does Obama.

In light of the statement that the prosecutor in England made yesterday on assisted suicide, does the First Minister agree with Debbie Purdy that the issue can be addressed properly only by elected representatives and through the introduction of primary legislation? Would he back a free vote on such legislation?

I think that I am the only person here who has worked on a local television station with news bunnies, weather in Swedish and topless darts.

I advise against going down that route until a lot more money is available. I ask the minister to ensure that the language that is used in any further presentation of the idea, whether in the national conversation paper or elsewhere, is simplified. People on the streets do not understand the technicalities.

Will the cabinet secretary's request for local authorities to take a pro rata share of the chancellor's cuts impact on the capital city supplement? I give notice now that if he does think that, I might not go for the standstill budget that I was looking for after I hear what Glasgow is to get.

Will the First Minister give me an assurance, as regards possible cuts to the personnel employed in local government, that he will have nothing more to do with artificially set class sizes that do not carry over from one authority to another or from one subject to another? On top of that, will he be guided by the principle of first working out the worth of the work that is done by people who may well have to have their jobs curtailed by having shorter hours, for example?

I apologise for not having the exact figures to hand—perhaps the minister can help me. What savings are made by upskilling primary teachers who are non-specialists while keeping unemployed the young physical education graduates who cannot get jobs?

The member mentions Andy Murray. He is the only tennis player who has, through his inspiring performances, increased the number of people who take part in tennis. That is something that we need to address. What has he got, and what has he done that others cannot?

I, too, congratulate the Health and Sport Committee on what I believe is a good report. However, running through it, I detected some slight confusion on the matter that Ian McKee raised: the differences between physical education and physical activity, and between physical activity and sport. Try as we might, no matter how good the coaching and facilities are, not everyone likes sport. The convener of the Health and Sport Committee does not like sport, but she likes physical activity. [ Laughter. ]

I had no intention of referring to the member's big blue knickers. The report endorses everything that I and other members have been saying in the Parliament for 10 years. Karen Gillon, who is not here, could attest to that. She did a huge amount of work to try to make PE serious and worthy of the respect that other classroom subjects get. I am happy that the committee did not pull its punches in its report. There was mention of lukewarm headteachers. The best lessons in that regard can be learned from East Renfrewshire Council, which must have worked out how to timetable PE along with all the examinable subjects and still produce good academic results. There are lukewarm councils. Members have said that no one takes responsibility for the delivery of the programme. Long ago, when dinosaurs still gambolled about the earth, we had PE organisers in councils who delivered the programme for the council and the Government. Perhaps that idea could be revisited. There are lukewarm inspectors, too. HMIE betrayed the snobbery about the status of PE in the school curriculum that I described. The status of PE is improving, but we still have a long way to go and HMIE might be the last to get on that train as it pulls out of the station. Christine Grahame said that if people are keen, PE will happen. I am glad that many members said that being keen is not enough. Many teachers  are as keen as mustard but cannot teach for toffee. We need good, well-trained teachers. The report emphasised the importance of getting them young. Physical literacy was mentioned in the context of pre-school education—that is the context in which I understand the concept. I have 10 grandchildren, all of whom were subjected to time with their grandma out in the garage in the middle of winter, learning how to throw, catch, pass a ball and so on, with cut-down clubs, bats, rackets and all the rest of it. That is what physical literacy is about. However, some children are more literate than others, which is why I have difficulty working out how we could have a system of examination of physical literacy and PE attainment that would equate to our approach to examining other subjects. The report also mentions the legacy from the Olympic games in London and the Commonwealth games in Scotland. If "legacy" means physical structures or the motivation to take part in sport or physical activity that we pass on to the people who come after us, it is already in place. The legacy should include kick-starting the active schools programme and links between what happens in schools and community sport and clubs. The committee's recommendation that there should be a conference to consider the matter is a good one, but the end result of the conference must be agreed in advance. We do not want another conference at which everyone starts by saying who they are and where they are from—there are far too many conferences like that. We know what we want to do; we need to work out how to deliver it. There is less mention in the report than I would have wanted there to be of the type of PE that is provided in PE teacher-training programmes. I have a query about the courses that are currently taught. The report welcomes the one-year course, but there are one-year courses and one-year courses. I caution members that people who go into the one-year course after having done an academic degree are often good at one particular sport—they are specialists—and inspirational in it, but they are not necessarily qualified to teach physical education. I would like the Government to assess the various courses that are on offer and to consider whether they are becoming far too academic. Is the PE certificate in schools also far too academic? Among PE teachers, there are too many stories of students coming out who cannot deliver any shots in netball and do not know about football and rugby because all that they did was class work. I will finish on the reality of sport in the community and quote the experience of Hutchison Vale Football Club, which is a marvellous  organisation. It has been going for 70 years and coaches hundreds of kids every week. Some of its graduates are Allan McGregor and Steven Whittaker of Rangers Football Club, Gary Caldwell of Celtic Football Club, Ian Murray of Hibernian Football Club, Gary Naysmith, Andy Driver, Darren Fletcher, Kevin Thomson, John Collins, Kenny Miller and Derek Riordan, who is very good. Hutchie Vale knows what it is like, in difficult areas, to take children on board, take them through and make them enthusiasts. In 1993, it introduced the measured steps system for six to 11-year-olds. In 1998, the programme had 130 kids, 45 per cent of whom had addresses in Broomhouse—not the most salubrious of areas—and the club charged them 50p a week. In 2001, it had to move to a new public-private partnership school and charge the kids £3 a week; only 7 per cent of them had addresses in Broomhouse. That is the reality for far too many clubs when they have to deal with new facilities. Paragraph 277 of the report says it all: "On the basis of the evidence, the conclusion that the Committee draws is that nobody has taken responsibility for delivering on the policy." If we have helped to clear that up this afternoon and inspire someone to take that responsibility, we will have done a good job.

As someone who was once fleet of foot in a gymnasium, I say to Aileen Campbell that it has always been the case that teenage girls have not been all that keen on PE. The problem has nothing to do with the sport or the PE activity and everything to do with the fact that it messes up girls' hair and makes them sweaty. Getting girls involved in PE depends on what surrounds the production of PE. That is what matters.

I could not agree more that it should be treated in the same way as any other classroom subject, but there has been a snobbery in Scottish schools about PE since Adam was a boy, and it exists among teachers.

I hope that the minister will forgive me for asking her the same question as I asked at the conference that we both attended in Aviemore. How does she define quality PE?

Did the committee investigate the reasons why such a small percentage of primary schools is delivering the PE that schools are meant to deliver?

Will the member give way?

And to meet scouts, I sincerely hope.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister anticipate at what point he will be able to say how much expenditure will be incurred?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It pertains to the same matter. I came to the debate to learn, and the issue that is being discussed seems to be a central point. It might be in order for a motion without notice to be lodged to carry this business over to another meeting. That would give the minister time to reflect and decide whether the legal opinion can be provided.

Will the member take an intervention?

If we are going to hypothesise about what might have happened if Scotland had a Government that could pull the Royal Bank of Scotland and so on out of danger, surely we can also assume that, if we had had a decent Government, those institutions might never have been in that mess in the first place.

Thank you. Will the First Minister consider a further inquiry, which might be elicited from organisations in Scandinavia that specialise in conflict resolution, mediation and so on? Does he intend to co- operate with the American senator who has flagged up the possibility of a Senate investigation?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I have already nailed my colours to the mast. For the reasons that I outlined in my speech, I do not think that there should be a referendum. That said, does the member accept that we have a difficulty as a result of the habit of referring back to the manifesto and claiming that that is what people voted for? Of course, I do not think that that is what they voted for, but I presume that that difficulty is shared by all the parties in the chamber. My plea to them is, "Get out o' it!" After all, we are in the 21 st century; no one expects them to keep stupid promises.

Will the member say what would satisfy her as regards an improvement in Scottish life and our economy if the powers that she advocates were introduced? Would she be like Alex Johnstone and want just a relative improvement or would she want something much better than that?

Before I attempt to dissuade the Government from its foolish referendum policy, I want to say how glad I am that it overestimated the £500 million that Labour will keep from it. I have figured out that £3.3 million is going spare, which suits me fine for the capital city grant. I thought I would get that in quickly. Why on earth is the Government persisting in bringing forward a referendum bill? It knows that it cannot get the thing through. It does not really have to stand on the dignity of its manifesto commitment; these days, people outside the Parliament like politicians who are able to say, "Whoops—I got that one wrong, and I'd like to change it." Why does the Government not do that? It did so with the local income tax, and, as far as I am aware, its rating has not gone down in the opinion polls. Unfortunately, the SNP has tactically boxed itself into a corner. It confused—as the Deputy First Minister and I once discussed—a tactic with a policy or strategy. It is a tactic that one would only use to pursue a campaign, and the Government will not manage to deploy it properly, so it should forget it. The time is not right, as umpteen members in the chamber have said. People are not concerned with that just now; it is not their priority. The Government has not done enough to inform people in Scotland of what independence feels like, what it actually is and how it applies to them in their small corner of the world. Not nearly enough work is being done to get the Parliament to start thinking constitutionally. I do not see why the SNP feels that it has to shoulder the whole burden now, because there are members on all sides of the chamber who agree that the present set-up is not satisfactory. We need to explore together how we can advance the Parliament. I would like there to be sovereign powers, because I am certain that that is the best delivery mechanism for the policies of any of the parties in the Parliament that might be elected to Government. There is much more common ground among current members of the Parliament than they allow themselves to express, but the constitutional question has become so enmeshed with party politics that members cannot concede that their party opponent might have a good idea. The aspirations that the First Minister outlined this morning were noble: the sort of standards that we should set ourselves and the targets for which we should aim. I do not believe that any member in the chamber disagreed with those aspirations, but they could not say, "Oh, I agree with that," because they were in the wrong party. I would like the SNP to drop the whole idea of forcing people  into a position that their experience of being an MSP has possibly taken them out of, if ever they were in it. We waste time in party politicking when the world is marching ahead. The world is setting up all sorts of new institutions and forms of co-operation, and methods of delivering services for people. We should be thinking about that, but we cannot do so properly if we are too busy playing ducks and drakes in the chamber over a constitutional question that is still very academic for most people outside the Parliament. They do not view it as the delivery mechanism for policies, and I sometimes think that the SNP does not either. We heard from Annabel Goldie, who thinks that it will all happen when David Cameron gets into power. That will be another false dawn. I have nothing against the man, but he is operating in a system that has been failing us for a very long time now. It has kept us relatively successful, but I do not want to be relatively successful compared to some regions in the United Kingdom. I want us to be optimally successful: as successful as we possibly can be. We know that the Westminster model does not deliver that, so I cannot see why Alex Johnstone persists—och well, perhaps I can. Perhaps he will relax a bit in the next session of Parliament when he, along with Annabel Goldie, realises that David Cameron does not have all the answers. Des McNulty made an excellent speech in which he pointed out some of the things that we could and should be doing. I wonder whether he will be as enthusiastic and feel that those things are as feasible when the Tories are in power. He should be thinking structurally rather than along party political lines; I certainly agreed with much of what he said. I wish that the SNP had stuck to explaining that sovereign power for Scotland would deliver customised policies for Scotland. That is what we need, as it is obvious not only that our economy is different, but that even our society has diverged so much from the way in which society south of the border has developed. We have different potential and different futures, but that does not mean that we have to separate—for goodness' sake, the Government should get that out of the lexicon. People are interested not in separating, but in finding new ways of working together to their mutual advantage. That is how we should be talking in the chamber. We can still fall out over whether, as Margaret Smith said, the SNP's education policies are rubbish—some of them are, but not all—but we can separate discussion of that particular specific from the constitutional question. I wish the  SNP would do that. It should perhaps take a tip from someone who has been through quite a number of referendums: just forget this one.

Will Alex Johnstone explain the source of his faith that the incoming Conservative Government at Westminster will close the gap in economic performance between Scotland and the rest of the UK? That is something that no previous Government has managed to do.

Will the member give way?

In the event that a consultation does not meet the best practice requirements that the cabinet secretary has outlined, will parents have recourse to somebody somewhere?

Will the member give way?

Can we divide the public interest in the legal sense from the public interest in the social, political, diplomatic and economic sense?

If the decision that the cabinet secretary took was outwith the realms of political, economic and diplomatic interests, can the member explain why the head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation should pass comment on the legal decisions that the cabinet secretary took? Are the two things not intertwined?

Will the member take an intervention?

I also respect the comments made by Elaine Murray and Jack McConnell. However, does Patrick Harvie agree that there is more than a legal dimension to the decision that was taken and that the needs of the global population now, compared to the interests of 20 years ago, have also to be weighed in the balance?

Is the member saying that compassion has no limits, that it is an absolute and that, once such a decision is made, it must be applied?

Will the member give way?

Although I fully appreciate Robert Brown's description of the legal niceties, would he have disregarded the realpolitik that swirled around the al-Megrahi case and made it a unique decision?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Richard Baker sign the motion that I lodged three weeks ago and which demands an independent inquiry?

The minister was obviously keen that justice should be seen to be done, and he informed Mr al-Megrahi of his rights. Did he also inform him that, under a compassionate release, he would not have to drop his appeal?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The First Minister asked whether it is in order for Labour to submit a drafting amendment at this stage. With the greatest of respect, I think that that is in order.

What did the cabinet secretary say to Mr al-Megrahi in his prison cell and what did Mr al-Megrahi say in return? Has he made any effort to discover from Mr al-Megrahi's counsel why he believed that Mr al-Megrahi would enhance his chances of returning to Libya if he gave up his appeal?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is monitoring local authorities through single outcome agreements to  ensure that they continue to commit to providing high-quality sports facilities, as detailed in "Reaching Higher", the national strategy for sport. (S3O-7404)

I thank the minister for her efforts in this field generally, but I draw her attention to what a BBC journalist recently reported about a sports facility: "If you doubt my words take a trip to the dump that is Meadowbank velodrome. It is dilapidated, tumbledown and overgrown. ... Ramshackle stands, tired changing facilities and grass untroubled by a lawnmower". Dare I suggest that the City of Edinburgh Council is trying hard to meet the national strategy? Can the minister comment on how the council will manage to do that, when we know that cuts to local government expenditure are coming?

I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement and I am glad that the group that first brought the matter to the Government's attention has been given some recognition for the part that it played. I, like Hugh Henry, am concerned about the eligibility criteria. I think that the cabinet secretary will understand that concern, given the level of house prices in Edinburgh in 2007, which she said would form the basis for access to the various schemes. I would like an assurance that the anomalous nature of the market in Edinburgh will not mean that Edinburgh householders find themselves at a disadvantage.

I appreciate that there will be official information campaigns, but will the minister also take on board the requirement to talk seriously to the media that cover and publicise local government elections, to try to get them to refocus on those elections and not the outcome of the next general election?

Does the minister really want an answer to that question?

Reliability is essential, but there must also be the correct specs. That is difficult to anticipate.

I was talking about  specifications for the counting machines. They are not big enough.

Always, always.

Will the member give way?

Although I regret saying it at this stage in our consideration of the bill, the way in which television in particular promotes and publicises elections influences turnout to a much greater extent than we in the Parliament estimate.

I associate myself with many of Margaret Smith's questions to the cabinet secretary. Can we have a full-day debate on education? We need much longer than normal, so that—apart from anything else—members can absorb the new terminology. I also suggest to the cabinet secretary that, when she is publicising all this to parents, teachers and folk like me who are too old to remember exactly what everything has been called, she uses flow charts and pathways through it using pupils—

I am being patronised, Presiding Officer.

It was them.

Further to Ms Grahame's point of order, Presiding Officer.

Will you perhaps ask the Presiding Officer whether he could supply us with the criteria that determine his choice of member in supplementary questions? Is it topicality? Is it a campaign that the member may have been pursuing? I, for one, do not know what criteria I am up against when I try to ask a supplementary.

Is Michael McMahon not concerned that having to put up with the embarrassments of the Labour Government for another year would harm his party's chances when it comes to the Scottish parliamentary elections? Is there nothing for the Labour Party in Scotland in having an early election and the stables being cleansed?

It was the Labour Government in concert with the Liberal Democrats that brought that about in this Parliament. It was not given to Labour; you did it yourselves.

It was quite a surprise to hear that Helen Eadie will not support the Tory motion. In the interests of accuracy, I wonder whether I might take issue with her opening remarks. She said that had Scotland been independent, there is no doubt that—if members will excuse the metaphor—we would have been all at sea when the tsunami hit us. Had Scotland been independent, we might have had a Labour Government and we might have repatriated Gordon Brown to run the economy in Scotland. We cannot choose our hypotheses without looking at the corollaries. The corollaries would have been that we would have had the same sort of oil fund as Norway has. We might well have had a leftish Government and the sort of regulations on the financial centre that there  should have been. I urge Helen Eadie to take that into account when she says what it might have been like had we been independent. In the interests of historical accuracy, I correct my friend James Kelly. It was not the SNP that brought down the Thatcher Government; it was a man called Frank Maguire, who represented Fermanagh and South Tyrone, and who abstained in the vote of confidence. He is the man to blame if we are handing out blame. I apologise to Dave Whitton for reminding him that the miners' strike was a bit more complex than he presented it. I pay tribute to men such as Davey Hamilton—a present member of the House of Commons—for his efforts in the miners' strike, but that does not take away anything from my criticism of the Government. I am sure that there are Labour members in this chamber who are a wee bit embarrassed by some of the things that the present Labour Government in London has done. Do we need a general election to give Labour a chance to stay in government or to hand over to—I forget his name—the nice Tory man? No, we do not need a general election for that reason; we need a general election to get rid of the stench of corruption and the disgust that people feel with the democratic process, and for the very practical reasons that were advanced by Derek Brownlee. We are walking a tightrope as far as the finances of not just Scotland but the United Kingdom are concerned, and we had better get off the tightrope and start being honest about the choices that we have to make on spending cuts. As I have said before in the chamber, it will not matter who is elected in London. David McLetchie mentioned that we should debate the constitution and I could not agree more. It is a pity that he is not here—[ Interruption. ] Oh, he is over there; good. If members look at page 26 of today's Business Bulletin , they will see my excellent amendment to the motion; unfortunately, it was not accepted for debate. It would have meant that we spent the time between now and the inevitable general election, which will come not sooner but later, informing people in Scotland of the constitutional choices. Then, depending on the outcome of the election, we could use that as the basis for renegotiation either of advanced devolution or, as I hope, the transfer of sovereignty to this Parliament. I commend that idea to members.

It does not matter what I prefer; it matters what people in England prefer. Any Government that is elected to Westminster  should answer to people in England and conduct their affairs. We have the Scottish Parliament to build on and we should do the same for Scots voters. I take the same interest in who is elected to be the Government in England as I do in Governments that are elected in other countries over which I have, and seek, no control. There is no chance of a general election being held, because members of Parliament—not just those in the Labour Party—have worked out that they will do better with 12 months' wages than with 10. Before members of the Scottish Parliament fall into line and churn out Pavlovian responses about spending cuts, I commend to members another of my ideas, which I shared with the Scottish Trades Union Congress last week at a meeting of its general council. It might be a good idea for the people in here to trust the people out there and consult them on how they want to determine priorities during a time of spending cuts and contraction of services. We cannot service our debt without making cuts or—more likely—having a mixture of tax increases and cuts. I find some agreement with that analysis from Ross Finnie. We know that cuts will happen, so why do we not consult our communities? The STUC could do that by working in conjunction with representatives from the Parliament. That would ensure that people were properly informed and allow them to make the priority choices that suit them and not us. If we are serious about cleaning up politics, that is how we can start. We could do that between now and the general election. There will be a general election, so people should just put up with it. We should try to ensure that we get something better for Scotland from the election. That is not selfish; it just makes sense. We know perfectly well that a huge difference exists between the construct of the Scottish economy and that of the English economy, and we know perfectly well that the size of our public sector demands a different answer. We in the Parliament can provide that answer.

I infer from the member's remarks that she agrees with the commentators who have said that Britain is now represented by BNP members. Does she agree with me that this chamber is not represented by those members, and that they do not speak for Scotland?

rose—

Will the member give way?

The member remembers covering the miners' strike as a journalist, as I did. I am sure that he remembers the devastation that was caused by the lukewarm support for the miners that came from the Labour Party.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

In all fairness, I must ask a question. Does the leader of the Opposition believe that it is possible to service our debt without incurring cuts in service provision?

I wonder whether we can touch on reality again. It does not matter who is elected. If the UK economy is deprived of its AAA rating among those people who lend us money, neither of the two parties that have so far spoken about cuts will be able to do anything about it.

Before the minister proceeds to the next issue, can he assure me that the Government has done what it can do to engage the makers of videos, the literature that young people read and so on? Those things carry the culture that the Government is seeking to change with a piece of legislation.

I am a less than bucolic member, but I am interested in what the cabinet secretary said about the availability of funds. He suggested that there was enough money in the pot to meet all the Government's obligations just now. What happens if the euro implodes?

Does the member agree that what she has been saying gives an indication of why many carers are in the position they are in? People who have not been carers do not really realise when they start to slip into that category. They do not describe themselves as carers, and they do not recognise it when others become carers. A Government information campaign is needed.

To ask the Scottish Executive, given the success of the well man clinics run by Rangers and Celtic football clubs, whether it plans to encourage and assist other sports clubs to replicate these. (S3O-7090)

I suggest that the minister should explore the idea further with the Scottish Premier League, which is also considering ways of rolling out the programme, given the proven success of the Rangers clinic, which achieved a 10 per cent reduction in cholesterol levels and a 7.5 per drop in blood pressure in a short time.  Mind you, I cannot give figures for the depression that might be around Celtic Football Club. Such a programme has proven to be effective. I suggest early work in other sports and at sports centres to reach the type of man who is not usually found in a well man clinic and who it has been proven would benefit from going to one.

Obviously, I declare an interest in the subject. Will the minister take on board the idea of extending self-management to carer management? There are physical tasks that can be undertaken by carers and in which allied health professionals do not need to be involved. However, allied health professionals must instruct or teach carers how to perform those tasks. I commend that approach to the minister as one way of using resources.

The cabinet secretary has acted entirely properly in this instance, but, without compromising Professor Spencer, will he expand on his statement that "If the process had been properly followed, the likelihood is that Martin would not have been transferred to the open estate"? It seems to me that there may be room for exceptions, as indicated by the very short additional sentence that was handed down to Brian Martin afterwards.

Would the First Minister care to speculate on why teachers now have a stress line that they can call and on whether it is entirely true to say that, because physical attacks on teachers are diminishing, the stress of being a teacher is any less?

Has the aspiration behind the 2004 act been compromised by the local authorities' lack of money?

Will the member give way?

I hate to throw a spanner in the works—[ Laughter. ]

We are discussing how information on legislation is distributed to parents. Are we creating a precedent that would apply to all departmental information?

I have an open mind on the matter and came to the debate to learn about it, so I hope that members will indulge me. If local authorities have been excluding the groups of children and young people that Ken Macintosh mentioned, why does he think that those groups' inclusion in the bill will make local authorities more likely to include them in the future?

Could the member explain why local authorities have taken that action? Is it purely financial, or is there another reason?

Will the minister inform us whether the Scottish Government has asked the appropriate American authorities whether the visa service will be restored to Scotland?

Until the speeches of Chris Harvie and Robin Harper, I thought that the rather prosaic title of the debate—"Scotland's Engagement in the United States of America and Canada"—should have been replaced with an alternative such as "Here's tae us—wha's like us?" A lot of the speeches have definitely been in that vein. I do not want to rain on anyone's parade, as I said to Ted Brocklebank, but the debate could also have been called "What I Did on My American Jolly". It was not terribly serious to start off with. I know that that makes me sound like a bit of a sour old trout, but I do not have the scattering of cousins in North America and Canada that Robin Harper has—although my husband's cousin's son owns the bar that Shania Twain drank in. Let me make it plain that I love many things about North America, particularly the USA. I love Willie Nelson, Alan Jackson, Dwight Yoakam, Reba McEntire and all of the country scene, but I am not blind to the fact that we have an unequal relationship with the USA when it comes to nuclear weapons and things like that. That must be pitched into the equation when we are talking about our relationship with America. Pauline McNeill said that Americans like us, but Americans do not know us. I was once in Atlanta, trying to check my bags through to Edinburgh, and I had to have an argument with the lady at the desk, who maintained that Edinburgh was in London. I had to explain that it was the capital city of Scotland. Do you know what the name on her badge was? Marie Stuart. She had never heard of  Scotland or Scots, which is, unfortunately, true of a great number of people in America. Tricia Marwick says that Americans have a great interest in us. Some of them have—I would not deny that some communities in North America know the difference between Scotland and Ireland and have a particular interest in Scotland—but I am more interested in what Chris Harvie said about building up a Scottish centre of learning, knowledge and true information at Princeton. I would back that any time. Although I appreciate that tartan day has become Scotland week and that there are now 10 cities that have events to mark the week, I am still critical. Susan Boyle got coast-to-coast coverage on American television in eight minutes, but, in eight years, Scotland week is still not coast to coast.

Scotland week would be a lot more coast to coast if it got on Craig Ferguson's "Late Late Show", which is one of the most important television programmes in America. I used to work with him in Scottish Television—for all I know, Ted Brocklebank might have worked with him as well. It would also be good to get hold of Dermot McQuarrie, whose father, Albert, was a Conservative MP and who is a vice-president of the Fox Broadcasting Company. We have never exploited those avenues because we have not thought clearly about the priorities of Scotland week. Is the priority to promote the profile of Scotland and make ourselves better known as a community or to build up business links? I am not at all sure, but I think that the Irish know what their priorities are. First, they built on the notion of Ireland. Their television adverts promote the island of Ireland—I point out to Ted Brocklebank that they are not in the least hung up about reminding folk that the north of Ireland is still British; they simply market Ireland as an identity. We should do exactly the same thing: we should market ourselves not as part of the United Kingdom but as Scotland, distinct and unique. If the priority is business, presumably it makes good business sense to target our effort either sectionally, geographically or both. Charlie Gordon got that right in his speech. I thought that I heard hints that that is happening already, and I hope to  hear more about that when the minister sums up. We heard that there have been three visits to Maryland. Profile or business? I would like to know what the priority is. It is not good enough to say that they like us, so we go back to see them. There must be more focus. I urge the minister to separate those two strands. He should think big with regard to identity and image and think in a focused way with regard to business. I am sure that I am trying to teach my grandfather to suck eggs, of course. Rob Gibson pointed to big thinking in terms of business when he talked about tidal technology. That is the kind of thing on which we can go international—we are as good as anybody in the world in that regard. I have enjoyed the debate. I do not mean to sound like too much of a sourpuss, but I really think that we should be a bit more realistic about how ithers see us. Members might have been a little rose tinted in how they described the situation, but I hope that I am proved wrong.

I do not want to rain on the member's parade, but we should also remember who founded the Ku Klux Klan.

Although I appreciate the member's long record of promoting  Scottish music and musicians, I wonder whether she agrees that we should ditch the lot and support Susan Boyle. After all, it has taken us eight years to get to where we are, and she went coast to coast in eight minutes.

rose—

I cannot prove that evidence was destroyed. It was reported to the anti-merger group that part of what I think was a 350-page document had been destroyed.

One of my concerns was that we might find what is happening in America happening here. In America, shareholders who think that they were not given full information before their bank's situation completely changed are organising litigation. I have heard whispers from shareholders of the former Lloyds TSB that they were not in full possession of the facts about HBOS, and I am concerned about that.

I realise that, in a members' business debate, one does not seek votes, but I am looking for all men and women of good will to give me their support in my efforts to establish that there should be more investigation into the business of the HBOS-Lloyds TSB merger. The motion seeks the agreement of members that there should be a public inquiry into the reasons for the decision by the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer to dispense with the normal procedures that usually accompany company mergers when HBOS and Lloyds TSB were supported and encouraged by the Government to engage in such a process. The motion also reminds members of the particular relevance of the decision to support the merger, which a more analytical observer might describe as a takeover. It refers to the inevitable and quantifiable increase in the number of people who are likely to become unemployed in the financial sectors in Edinburgh, the Lothians and the capital's travel-to-work area, and the less easily measurable but nonetheless adverse impact on the city's self-confidence and reputation as a secure and well-managed financial centre, which has implications not only for the people who live in this area but for all of Scotland, in terms of the economic generation that has been ramping up in the city over the past decade. But it is a done deal, is it not? Why bother to rake over cold embers, even if the commonly held view among people who work in the sector is that the merger was not such a get-out-of-jail move as was assumed last September, when Gordon Brown and his chancellor sprang their news that  there would be no investigation into the so-called merger? At the time, I and others said, "Oh, they probably really didn't have any choice." In fact, probably everybody said that. However, by the middle of October, the situation in other banks was not much different from that in HBOS and Lloyds TSB. The merger was therefore seen in a quite different context. We had thought that the proposed merger was a stand-alone crisis that left the Government with no choice other than to wave it through before the banks' depositors left one or other or both of the banks high and dry. By October, it was obvious that the same flawed lending policies had been pursued by other banks, and that a strategic policy, rather than an emergency reaction, was required. Months before shareholders voted on the merger proposal, other options should have been explored to address what was known to be a systemic weakness, so why did that not happen? Why did Gordon Brown, whose reputation was built on his being a prudent chancellor, fail to take advantage of the time bonus that was bestowed on him by other banks here and abroad being in the same pickle? The suspicion is that this most political of Prime Ministers stuck to his initial decision for political reasons, in spite of having been given time to let the normal practices on mergers come into play, and in defiance of the widespread and growing opinion among banking professionals that the size of the merged bank would break European Union and United Kingdom rules. We should not forget, when we are trying to work out why Gordon Brown in particular did not take advantage of the time that he had been given, the initial approval of the decisive action that he took. That approval got him out from under the weight of accusations that followed his cop-out from calling an election—accusations that he was an indecisive ditherer. Almost overnight, his reputation changed. There has to be some reason, other than the business case for a merger, to explain why Gordon Brown threw so much weight behind the merger in the period leading up to the shareholders' meetings and votes. It may be significant that Lord Mandelson, having succeeded John Hutton as Secretary of State for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform on 3 October, made plain from the outset his opinion that recapitalisation of the two banks would be dependent on the merger going ahead. Some members may recall that he seemed to jump in before he had had time to think the thing through. Although the Prime Minister said that he did not see the reports from the Financial Services Authority—reports that pulled together information that the banks supplied on their financial health—it  seems most unlikely, given his known propensity to micromanage other departments' policies when he was chancellor, that he did not glance at the more independent reports produced jointly by the Bank of England, the Treasury and the FSA. He cannot have been unaware of their concerns about anti-competitiveness, or of the concerns expressed by the Office of Fair Trading relating to personal accounts and banking services for small and medium-sized enterprises in Scotland, or of concerns expressed about the impact on the mortgage market. I accept that the suspicions that I have outlined—and they are only suspicions—as to the reasons for the failure to test the efficacy of the proposed merger against the normal standards cannot be proved without a complete record of the interdepartmental information exchange in the period from 18 September 2008, when the merger was first announced, and the decision of Lord Mandelson to proceed with the merger in spite of the OFT reporting on 24 October that, since the onset of its investigation, market conditions had "changed considerably". The OFT report advised caution. It emphasised the "enormous importance of the mortgage business to the UK economy." It also warned, given the market conditions, that "the combination of the largest and third largest mortgage provider is significant enough to cause concern." The report concluded that the proposed merger would result in a "substantial lessening of competition." Frankly, the redactions applied "in the public interest" to my request for the papers that might explain why the original plan was unaltered, even when the market conditions had changed hugely, have compromised the transparency of this whole episode. The question has to be why. If it is a done deal, why can we not understand it better? The point at which my suspicions tipped over into certainty that there should be a public inquiry into the merger came with the reported refusal of Lord Mandelson's department to hand over a document considered in camera at the appeal by the anti-merger group. The group was told that the document had been destroyed. Even if that is true, it strengthens the case for an inquiry into the merger decision-making process that led to shareholders voting when they may not have been in possession of the full facts about the soundness of HBOS, the effect on the mortgage market and the competitiveness of the merger. If it is not true, an inquiry is essential to discover what had to be hidden in the public interest.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will introduce the practice of allowing a McKenzie's friend into law courts. (S3O-6781)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply and for his attention to Lord Gill's upcoming report. Before its publication, he will see the petition on the matter that was discussed in committee just two days ago. I draw to the cabinet secretary's attention that the McKenzie friend system, which we advocate, does not allow anyone to advocate on behalf of someone in court; the McKenzie friend is simply there to advise or support a person who might be without legal representation. The cabinet secretary must agree with me that that would only enhance the procedure in Scottish courts.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not wish to detract from the point of order that Jack McConnell has outlined, but can you rule whether a First Minister, or any other member of the Parliament, can lie? The First Minister was accused of lying today.

When the minister is considering the provisions that relate to houses in multiple occupation, will he also consider a new nuisance that has arisen for people who live in buildings with communal stairwells: weekend lets for stag and hen nights, in which the participants' behaviour is abominable?

I wonder whether there is a record of how often that provision has been utilised.

I appreciate the difficulty of introducing outside accountants to private businesses, but we are dealing with a very different sort of business. Besides the possibility of illegality in the management of funds, there is a huge possibility of undercapitalisation in homes. Someone must look at that issue, because people are involved.

I think of you as Brad Pitt.

If the minister is listening to all voices, he will listen to Sarah Boyack's in particular because she speaks for most of Edinburgh when she says that most people are absolutely fed up with the city centre being trashed. It contains high levels of rental and owner-occupied property. The minister has to tackle the problem one way or the other; we wait to find out which way he will choose.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to respond to the recent report by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care, "Better care every step of the way". (S3O-6765)

There might be cost implications if 57 per cent of services have not trained their staff in palliative and end-of-life care. How will the cabinet secretary deal with homes that are supplying a much-needed service but find themselves unable to provide the quality and depth of training needed for such a wide range of people?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To build on the idea of suspending the right to buy, we must look a little further ahead. I wonder whether the member agrees that some of the family homes that will be built will prove too big, given the demographics that are predicted for, say, 20 years' time. Councils will eventually have to have the right to decide whether to sell some of their homes as a management tool, although they must be able to replace what they sell.

Will the member give way?

Given that it is now some time since we had the argument about stock transfer, should we not let bygones be bygones and get on with ensuring that there is an  equitable arrangement and that housing debt is written off for the City of Edinburgh Council, as it is for councils that took the other route? We are in a different ball game.

I thank the cabinet secretary for keeping me informed about the situation and I congratulate NHS Scotland on its state of preparedness. I, too, am interested in antivirals and I suggest that it would be worth while issuing a statement that would make people understand what antivirals are. For example, we  have said that Tamiflu and Relenza are proving effective against the virus. Was that just good fortune? We did not seem to have the same notice of swine flu that we had of bird flu. It might be worth while explaining to the public what an antiviral is.

Will the minister make it clear whether Trinity Mirror has agreed to meet him to discuss the issues?

Does the member accept that some of us are unfortunately old enough to remember the time when Robert Maxwell watched the way in which Rupert Murdoch went about restructuring his company, and then used that as a template for the Daily Record and the Mail in Glasgow? He had razor wire round the place. That is what everyone is concerned about now.

Very often, the issue is a lack of experience on the part of officials at local level, not a lack of willingness. They need training—which can be provided from within the resources that we already have. [ Interruption. ]

I associate myself with most of what Ian McKee said. Among sports people and those who are interested in sport, it is not heresy to say that the important thing is not for more people to win gold medals but for more people to play sport. Over the years, I have made that point in this chamber and said that, if we do not have a big pool to draw from, we will not get the elite athletes. I agree with Frank McAveety's conclusion, which was—and I paraphrase—that the legacy of the Glasgow games should be about people living better. Whether that is defined in the cerebral sense or in people living more healthily or in better houses, the legacy should be about an improvement for everyone who is associated with the games. We must not do what I think Bill Aitken suggested and place too many expectations on the games. They will never deliver everything for Scotland that we want them to deliver. For example, our football clubs are already tackling the challenge of getting young people into sport and a healthier lifestyle. A recent meeting of the cross-party group on sport heard from the Rangers Football Club's community development team. Some wonderful work is being done by the Hibernian Football Club by way of its youth programme. Last Sunday, I had the delight of watching some of the youngsters who had come through the programme, but that is another story. That work is being done, and we should not downplay it. We should not expect the games to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear. If it was possible to do that, the current interest that many kids in Scotland have in the progress of English football teams in the European cup would mean that many more people got out there and played football. That is not happening and, instead, the phenomenon is ensuring that more people stay in to watch football games on television. As Frank McAveety rightly said, for the legacy that we hope to inherit from the games, we have to turn to physical education and activity. It will come from people who understand the relevance and importance of sport. Physical education starts in  schools or pre-schools, and I am glad that Frank McAveety now says that it has to at the centre of the school timetable. In the past, among other Scottish classroom teachers, he was guilty at times of an intellectual snobbery towards PE. He thought that it was a frill; it is not a frill. I will not quote any Latin tags, but I remind the chamber of the "healthy mind, healthy body" philosophy. That has always been true—indeed, it has never been truer than it is today. Reference has been made to the joining together of sportscotland and the former Scottish Institute of Sport. The cross-party group on sport recently visited the Stirling centre of excellence, and I was very impressed by its focus. I reassure the minister that, although I disagreed with—and still do not really agree with—the fusion of the two bodies, it seems to be working well. Sportscotland seems to have worked how to keep both the elite and the community strand of its activities going. When we were in Stirling, we were assured that a good range of programmes were in place to prepare elite athletes for the Commonwealth games. We will certainly do well, although performance will be patchy across different sports. That will be down not to the Commonwealth games organisation but to whether sports and sports governing bodies are organised well enough to promote their best athletes through the ranks. I wish that the Gladiator Programme to which Margaret Curran referred was available in all sports and all parts of Scotland, but it is not. We should seek to develop that template throughout sport in Scotland. No automatic benefit for our national health and wellbeing will come from the Commonwealth games. I was glad to hear the minister say that everyone must examine what part they will play in the process of improving health standards, participation and activity in Scotland. As Frank McAveety and others have said, PE is the key. If the minister has anything to do with the education department, she had better see it about getting PE teachers into schools. They are being trained and are waiting to be employed; if we mean what we say about the legacy from the games, they should be employed. On funding, I appreciate that there is some argument between those members who are interested in whether we are owed money from London. Let us forget that for the moment and accept that there will be cuts in public expenditure. The games are not directly funded by Government, but local authorities, which are essential for doing the things that I have described, such as employing the teachers who are needed to engender much greater sporting activity, will suffer more cuts. No one should bother denying that; instead, we should try to work  out how we will offset such cuts. If the Glasgow games are to have wider economic benefits, they must look good, classy, professional and big; if we do not have the money to spend on them, they will not. We had better admit now that the local authorities, voluntary organisations and clubs that will feed into the process will experience difficulties. Jamie McGrigor referred to the lottery funding that has been taken from Glasgow, and we should certainly pursue that issue. The member's nose was tweaked a bit by Michael Matheson when he spoke about funding, but I know that, across the chamber, members who are interested in sport have a common approach—this debate has shown that. The minister must take what has been said not as criticism but as constructive comment and ideas. I wish her all the best.

There are different grades of international meets, and the Commie pool will be able to take some of them.

Now there is a surprise.

With reference to the member's recall of the number of swimming medals won in Australia, the team was so shallow in its quality and quantity that it could not put a real A team in the pool. We should not be too complacent.

When the cabinet secretary was in China, did the Chinese say whether they have maximum class sizes or whether they determine the number of pupils in classes by the subject that they are studying, the teacher's experience of teaching that subject and the socioeconomic range that the school caters for?

To ask the Scottish Government what its approach is to preventing further contraction in Scottish broadcasting and print media. (S3O-6575)

I welcome the minister's first remarks. I press on him the urgency of the situation at the Daily Record  and the Sunday Mail , so I ask him to ask his colleague Jim Mather to arrange a meeting please with the management, before too much happens. I was glad to hear that Michael Russell is supporting Ayrshire Fiddle Orchestra, because my grandson is going to China with that orchestra.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will ensure that adequate funding is made available to the City of Edinburgh Council to enable the completion of the tram project. (S3O-6479)

I thank the minister for his reply but I hope that I can change his mind. I hope that he will take comfort from the fact that the project has a new boss, Richard Jeffrey, who has already shown that he can run a very big project extremely well. Added to that, since "not a penny  more, not a penny less" was said about the cost of the tram project in Edinburgh, things have changed. We now desperately need the jobs that the project affords. All that I ask is that the minister display the same flexibility and imagination in relation to end-of-year spending that he displayed yesterday in relation to the Dunfermline Building Society.

I hope that Jim Tolson will forgive me. I will be looking back because I do not have immediate responsibility for the future of the employees. The process is important because, although we hope that they do not, other situations like this may occur in the future. I would like to know whether a saver—a member of the society—could challenge the decision in court, as the anti-merger people did with the Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds TSB, since no opportunity was given to depositors and members to vote on it. Secondly, does the First Minister know when the Dunfermline Building Society was informed of other interests? What was the communications route to the Dunfermline's board? The past chairman seems to have indicated that he was not as aware of what was going on as he might have been. When did the Nationwide first indicate its interest in the Dunfermline? I appreciate that the First Minister may not have all the answers, but perhaps he will undertake to find out some of them.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will instigate national testing in reading, writing and maths for 10-year-olds, to ensure that underachieving pupils have the opportunity to catch up before starting secondary school. (S3O-6367)

I thank the new minister and I welcome him to his post. He will be hearing more from me if I get more answers like that. It is acknowledged that the basic skills of reading, writing and arithmetic have been falling over the years. Scotland is falling down the league table of achievement in those skills. It is not fair to wait until some children leave school to think about testing them, as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has suggested. Will the minister turn back the clock and allow primary teachers to decide whether their pupils can read, write and count before they go on to secondary school? Will he ensure that we come up with a means of enabling pupils to catch up without embarrassing them?

I take it that Edinburgh's ambition will not be punished in any way and that its bid will be recognised as expressing not just the city's ambition but its need, which has not been acknowledged until now. In that vein, can the minister assure me that, if the homelessness figures for Edinburgh continue to rise, there will be flexibility in any response that he might be asked for?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I regret raising this point of order, and I do so with the greatest respect, but I believe that the exchanges that took place following Mr Maxwell's question to the First Minister constituted an abuse of the criteria for the conduct of question time, which are set out in standing orders. Might I suggest that it would be more suitable to have such an important topic discussed after a statement, instead of using First Minister's question time in this way?

Although I fully appreciate Jackie Baillie's concern that the elections should be valid and seen to be so, the cabinet secretary said that she did not object to the use of personal identifiers per se, but to the expense that they would incur during a pilot. If the member could be assured that there is another cheaper way of monitoring, would she be satisfied with that?

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing prior sight of his statement and for the briefing at lunch time. I agree with Bill Aitken that all parties must contribute. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it would help if all parties spoke to their members in the Westminster Parliament and assured them that the proposed measure would not be a precedent and that they need not be afraid that it will be used to prise open the Scotland Act 1998? I strongly  suspect that that is what has been causing the logjam.

Will the minister give us a pledge that the Government will not resort to the unctuous and pretentious posture struck by the Prime Minister in America? We do not want to be seen in that way. In addition, will he moderate claims about sharing great friendship and understanding with America? Tartan week has not built on that, and we have much to do in that regard before we go bigger.

The member has just illustrated the point that I wanted to make. Those arguments stopped when chaos hit the international money markets. We do not need to have those arguments any more; we have moved on.

Had my amendment been selected, I would have tried to persuade my friends and acquaintances, and others in the Government, that when they are in a hole they really should stop digging. The referendum was proposed about a decade ago, when the SNP was not cutting too much mustard. It was a bad idea then to try to short-circuit an honest campaign of information about the merits of independence and it is an even worse idea now, given current global political and economic affairs. Had my amendment been selected, I would also have tried to appeal to my friends and opponents in the Opposition parties in the Parliament. I would have asked them to admit that the political landscape has changed dramatically since they first pounced on the SNP's ill-thought-out tactic—the referendum is a tactic, not a policy or a strategy—as a convenient stick with which to beat it. The Opposition parties also owe it to Scots to probe fundamentally many of the assumptions that marked the previous demarcation line between nationalists and unionists. Ever since the Parliament was established, the certainty felt by many—perhaps most—members in the pro-union parties that Westminster was Scotland's best shield against comparative poverty, aggressive attack and anonymity on the world stage must have been shaken, if not shattered, by the proof of Westminster's inability to shelter us from economic storms now or in the future. Let us have a national catch-up campaign to work out where stands Scotland in what might be a brave, and is certainly a new world order, instead of the tired old reprise of the old arguments and politicians singing the same old songs at each other. I have always believed that we can achieve the optimum benefit for all the people who live in Scotland only if we stretch ourselves to the limit, exercise full sovereign powers, rely on our determination and imagination and accept responsibility for the effect of our actions on people outwith our borders. That is how we will grow as a community and a nation. That is what I have always wanted for Scotland, and since I have been in this Parliament that belief has grown. How we express our unique contribution to the global economy and to internationalism must change with the times. To pick up on what Mr Rumbles said, this Parliament requires the sovereignty, or independence, to order its own priorities, whether in defence, foreign relations or  social policies. The dominance of London, which was the centre of perhaps the greatest empire that the world has ever seen, lives on in folk memory and in its assumptions about how it relates to the rest of the country. We must establish equality in the union. In the other union of which we are a part, times are a changing—perhaps we should think about changing, too. Following enlargement, countries in the European Union with a common interest are forming groups such as the Mediterranean group and the Baltic group. That is probably inevitable. Should not the offshore grouping of islands presently encompassed in the British-Irish Council respond to EU and global realpolitik by developing co-operation in policies and operations and a social union among the peoples of these islands? If we establish sovereignty for Scotland and Wales, if that is what the Welsh want, what is to hinder the formation of a new union among the nations and regions of the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland—or a united Ireland, if that is what the communities there want—the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands? Perhaps there can even be a new style of autonomy for our island groups in the north, if that is what they want. I suggested that such co-operation could be referred to as a new union, but it would be a union of the spirit, not of the institutions and fixed furniture of Government. The latter can be overtaken by events, as we have just seen. That is one element of the educative and informative debate that the Parliament should be encouraging, in addition to the SNP Government—along with the other political parties—running a programme of information explaining the differences between devolved and sovereign powers and the impact on the work of the Parliament. I urge my fellow MSPs not to put the cart before the horse. A referendum is a mechanism, not a holy grail or sacred flame, which, to hear some Nationalists talk these days, one would think that it was. We need first to think about the new possibilities. When our fellow citizens have had a chance to reflect on the choices that are open to them, the time might be right to talk about having a test of opinion and a referendum.

The member has just met someone living in the capital city who has the vision to see why we should have a proper tram system and who looks to this Government for enough money to provide it.

I agree thoroughly with Elizabeth Smith, but can she outline how she would deal with pupils who fall below the qualifying standards?

Will the member take an intervention?

The member referred to children who are still in care but who are over the age of 16. Is she satisfied that the bill properly addresses the issue of those people who need support post-school?

Who will decide whether extra school support should be provided and what form it should take?

I have a point of information on compliance with the regulations. Some European countries—I instanced Portugal because of Jackie Baillie's connection with the country—have reserved blue-badge parking not only for people with disabilities, but for expectant mothers and people who walk with sticks. They grade the disabilities and, therefore, the use to which the parking might be put. That was part of Michael McMahon's point.

In terms of overall cost and cost benefit, would it be sensible for the Government to undertake an information and education campaign before the legislation comes into force? If people understand the legislation from all different points of view, the amount of work that local authorities will have to do when implementing it may be reduced.

I declare an interest as a blue badge holder. What comparison has been made with other European countries as regards compliance with the blue badge legislation? From personal experience, I believe that our compliance is probably greater than that in other countries, such as Portugal, where Jackie Baillie is just now.

Presiding Officer, I apologise for arriving late this morning. Picking up from where the cabinet secretary left off, I endorse Malcolm Chisholm's point that the Government should be guided by what the local authorities in Glasgow and Edinburgh are doing on the ground, rather than try to incorporate them artificially into the task force. The task force could grow far too big. It needs to be focused. My second point is to pick up on what the cabinet secretary said in his statement about the profile of the financial services industry. He stressed the necessity of understanding "how our industry is perceived as we take work forward to promote it further."

Will the cabinet secretary expand on where Scottish Development International comes into that? I am interested in what we are doing to promote ourselves outwith Scotland.

Has Paul Martin checked on what the police feel about the issue? What does the Scottish Police Federation say?

I cannot think what I would fill four minutes with, Presiding Officer. I came into the debate only because I wanted to find out about the squirrels, but no one has mentioned them. I assume that Roseanna Cunningham will be more thoughtful in how she despatches them than Mike Russell was. He had every intention of hitting them over the head. It is just as well that the First Minister has had the wisdom to move Mike Russell to a department where he is not allowed to hit people over the head—or perhaps he will. My real concern is for the SNP members who were not given a job.

Yes. I have this message for them: say what you think all the time and you will end up just like me—going on "Newsnight".

I inform members that not everyone who goes on "Newsnight" is obsequious.

I am intrigued by the cabinet secretary's statement that the object is to protect our young people, which is why the age of consent will be maintained at 16 years. The statistics for sexually transmitted diseases and unwanted pregnancies are much lower in continental countries, which have lower ages of consent.

A short question: how does the member propose to do that?

The cabinet secretary has done the sensible, right and brave thing. Even if independence is not achieved after the vote in 2011, I ask him not to return to promising a daft policy, but to keep the situation the way it is.

Salaam alaykum. Bashir Ahmad's sheer humanity and love of life shone out of his face. I did not know him well, but I knew him to be the good man of whom others have spoken. Tavish Scott said that he was not "a politician's politician", but I take issue with that because, before a tight vote, he knew how to speak to this politician. Even more important than that, he gave me Panjabi tablet. I was bought and sold on Bashir Ahmad.

If the Government declares game, set and match to the Opposition on the figures and agrees that there are 13 fewer nursery teachers, will the Labour Party withdraw its amendment?

rose—

Has the member any notion of the situation with pre-school rolls in Renfrewshire? Like her, I would be very disturbed about a 50 per cent reduction in teaching numbers being made without a corresponding reduction in pupil numbers.

Has the member given any thought to the apparent contradiction in the experience here in Edinburgh, although I think that it is the same in all cities? There is a much higher expectation of employment for young people when they leave school than there was 20 years ago, but that correlates with a much higher level of violence in schools and a higher incidence of disintegration in the family.

I appreciate that the Labour Party is not in government, but it would help me to make up my mind whether the claims that are made by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning are reasonable if I could hear the alternative. What would the Labour Party spend money on and how much would it spend?

Will the minister outline the Government's approach to European energy policy now that it is interesting and important, not only in terms of energy supply but in relation to the politics of eastern and western Europe? Is she satisfied that we have the correct level of representation at policy-making level?

In advance of the retrospective action, would it not be better for the Scottish Government to co-operate with the Home Office and the Foreign Office to try to stop trafficked people coming into the country? To the best of my knowledge, we have no intelligence as to how they come in, what the most common routes are, or how many come in.

Could Mr Whitton advise me of whether, the next time that Labour is in government, it will discontinue the capital city supplement?

I thank the cabinet secretary for being accessible, for listening and for being fair. He practised with me the message that was preached by Johann Lamont: he acknowledged that I have a mandate, too. It is a more limited mandate than that of the parties in this chamber, and for that reason my objectives were perhaps more limited in my negotiations with the cabinet secretary. It was a pleasure to do business with him, and I look forward to repeating the process all over again next year. I have some ideas in mind. Next year, Parliament will continue to be a Parliament of minorities—Angela Constance was correct in much of what she said. However, we would all do better to explain to Scots that, in this Parliament of minorities, it will be continuous negotiation and not name-calling that determines the outcome of proceedings. Shame on those who say that one cannot have a good Tory. I used to believe that, too—until I came to this place of consensus. I now think that it is much better to listen to what the Tories have to say, because they have some good ideas—and I do not care whom they pinched them from, so long as we put them into effect. It is better still, I think, to do what Labour members have suggested and to start the horse trading earlier. Had that happened, we would not have to decide now whether to keep on the hair shirts that were so speedily donned last week, or to cast them off and say, "Everything is all right now." I have campaigned for the capital city supplement for years, and I always started early, as every finance minister would admit. However, one outstanding question has arisen from some of the exchanges. I do not want to pursue the idea that there is any division between the twin cities of the plain. It would be an artificial division. I want the cities to work together and I have made moves in that direction. What I want to know is this: should I infer from what Labour members say that they will, the next time they are in government, withdraw the capital city supplement? I ask the question because Edinburgh will still be the capital and will still perform services that are peculiar to the capital on behalf of the rest of Scotland.

I hope that Margaret Curran will not mind if I do not take an intervention just now. I will see whether I have time at the end—but there is something else that I would like to start negotiating on now. Parliament is to have a review of public spending, and we are to have a group including  representatives of all the parties in the Parliament. It should also contain representatives of no party in the Parliament. A considerable body of opinion stands behind the idea of independent negotiation. For example, Patrick Harvie can point to opinion outside this chamber, and that opinion should be represented in the group's deliberations. I therefore give notice that I will be knocking on the cabinet secretary's door to suggest my name for a post. Finally, I thank the cabinet secretary for the courtesy that he accorded me, and for his sheer patience. The city of Edinburgh's capital city supplement is safe, and it will be a year-on-year budget heading because we will continue to be the capital. I also thank the cabinet secretary for sensibly saying that he will give early and sympathetic consideration to Edinburgh's request on council housing. The need is urgent. I did not try to put a figure on it, because I knew that the cabinet secretary was trying to accommodate many other interests. Having thanked the cabinet secretary, I am now quite prepared to give way to Margaret Curran.

That is the last time I will give way to Margaret Curran. I say, following that full exposition of where Ms Curran stands on the position of the cities, that Edinburgh is the capital city. It undertakes unique services and provides unique facilities on behalf of the whole country, so it is not fair that Edinburgh council tax payers should pay for those with the expenditure not being shared throughout the country. In that respect, Edinburgh is unique. In respect of health, Glasgow is uniquely bad. I kept my tongue between my teeth when it came to reviewing the Arbuthnott report on expenditure and how money was allocated according to need, because Glasgow's need is much greater than ours in Edinburgh. However, I would hate an artificial division between the cities to be one of the fall-outs from the current budget process. Aberdeen has a good case in all sorts of ways to argue for specialised cash, as have all the cities. I acknowledge that. I simply argued for on-going recognition of Edinburgh as the capital, and acknowledgement that right now, because of the city's peculiar situation in relation to the fall-out  from the collapse of its financial centre, there is an urgent need for public housing. The cabinet secretary has satisfied my requests, in that he is willing to take them on fairly.

Will the member give way?

Is the member attempting to say that, as a Parliament, we should explain to our fellow Scots that the process that we have just undergone is good for everyone? From his background, he will recognise that it is called negotiation.

Will the member give way?

Is the minister aware that it looks as though the  Government has an extra £33 million? Perhaps he could persuade the Government to put that money into affordable housing in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Is he satisfied that there are a sufficient number of tradesmen to carry out the work that he has outlined?

On a point of order.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As this is a learning process for all of us, I wish to question whether your vote was cast according to the status quo convention or whether, under our standing orders and "Erskine May", it would be preferable, given that the motion is of such importance, for the matter to be decided by the whole house.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary say whether he could run a couple of pilots in Glasgow and Edinburgh for the scheme that I spoke of earlier—tax increment financing? I know that that has support in the councils and I know that they have been in touch with them.

Will Mr Purvis give way?

If the budget is brought back, will Mr Purvis be willing to drop his main demand?

Any minority Administration seeking to get its budget passed is subject to pressure from all sides. If the Administration is not prepared to make concessions, it will fail. By the way, what we call a budget is in fact just the decision on how to distribute a block grant, which is a very different thing. We can call it a budget as long as we do not forget that it is not the real thing. We must resolve to embed a proper budgeting process into our work as soon as possible. A minority Government cannot satisfy every demand from whatever quarter. If it did so, its budget would have no economic theme or social coherence. Such a budget would be a pick-and-mix of spending commitments lacking any sense  of priority or direction. Parliament must accept that a minority Government, in trying to be a good Government, will have the same objective as Governments with comfortable majorities: the production of a budget that reflects its priorities and that fits those priorities into a coherent programme. In trying to maintain that coherence, because of the limits placed on the ability to manoeuvre by the constraints of devolution that Mr McLetchie mentioned, the finance secretary has very little leeway to meet demands from other parties. However, whether they are faced by a minority or majority Government, Opposition parties and individuals must try to persuade the Government to incorporate some of their ideas and policies. Like every other member, I issued a manifesto and was elected on that manifesto. That gives me some right to try to pursue it. Last year, I persuaded Mr Swinney to incorporate a capital city supplement to help to defray the cost of the extra services and facilities that the City of Edinburgh Council must provide to meet the duties and demands of Edinburgh's role as our capital city. For that recognition of the special status and responsibilities of the capital, Mr Swinney has my sincere thanks. However, in the same way as the Arbuthnott formula for sharing out NHS spending recognised that need in the then Greater Glasgow Health Board area was greater than in other health board areas, I suggest that we need to look at the share-out of the moneys that are made available by the cabinet secretary. Whereas health expenditure in Edinburgh ended up being underfinanced, we made no complaint because we accepted that Glasgow had a greater need.

Unfortunately, although I supported the cities growth fund, the fund did not prove adequate to Edinburgh's needs because the city's population growth was much greater than anyone had anticipated. It was right that need was the determining factor in deciding how much money went to the NHS in Glasgow. As I have said, the Edinburgh region's share of NHS spending is less per head than elsewhere. However, the general economic situation is changing in the region that I represent. The need for affordable housing is growing probably at a faster rate than in other local authorities, with 145 people chasing every council or housing  association house that comes up for rent. Because of the Edinburgh region's reliance on financial services, economists are now confirming the fears that I have voiced to Mr Swinney both in this chamber and elsewhere when I have bumped into him. The shortage of affordable rented accommodation could produce a housing and homelessness crisis because of the high percentage of people made redundant by the banks, who could find that their mortgage repayments are now impossible to meet. While I welcome the recent moves by the Government to direct money into housing associations to buy up property that the private sector is unable to sell—an idea that I floated with house builders in Edinburgh before the summer break because it will make more social housing available—unfortunately the number of houses announced yesterday by the other cabinet secretary, Ms Sturgeon, will not be enough. I am aware of the limitations of the money available to the finance minister. There are statutory obligations that must be met, and certain essentials that the Parliament committed him to, such as care for the elderly and free bus passes. Those and other spending items severely restrict the amount of free spending room he has. However, I and other MSPs who represent Edinburgh and Lothians must not allow our sympathies for his predicament to blind us to the fact that, if the prognosis of serious economists is correct, we face an avalanche of job losses and repossessions, with all that that implies, such as broken families and a substantial rise in the number of people who need social housing. I sincerely hope that those economists are wrong. There is a lot riding on the G20 meeting in a few weeks' time in London. If there is genuine co-ordination of policies designed to pull us out of recession around the globe, and the trend towards protectionism is defeated, things might turn out better than we presently fear. However, if that is not the case, the Government will have to respond to what will be a social tragedy for many families, which will create a demand for more social housing as a matter of priority. I hope that the finance minister can assure me that he will respond with an adequate financial package, taken from contingency or adjustment within the discretion built into the budget, for example a share of the moneys earmarked for housing that currently are not allocated to Edinburgh and Glasgow.

Will Margaret Curran give way?

Does the member accept that such matters are normally decided on need and that Edinburgh's need is greater because of the banking sector's dominance of the city?

I wonder whether the Opposition has investigated the tax increment financing scheme, to see whether it provides an opportunity for more apprenticeships.

On the additional funding to which the cabinet secretary just referred, is there flexibility in its disbursement vis-à-vis the position of local authorities that are just managing and local authorities, such as the City of Edinburgh Council, that face crises in, for example, affordable housing?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Is the Labour Party inclined to support the suggestion that I am about to put to the minister, which is that the non-domestic rates revenue that leaves Edinburgh every year should remain in the city if the effect of the tsunami is as bad as the prognosis from Oxford Economics?

I thank Frank McAveety for his good intentions. Before I discuss my plea to the cabinet secretary on measures to mitigate the effect of economic recession on Scotland's capital, I repeat a plea that I made privately to the First Minister last week. My plea was that he build a consensus with the other party leaders in the Parliament to seek from Her Majesty's Government an immediate amendment to the Scotland Act 1998 to endow the Parliament with the borrowing powers that are required to manage and balance, to best effect, our responsibilities to develop Scotland, with sensible economic and financial management practices. Today, as always, the Opposition has repeated at every opportunity the mantra that the £33 billion that the finance secretary has to spend is more—much more—than his predecessors had. Let us be  a bit more honest with ourselves and with the Scots who are trying to work out to whom they should look for leadership in what Will Hutton of the Work Foundation described last night as Iceland on Thames and in Edinburgh. After we fulfil the commitments that, in effect, are decided by our statutory obligations, John Swinney can only move money around at the margins. That is why we need borrowing powers and an unemotional, unsentimental examination of how well the much-vaunted but busted UK economy is likely to provide the customised policies that would allow Scots to maximise their economic potential in the different circumstances that will follow what might be a decade of very low growth. The finance secretary must do what he can to stimulate Scotland's economy with imagination and by making full use of our existing structures. He must protect the parts of our economy that are likely to provide the recovery and growth points. Edinburgh is one of those. On average, Edinburgh has contributed 13 per cent of Scotland's GDP, and much more than that in specific sectors. A recent study by Oxford Economics entitled "Which parts of Great Britain are vulnerable to the credit crunch?"—this answers some of Frank McAveety's points—shows the City of Edinburgh Council as the only Scottish local authority that is vulnerable. Edinburgh is ranked 14 out of 50 in the index of local authorities that are vulnerable to high numbers of job losses. Edinburgh's score in the vulnerability index is not much below that of greater London. When the finance secretary and I met to discuss my suggestions about Edinburgh, I freely acknowledged that he has neither the statutory powers nor the resources to pull the sort of rabbit out of a hat that Lord Mandelson has demonstrated in providing £20 billion in support for small businesses. However, I indicated that my support could rest on the finance secretary's willingness to show flexibility on Edinburgh's financial position if the effects of the recession produce a situation of disproportionate unemployment—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With all due respect, although I accept that responsibilities are inherent in the ministerial code, it is your responsibility to ensure the probity of proceedings in this Parliament.

Further to the point of order that Christine Grahame raised, Presiding Officer. I say with the greatest respect that you ruled that there was discourtesy and that such behaviour comes under the heading of—[ Interruption. ] I am referring to one of the points of order. Members are expected to be courteous to each other.

I will try to be brief in picking up where Pauline McNeill left off. Sandra White has done the workers in the Herald group a service by securing the debate, but in doing so she has also opened a can of worms. There is a great deal that we in this Parliament cannot do. Ted Brocklebank was the first to analyse properly the fact that we are talking not about a little Scottish problem, but about a national one. Although each of us can feel heart sorry for all the Scottish families that are represented in the workforce across the three titles, they form part of a much wider movement. As Pauline McNeill and other members correctly said, the important issue in the debate is the way in which the situation was handled. The textbook case in front of us, which David Whitton will recollect, as do I, is that once Rupert Murdoch had gone to Wapping and done it—as the headlines  said, it was The Sun what done it—the way was open for Robert Maxwell to copy him. I remember the razor wire that was put up around the perimeter of The Record offices. People questioned why it had been done, but the tsunami had started and was carrying all before it. Given the current economic climate, I doubt very much whether this or any other Government will take on any employer who behaves as Newsquest is behaving. I think that there is a piece of legislation before Westminster that will place wider civic and public-spirited duties on shareholders. We could investigate that. Perhaps we could also encourage Scottish shareholders of the Herald group to exercise more care over their stewardship as shareholders—it is possible. This Parliament cannot sort the situation out, but we could agree to host a seminar to examine the future of mass-media communication along the lines of those that we have held in the past, such as the event in which Bill Gates was involved. It is essential for a democracy to have mass-media communication. If anyone thinks that the blogosphere will take the place of the responsible journalism of the past that helped to build democracy, civil liberties and natural justice in this country, they are out of their minds and ignoring the patently obvious. There is a role that we can play: we cannot sort out industrial relations, but we can take the side of the workers. In this situation, they are in the right. Circulation is falling, as Newsquest knows. It also knows that advertising is vanishing like snow off a dyke and that the situation will get even worse over the next year—but it also has responsibilities as management. I am not on its side, but I am willing to help it behave better, just as I am willing, as part of the Parliament, to help with the bigger picture. We might be able to bring people together to establish how to manage mass communications of information. If we do not, people who are less well intentioned might well do so.

On the matter of standards, what discussions have taken place and what agreement has been reached with the people who teach the teachers? If we are to have a literate school workforce, student teachers must learn grammar again when they learn to teach.

Now that the money for Edinburgh is safe and the cabinet secretary has said that he will be flexible on future requirements, will he say how interest rates, which we are told might go as low as 1 per cent, will affect the spending programme?

The member might find this information useful. I believe that construction industry workers are leaving Scotland to go to that basket case of an economy, Norway, where they can get lots of jobs in fish-related work.

Will Alex Johnstone outline his party's thoughts, if it has had time to form them, on the sale of Edinburgh airport, which is predicated on an ever-growing number of air journeys from Scotland?

I gently remind the minister that, similarly, the City of Edinburgh Council's problems have not been accumulated only over the past couple of years. Perhaps they are down to underfunding in previous years. I am grateful that he has concluded an agreement with that council, but given the additional pressures that have existed since the onset of the current economic crisis, will he give an assurance that he will be flexible with it when it explains that it cannot build the houses that are urgently needed?

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. I had meant to write to you on this matter. A precedent might have been set when, on one occasion, the police were invited on to the floor of the chamber and into the gallery to remove members of the press corps. In that light, it is perhaps apposite that you rule on privilege in this place.

Are we any closer to having the energy efficiency certificate for this building displayed in a prominent place as per the European directive that came into effect on 6 January 2006?

Would the Labour Party support a progressive income-based tax if it were part of a cohesive system of taxation, or does it support a property-based tax per se?

I might never have made this speech if Alex Salmond had only replied to the letter that I wrote to him at the general election to inquire about his plans for local income tax. That said, my speech should not be interpreted as offering support for what we must call "the hated council tax". I prefer an income-based tax to a property-based tax. I remind Frank McAveety that the criticism of the poll tax was that the duke would pay the same as the dustman. His speech contained just a hint of Orwellian doublespeak. I have always doubted whether a local income tax could be bolted on to a comprehensive and cohesive tax system such as the one that we have in the United Kingdom. The Government's consultation paper on LIT asks who should collect the tax and whether it should be collected at source, by payment—by the taxpayer, I presume—or by a combination of the two. That is the Achilles' heel of LIT in the devolution setting. In an independent country that had its own central tax-collecting authority, there would be an  instrument to instruct on LIT collection, but that is not the case in a devolved Scotland. Paragraph 29 of the consultation paper states: "We will work with the UK Government to ensure that processes are thoroughly tested before implementation." That clearly implies that HM Revenue and Customs, with the agreement of the UK Government, will be the LIT collection instrument, and that the UK Government will be asked to legislate to ensure that employers, who represent the first tax collection point, are required to calculate and deduct the tax and then to send it to HMRC for onward transmission to the Scottish Government. It is difficult to see how any body other than HMRC could be the collection instrument, because if the Scottish Government set up its own equivalent, that would eat deeply into the block grant that we get from Westminster. What puzzles me is why, despite the number of times that the First Minister has reaffirmed his determination to go ahead with LIT, we have not heard anything substantial about the Government's discussions with HMRC and the UK Government. A constituent of mine who does voluntary research, a Mr Sillars—[ Laughter. ]—made a freedom of information request to HMRC dated 3 October. He asked for copies of correspondence—including memos and notes—between the Scottish Government and HMRC since the 2007 election on HMRC becoming involved in the collection of the SNP Government's local income tax and for any similar material from previous parliamentary sessions. He received this reply: "I am writing to inform you that following a search of our paper and electronic records, I have established that HMRC does not hold the information you have requested." Before any bill is published, we need to know the position regarding collection by HMRC: whether it will do it, what the cost will be, and whether we believe that it will be able to do it accurately, given that department's poor record on tax credits. If HMRC is not the chosen instrument of collection, what will be chosen, how will it be established, at what cost, and what confidence can we have that it will do the job properly? All that I have said is, of course, predicated on the Scottish Government's proposal for a national LIT—if that is not a contradiction in terms. When it comes to 32 variable taxes, it is all the more imperative that the bill spells out the detail, complexity and cost. That is why I find it very difficult to support the Government's proposition on local income tax.

I wonder—as a former presenter of "Good Morning Scotland"—whether Elizabeth Smith would like to dissociate herself and the rest of Parliament from Lord George Foulkes's opinions.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I had no intention of taking part in the debate but, having listened to Christopher Harvie in particular, I have one or two things to say. Ian McKee's reservations are shared by many people, but the reopening of the south suburban line is a challenge that can be overcome by engineering and planning. We might not have had the cost benefit analysis that we should have had or the sampling of the public that was done for potential tram use, but that does not mean that it cannot happen. I urge on the minister the meeting with the council that was suggested so that the proposals can be discussed in a strategic fashion. The south suburban line is essential if we are thinking about the strategic development of transport in Edinburgh to meet the needs of a population that has grown and will continue to grow once we are through the recession and depression. However, I think that it is a bit rich for a unionist party member to describe the benefits of such capital investment when the minister is deaved at the moment with all the promises that have been made for capital development in transport systems, and he well knows that the money is not likely to come from Westminster as might have been expected even 18 months ago. Although we all have grand plans and what Christopher Harvie talked about should be the template for our thinking—we should be thinking as big as anyone is doing in a comparable European city—where is the money coming from? That is the question that someone has to answer.

The member will know that, in opinion polling on the potential use of trams in Edinburgh, it is always assumed that the travelling public would prefer to leave their cars at home in order to travel by tram. Has the same sort of sampling been done for the south suburban railway?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. According to the standing orders, members are required to be courteous to one another in the chamber. I and other back benchers believe that it is completely discourteous for front benchers to dominate a session that is supposed to be a calling to account of front benchers by the back-bench members of the Parliament. Presiding Officer, I suggest that you enlist the services of some back benchers to discuss with you and the party managers and leaders how we might best recalibrate the question time sessions in the interests of all members.

I ask the cabinet secretary to return to the £500 million reduction in the public spending programmes. He said that his Government would seek to influence the Westminster Government to the max—hope should spring eternal. However, can the Government give a factual estimate of the loss of public sector jobs that that reduction is likely to  occasion? The timeframe is in line with the possible loss of a great number of jobs due to the proposed takeover—if we are unable to stop it—of HBOS. With that in mind, and considering the diminished tax base that would result, will the cabinet secretary reconsider the introduction of a local income tax?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the guidelines issued to national health service boards regarding end-of-life choices are sufficiently clear. (S3O-4852)

Although I congratulate the Government on clarifying some aspects of end-of-life choices, I wonder if the minister could outline the thinking behind accepting a patient's right not to be resuscitated, but denying a patient the right to take positive action to end a life that has become intolerable to them.

Will the Government be influenced by the additional financial pressures that are on it and look again at the local income tax?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The cabinet secretary—

I hope that members will forgive me for concentrating on the Edinburgh economy. They will be aware of the importance of the Edinburgh economy to the entire Scottish economy. Given that, as the front-bench Tories have reminded us, the Scottish Parliament can act only on the margins of our economy, we would do well to concentrate on the things that we can do. I think that we could do something in relation to Edinburgh. I commend to the cabinet secretary the City of Edinburgh Council's "Economic Resilience Action Plan". He could act on some of its recommendations. For example, point 4.0 of the action plan outlines measures for tackling the lack  of credit availability. Point 3.2 outlines measures to stimulate the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises. The reason why I referred earlier to the capital city supplement is that those action points, which have been identified by the City of Edinburgh Council, were not around when the Government first started to talk about the capital city supplement and decided the decent level of funding that was required to maintain the city as a contributor to the Scottish economy and as the Scottish capital. I appeal to the cabinet secretary to take on board the extra work that Edinburgh will have to undertake because of the global economic crisis. I also ask Parliament to be open minded regarding the takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB. It is not a merger; it is the merger of Jonah and the whale. I say that not because of any sentimental attachment to the Bank of Scotland—something to which David McLetchie referred—but because of the corporate functions that emanate from the Mound. I would much rather that the Bank of China established its European headquarters in Edinburgh than that the city became home to the regional headquarters of a much smaller bank that would also have its annual general meeting here—maybe during the festival. I ask members to keep an open mind on what is possible, as much has been said to drive away one very good bid that should have been on the table. It would have been on the table, had it not been for the timing of the Glenrothes by-election—that is why we did not hear of it. There should be no more talking ourselves down and talking the possible prospects down. We should let the shareholders decide, when they have a choice to make; let us not try to empty the field for any partisan reasons. I regret to say that I think that there have been Pavlovian responses from the parties. Those of us who have tried very hard to look at the employment prospects for Edinburgh and the contribution of the corporate functions of HBOS to the Edinburgh economy have tried not to be partisan. If Edinburgh is downgraded because of the loss of that headquarters, all Scotland will suffer. We might learn in 30 years or so about the chicanery behind the scenes, but a lot of good that will do the people who will lose their jobs.

There might well have been hard cash on the table that has now gone, not because of the activities of the white knights but because of the activities of the politicians to whom David McLetchie started to refer in his speech. We could have talked ourselves out of the money.

I am not prepared to quibble with the figures that John Park has just quoted, but does he realise that City of Edinburgh Council has been singled out as the 14 th most at-risk authority in the UK because of its reliance on financial services, and that particular areas are more badly affected?

I appreciate the measures that are being put in place to try to anticipate the worst that might happen as a result of the economic downturn, and I hope that the cabinet secretary takes my next words in the way they are meant. I know that he is in negotiations with the City of Edinburgh Council on the capital city supplement, but an economic tsunami is likely to hit Edinburgh, which was not anticipated when he started his investigations into how much the supplement should come to. Will he be flexible, and how much could be paid to Edinburgh?

Can the minister supply us with comparisons between the criminality of children elsewhere in Europe and that of our eight-year-olds?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is satisfied that the requirements of core policing are not compromised by the practice of private hire of police personnel. (S3O-4574)

I am still a little puzzled. I think that the cabinet secretary has told me that it is all right to police a pop concert if it is in the general community's interests, but I would have thought that that is not in the general community's interests and that security firms are much better qualified to do such work than are off-duty policemen, whose recreation time is eaten into, or policemen who are transferred from other core policing jobs.

Angela Constance, in replying to Mr Macdonald on the Labour front bench, said that she could not see the point of the Labour amendment. I have been struggling to find the point of the debate. For a whole afternoon, we have discussed the British-Irish Council. I am sure that members agree that it is fascinating, but does it merit a full afternoon's debate when there are many other issues that we should and could be talking about? I mention that in passing. Earlier, I accused—if we want to use that terminology—the council of being a bit of a talking shop. When I heard about all the things that are talked about, I wondered whether anybody mentions Rockall and who has sovereignty over it or the mineral and exploration rights. Does the British-Irish Council talk about that? That would be a good reason for having a meeting.  What about the issue that is diminishing the effectiveness of the repercussions of the Good Friday agreement? The Executive in the north of Ireland does not appear to be meeting properly. I wonder whether the council talked about that. The problem seems to be certain policing matters, and I would have thought that we could have shared our experiences; perhaps not. Perhaps one of the members who will sum up the debate will tell me whether that issue was talked about. I wonder, too, whether anyone discussed the matter that was raised by Hugh Henry—why not the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands? If this is a council of the British isles—

Are they all in it? That is fine—it is just that I had never heard anybody talking about them at all. As I said, I wondered about the point of this debate. However, I have said that I prefer the nomenclature "the council of the isles". It seems to imply a recognition of the distinctiveness of the different parts of the islands—including the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands. I was sorry to see that the name was dropped. I think that it was dropped for political reasons, although perhaps not. All afternoon, we have rather tended to claim the Good Friday agreement, and the ending of hostilities in the north of Ireland, for British politicians. I think that David McLetchie was the only person who paid tribute to the work that was done by the politicians in the north of Ireland. A huge amount of work was done there, and we should all recognise that. While terrible things were going on in the north, and each community was doing damage to the other, Ian Paisley and John Hume could be spotted in wee corners of Brussels or Strasbourg, talking about what they could do together, covertly, to try to improve things. We also know from diaries that Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness were talking through back channels all through the troubles. We must not claim too much for the council of the isles as far as the ending of hostilities in the north is concerned. I want to look ahead—and I think that it was Keith Brown who said that we should be looking ahead rather than looking back. It was good to hear the interpretations of history from different vantage points, but there are other ways of looking at things. If we look ahead, we will look to see what the council of the isles—as I will continue to call it—might lead to. David Whitton talked about the oneness of the isles and about how we had a real commonality when dealing with the real problems that beset the people in all parts of the islands. He talked about social inclusion, and I  could not agree with him more. Those are the kinds of issues that we can agree on. Not until Keith Brown—who has form on such matters—mentioned the EU and the Committee of the Regions did anyone even think about talking about the EU. What David Whitton proved in his speech was the sense of seeing ourselves as an offshore group of islands in Europe that have much more in common with one another than we have with the rest of Europe—especially now that Europe stretches as far east as it does. We are a smaller and more homogeneous group, and I urge anyone who is thinking about how we can tackle the problems of poverty and of migration to bear that in mind. We have a common sea border, and that is the way in which we should approach the problems of mass migration, which will not go away. We are more likely to achieve a satisfactory agreement and a common policy by working through the islands than by working through the EU. It was stated that we should work together to fix our issues. I absolutely agree. Once again, that came from David Whitton's speech. As I have just suggested, on issues such as social inclusion and migration, we can work together much more easily among ourselves. I am not suggesting being isolationist, but working among ourselves would allow us to reach policy agreements a lot quicker than would ever be possible through the EU. The one thing on which I agree with David McLetchie is his implied cry for new relationships to be built. However, those new relationships have to be built on new institutions, which will be built on a new respect for our distinctiveness and equality as communities. We are not equal in size, but we are equal as far as our identities are concerned. We must drop the politics from the council of the isles—or the British-Irish Council, if we must call it that—and concentrate on meeting people who have the same interests as we have. We will not win Scottish independence through the British-Irish Council. I hope that we will take an independent part in the council in the future, but we will not win independence through it. I caution the Government to remember that.

Will the member give way?

The member might not do so after my intervention. If we can no longer describe the Irish economy as the Celtic tiger, how should we describe the British economy? Is it a bulldog economy?

I agree with much of what Hugh Henry said. However, does he include in the lessons that we can learn from one another the lessons on multiculturalism that might be learned by Irish people, who are perhaps just that bit behind us? I set my question in the context of the homecoming. We share with the Irish a diaspora that includes many people with dark skin, who are the descendants of slaves in the southern United States and the West Indies. Those people are part of our diaspora, too.

Does the member recall that the preference outlined by President McAleese when she visited us here was that the council should be called the council of the isles? The council has lost something in being called the British-Irish Council. There is no romance there. There is nothing in that name to lift our spirits; it sounds like just another political talking shop.

Was that role helped by the intervention of the Secretary of State for Scotland, Mr Murphy, with his comments about the success or otherwise of the Irish Government in managing Ireland's economy?

Can the minister assure me that the fact that we have a capital city supplement will not militate against Edinburgh's receiving any extra money for which it might come looking? I will not outline the particular difficulties that have arisen in Edinburgh as a result of the current financial turmoil, because the minister knows them better than I do, but it may be that I will come looking for more money. I would not want that to be thought of as greedy; it would just be a necessity. I would like an assurance that the capital city supplement will not be held against Edinburgh.

Will the member give way?

I will not expand on it, Presiding Officer. If the member agrees with paragraph 6 of the executive summary, as I do, will he urge his colleagues to stop assuming that we are stuck with the constitutional arrangement of Westminster being in charge of broadcasting? There are other, more equal models.

Does Ted Brocklebank believe that viewers want more of those programmes?

I thank the commission for its work, and I should also thank the Scottish Government for commissioning it. I notice that Blair Jenkins's commission was at pains to depoliticise its report. Quite right, too. However, underlying any policy on broadcasting is its importance in educating, communicating, promoting and helping to evolve a sense of community identity. That is why every distinctive national community has established a broadcasting system alongside the other requirements of a sovereign power. We should not be too polite about it; of course that is what happens, as Chris Harvie pointed out. Iain Gray quickly clocked the point as well, and went on to emphasise that it was recommended that the broadcasting system be a UK broadcasting system. However, that does not mean that it would have to be part of the UK state. In practical terms, the days of revolutionaries capturing the local radio and TV stations are all but gone. Satellite is the new game in town and the web is where it is at, if you want to run a revolution. However, I am going to concentrate on broadcasting, and I suggest that everyone else here should do likewise. I direct members to the lesson of what happened in Qatar in 1995, when the old emir was deposed by the young emir. The first places that the young emir's people went were the local radio and television stations, but the old emir managed to hold them off for a year because he had the chequebook. If a viewer's preference is for a quiet life watching TV for entertainment, sport or keeping up  with affairs in far-flung corners as well as the latest developments in public affairs in Scotland or over the border, it is a fair bet that they are not overly concerned about the relationship that the channels of their choice enjoy with government. Nowadays, because of American television standards, viewers and listeners want and expect broadcasting to be of a high standard. They want their programmes to be interesting and/or enjoyable, and nothing like the rubbish that was shown on Channel 4 this week about lap dancing—but that is another story. If the programmes are to be shown outside Scotland, viewers in Scotland—that is, taxpayers and citizens—want them to be a credit to our national creativity, the quality of our life, our social priorities and, of course, the beauty of our country. That is the perspective that the report quite correctly adopts, but not for the reason of buttressing the unionist side in the ever-present constitutional tug-of-war in the chamber. Let us forget our politics for the moment and consider quality broadcasting from the viewer's perspective. As I said, the days of government's ability to propagandise without competition from alternative programming and broadcasting outlets are gone anyway—we cannot do all that much to influence people's political opinions through the multiplicity of broadcasting outlets that we have. When, in the process of establishing Scottish sovereignty and new relationships based on equal legal status between Westminster and Holyrood, we come to negotiate the share-out of assets and liabilities, the BBC, which is presently London-centric and a reserved responsibility, might well become a joint operation that is funded by and answerable—at arms' length—to both Governments through a joint board or trust. That is what I want to happen, because I want to hold on to the broadcasting tradition that has been established in the United Kingdom, although I would want to bring it into the 21 st century. However, details on how that would be organised are for the future—the report concerns action to be taken now, and I heartily support the commission's recommendation that there should be a Scottish network. I was a bit concerned about some comments that one of the reasons for having a Scottish network is to retain technical and creative expertise in Scotland, and that that is linked entirely to the training that is offered by colleges and universities. Those of us who have worked in TV and in radio know that there is no better thing in that respect than in-house and on-the-job training. That is one of the things that we do not talk about—if we are talking about the public responsibilities of broadcasters, we must talk about the training that they should offer, because it has been allowed to fall away.  It is obvious that there should be extra commissioning of programmes from Scotland. I agree with what Ted Brocklebank said about the share of the commissioning cake, and we should be getting that much sooner than is proposed. However, there is one thing that we should clarify. I think that it was Christine Grahame who referred to London and the share that it got—I think that she said 6.3 per cent as compared to our three-point-whatever. London has twice our population. Are we going to look at this in terms of the share that we should have because of our distinctive national identity, or because of the number of people who are paying for a television licence? We had better sort that out. Iain Smith talked about the need for more money. I wonder what he thinks the likely political response to that will be, at a time when "subsidised Scots" is the common phraseology that trips off the tongues of folk in London. I hope that BBC Alba is put on Freeview, because that will help to allay some of the fears about the parochial nature of the content that a Scottish network might show. Such fears have been voiced in all the popular papers; they are rubbish, and if we get Alba on to Freeview, it might show that they are rubbish.

Can the member sympathise with Jeremy Purvis when he suggests that he does not trust a Scottish Government to be fair and objective on Scottish broadcasting? Christopher Harvie gave us the example of the BBC in London guiding us through the war.

Pauline McNeill said that people have high expectations of a new channel. When the commission's work was first published, did she not see—as I did—many derisive comments in the newspapers about how  we would have "Hootenanny" all the time and reruns of "The White Heather Club"?

Will the First Minister ask—nicely, of course—the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture to write to her opposite number in Westminster, suggesting that it is about time that BBC Alba was available on Freeview?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I apologise to you and the chamber if I am error in raising this, but I may have inadvertently voted for Mr MacAskill and not Mr Fraser. If I have done a Cathie Craigie—[ Laughter ]—should my recourse be to the Official Report or is it enough that I have put it on record?

Presiding Officer, you will forgive me if I speak very slowly to fill up the time, given that this is the only question—

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will provide an update on what progress it has made towards compliance with European Union energy performance of buildings directive (2002/91/EC), which came into force on 4 January 2006. (S3O-4573)

Can the member of the corporate body outline further what other services need to be purchased in order to comply with the directive? Could those possibly have something to do with the fact that the directive requires that the energy certificate "is placed in a prominent place clearly visible to the public"? The current corporate body, like the previous one, is aware of the fact that the rating that is given to the Scottish Parliament might not be altogether too impressive and might fall below what would be considered a reasonable standard, given the amount of money that was spent on the building.

Unused as I am to having eight minutes in which to summarise a debate, I hope that members will forgive me if I do not quite hit the target. However, the last shall be first. I was pleased to hear the Minister for Communities and Sport, Stewart Maxwell, say that he had a clear vision for sport's contribution to community development, but then he went and spoiled it all when the words "quality PE" rolled off his lips. He mentioned that in conjunction with a somewhat truncated form of PE teacher training. However, we can talk about that at another time. As usual, I agreed with almost everything that was said by the shadow minister, the former minister Frank McAveety—yes I did—and I was encouraged to hear about the investment that Glasgow City Council and North Lanarkshire Council have put into areas that need the sort of community and personal development that can be achieved through sport or, as some members called it, physical activity. There is a difference between physical activity, recreation and sport, which I have not time to go into. However, I am glad that Christine Grahame got that one right. She did not get some other things right, but I will mark her contribution later. We should not deprecate the fact that it is often the usual faces who turn up to volunteer. Manchester created a cadre of 5,000 volunteers, many of whom used the experience, and the skills that they acquired, to move into employment. It is a good idea to have volunteers. Having said all that, I whole-heartedly accept Frank McAveety's amendment. Other members picked up on Jamie McGrigor's initial comments on the importance of investment in schools and on the indivisible and unbreakable links that there should be between sport and physical activity and exercise in schools—properly taught by properly qualified physical education teachers—which carries over into community clubs. I was very pleased that Jamie McGrigor saw that link; to me, it is at the very nub of the debate. Ross Finnie spoke about the importance of coaches and facilities. Of course, that is where the money comes in. We cannot offer people the opportunity to become coaches if we do not offer a bit of support where it is needed. I gave the example of a person from Dingwall, or the far north of Scotland, having to come to the central belt to achieve their sports qualifications. The  people whom we would want to get involved in personal development and community development are the very people who would need that support. That point came out clearly in what Ross Finnie said. At this stage, I should apologise to members who made excellent speeches that I may not have time to refer to. Bill Kidd correctly identified the potential for community development. However, I share some of the reservations, voiced from other parts of the chamber, about the tone that is sometimes adopted. I took Bill Kidd's words at face value, and his analysis was correct. However, if we are to negotiate with Westminster, and I think that we will have to, we should perhaps remember that we can catch more flies with sugar than with vinegar. I agree entirely with what Jackie Baillie said about the sense of excitement that already exists about the Glasgow games. However, I do not believe that the only important developments that come via sport are the ones that come via elite athletics events. That is not true. However, expectation has been created—perhaps because of the spectacular Beijing Olympics. I confess that, before the Beijing Olympics burst on to our television screens, I was for the first time ever more interested in the politics of the games. However, I was absolutely knocked over by the quality of the sport and its presentation. I am sure that I was not alone in that. I am sure that the Olympics have had an impact on the sense of anticipation in Scotland about the Glasgow games. We should not talk them down. Despite what I have just said, I agreed entirely with Ian McKee when he talked about big events and proportionality. We should not forget that sport is supposed to be about athletes and about personal development and the expression of excellence. It is not supposed to be about tables showing how many medals America got, and so on. We used to have an ersatz cold war every four years over the medals tables; I thought that we had at least got away from that, but no, we have put another one in its place. I greatly regret that. The one thing on which I did not quite agree with Ian McKee was his questioning of the link to health. I believe that his point was answered later in the debate by the member who said that the feel-good factor and the growth of self-respect feed into a general holistic feeling of healthy living.

I am so sorry—if I were not into my final minute, I would have referred to Christine Grahame's terrible experience of running round a hockey field in outsize knickers, freezing. I  am sure that that experience had an impact on some of the things that she said this morning. In closing, I will say that most of the important points have been identified—the importance of sport and PE in schools, the importance of community development, and the absolute necessity of having coaches of the best quality, because they will be the inspirers of future athletes and healthier Scots.

I heartily endorse what Bob Doris says about sport bringing different strands of the community together. Many of those good Scots who play for the Scottish Saltires are Asian Scots, who want to play for Scotland rather than the country of their parents' origin.

I hope that the member will not think that I am being patronising in saying that that programme was the best example that I came across of coping with what we unfortunately call the NEET—not in employment, education or training—group. The boys whom I saw there were learning how to build and repair mountain bikes and were going on to work for professional qualifications that would lead them into employment.

Will the member give way?

It is a genuine intervention, Presiding Officer. I can speak only from experience but I was, as a very small girl, a member of Hamilton baths swimming club when Eleanor Gordon won a bronze medal at the Helsinki Olympics. I realise that that dates me—it was in 1952, if anyone wants to check—but I assure that Ross Finnie that simply training in the same water and with the same club as someone who had just won an Olympic medal was inspirational and created a legacy.

I am not.

I inform members that, if they want to check on where sportscotland stands on all this, Louise Martin will be the speaker at today's lunchtime meeting of the cross-party group on sport.

I very much appreciate what the minister has just said about legacy. Does he agree that, while everyone is bathed in the warm afterglow of the Beijing Olympics, we should start building the legacy now?

I am grateful to the shadow minister for allowing me in. I want him to get an all-bells-and-whistles, all-singing, all-dancing velodrome with a spectator arena. The facility that we want for Edinburgh is a top-flight coaching velodrome. I hope that that puts minds at rest.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I should say at the outset that I imagine that this is the only occasion that you will have to put up with me for 13 minutes during this session.

I also thank the members who have come to this morning's debate. I tried to find a topic and a motion that would attract support from all parts of the chamber—we will see whether I have been successful at decision time. On Monday evening, I attended a reception for our Paralympians in the national museum of Scotland. The Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Nicola Sturgeon, did the honours—very graciously, I might add—but there was one teensy-weensy bit in her speech that did not quite ring true with me, although it made us all feel pretty good, particularly the parents, coaches and other volunteers among the athletes and their supporters. Nicola Sturgeon said that sport was in our psyche in Scotland. If only. The Government and its predecessors have made genuine efforts to encourage people to take up sport and exercise—I pay tribute to them—and they have supported elite athletes to an unprecedented extent. Stewart Maxwell's predecessors as sports ministers, one of whom I am glad to see is present this morning, have all brushed up on their sprinting techniques as they have dealt with my lobbying, my complaining and—yes, I will admit it, on the provision of adequate numbers of fully trained physical education teachers—my nagging. On-going campaigns on television and elsewhere have successfully raised public awareness of the benefits of and enjoyment to be had from sport, and the performance of Scots  athletes in Commonwealth and Olympic games and world and European championships have thrilled and inspired all age groups. However, some studies suggest that, although standards are rising among sports participants, fewer of us are taking part. Although there are improvements in the statistics on, for example, heart and lung disease, our waist measurements are growing inexorably bigger and our children vie for top spot in the obesity league. It is because it is urgent that we make history of that last fact about our national fitness, and because of the opportunity to inspire people that is afforded by the Commonwealth games, that my motion urges the Parliament to support the return, as soon as possible, of a substantial part of the lottery funding already earmarked for Scottish activities but diverted to help pay for the London Olympics. Subventions from the lottery could start in three years' time, but I hope that, after hearing the case studies that I have prepared for the debate, members will agree to pursue an earlier start to the resource being injected into the development of community sport and the support of young athletes, for whom it might make the difference between attaining a personal best and a Commonwealth games qualifying standard in six years' time. I know that some people in the voluntary sector have concerns that the third sector will be the losers in any rescheduling of the supply of lottery resources. I hope that I have been able to reassure them on that. I have simply made a case for the urgency of speeding up the delivery of a resource that has already been scheduled and I have concentrated on the resources that will be earmarked for sport. Other members may concentrate on aspects of volunteering, for example, other than the support activities undertaken by the parents whom I met at the receptions for both groups of Olympic athletes. My first case study is Ross County athletics club in Dingwall. Last Tuesday, 53 young athletes aged between nine and 17 turned up for coaching by scottishathletics-qualified coach Alasdair MacDonald—no relation. The previous week, 63 young athletes turned up, no doubt inspired by the Olympics and Paralympics. Those numbers are up on last year's average of 30-plus members, but unfortunately nothing else has improved in the past three to four years. During that time, the Ross County club members have tried to raise their standards on a muddy field. It is sloping and holed, and it is used for shinty and football. Injuries are common. It is very easy to go over on an ankle in such conditions, which is something of a discouragement to athletes and their parents, who would prefer them  not to go hirpling to school or to be laid up at home with a cast on. There are also no showers or other indoor facilities. In fact, if Alasdair MacDonald wants to take his young athletes for intensive indoor coaching, the nearest facility is Grangemouth. If that were not enough of a disincentive, the cost of transporting even a minibus-load of athletes is almost prohibitive. If overnight accommodation is required, the indoor facility is just a dream. Inverness has a good track and what local athletes describe as reasonable facilities, but other communities across the Highlands and Islands are much more likely to experience the same muddy fields as Ross County club does in Dingwall. In spite of that, among the regulars, James MacPhail has won the under-17 400m Scottish hurdles championship. He is ranked sixth in the United Kingdom, but if he is to improve on that, he has no option other than to transfer from Ross County to Inverness, just as Ian Coghill did as the Scottish under-13 high jump champion—high jumping on a sloping field can also injure one's health. The schoolchildren, part of whose school playground it is, are forbidden to play on that so-called sports facility when it rains because it is so dangerous. Alasdair MacDonald negotiated for a half-tartan track when the new public-private partnership Dingwall academy was being built. Everyone thought that it was a great idea but said that there was no money to provide it. Far from current and past Government good intentions getting youngsters into sport, the lack of facilities and money to support sports club activities results in the old story of fewer and fewer young athletes continuing to compete in adulthood. I have described the prohibitive cost of a visit to indoor facilities for Ross County AC, but Wester Ross athletics club folded because of the prohibitive cost of travel. The MacDonald league of athletics clubs, which sustained regular sports meetings for clubs the length and breadth of Scotland, is now almost exclusively contained in the central belt because of travel costs. The Highlands and Islands clubs have regrouped in a Highland league, and it is grand that coaches such as Alasdair MacDonald and athletes from the deprived sporting areas are still motivated to the extent that they are, but in narrowing the geographical base of their league, they narrow their competitive opportunities and therefore their potential. Ross County AC represents exactly the sort of community sport that I would like lottery money to be spent on. Alasdair MacDonald could be joined by other local volunteer coaches if the expense of gaining coaching qualifications at Grangemouth, Meadowbank and Scotstoun, for example, was not  so off-putting and if there was help with travel and overnight accommodation. The two young men who have already proved themselves at Scottish championship level would not have to leave their local area if decent facilities were available, and one of our granddaughters, who shows promise as a pentathlete, could be properly coached in hurdles—yet another event precluded by a sloping, muddy field. That is the reality that can be addressed only by resources being invested in facilities and coaches. The sooner we start, the more athletes and coaches will be motivated to gain places at the Glasgow Commonwealth games. We would then be talking realistically about a genuine legacy. My second case study concerns Leith judo club. This week, as every week, 250 young athletes will attend judo teaching and coaching sessions overseen by the UK's leading judo coach, Billy Cusack, in a church hall in Leith. There are no showers or changing facilities there, either. The players are youngsters from all over the Edinburgh area, but mainly from the sometimes less-than-salubrious areas in the north of the city. There are approximately 20 players of top-flight international standard out of the 50 seniors in the club. At the Commonwealth games in Manchester, 10 medals were won by club members—one club provided 10 medals for Scotland—and Billy Cusack admits that he and his athletes were disappointed that, at the Beijing games, only one medal was won by the Leith club—by Sam Ingram. However, he is nevertheless confident of getting closer to Leith's usual medals total at the 2014 games in Glasgow. He hopes that, long before then, his athletes will have a practice area that is light years away from the one that they are presently forced to use, which he fears will cause serious injury due to the floor crumbling away with dry rot. He also hopes that the club's new premises will have changing rooms and showers, and a general-purpose strengthening and conditioning room would be nice too. He is currently in negotiation with the City of Edinburgh Council with a view to renting an unused industrial unit. He hopes that the facility will be temporary and that it will cost the club less than the £12,000 to £16,000 that he presently has to pay each year. However, there is always an alternative open to a coach such as Billy: the British Judo Association would love him to relocate to a centre of excellence south of the border. The athletes who have come north to be coached by him would be likely to return south of the border if he did so, but Billy wants to encourage them, build on what he has created in Leith and keep Sam Ingram, who is one of the English athletes who have come north to have the excellence of training that is provided  here. He wants to inspire and encourage the 200-plus youngsters who attend the club and maintain the high standards of performance that encourage kids from Leith to be all that they can be. I will now dive in at the deep end, which is still possible for a diver from Edinburgh. However, Sally Wood and Robyn Matthews, two young women who learned to dive here and have been coached to a standard that makes them realistic possibilities for the Commonwealth games, will have to find other facilities if they want to pursue their goals, because the Royal Commonwealth pool—known as the Commie pool to locals—is due to close next year for refurbishment and upgrading. It is estimated that that will take about two years so, if their family circumstances allow, Sally and Robyn will be off south to the most suitable facilities and coaching. Members should remember that they are still studying and that it will cost their parents a lot of money, but they will have to go south for the most suitable facilities and coaching. Even with that disruption to their lives and studies, those two young women are probably envied by the two talented divers who have had to pack in their sport because of the closure of Bon Accord baths in Aberdeen. When the baths closed, it was inevitable that, without divers to work with, the diving coach would be forced to seek out venues with 5m and 10m fixed boards and 1m and 3m springboards. Once again, a dedicated and professional coach has been lost to those of Scotland's youngsters who are ready to have a shot at diving after being inspired by young Tom Daley's performance in Beijing—it is the time to take it up—and to the remaining diver in Aberdeen, who is a Commonwealth games prospect provided that she can move to another diving venue. Those are three case studies of the reality of sport in our communities and the difficulties that our best—and potentially even better—sportsmen and women experience. We are now in an economic slow-down at best or a recession at worst for the next two, or possibly three, years. Local resources are already stretched so, if we are serious about the various programmes and initiatives that are designed to encourage people into sport, we dare not put them off until the economy recovers. I move, That the Parliament, in view of the reduction in lottery funding for the development of community sport in Scotland, supports calls for a substantial sum of National Lottery funding to be released as soon as possible, without prejudice to the outcome of ongoing consultations on aspects of the wider remits of lottery funding, thus ensuring both support for ongoing coaching programmes and a legacy from the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow that benefit the population of Glasgow and all of Scotland,  and believes that such funding is capable of enhancing the Glasgow games so that, in addition to supporting a spectacular event, the investment would lay the foundations for health and sporting improvements across the entire population of Scotland.

Will the member take an intervention?

If Harold Wilson was right when he defined a week as a long time in politics, I wonder how he would have characterised the past 10 days in the money markets—as a millennium, perhaps. People who know how many beans make five have said that the events of the past few days created a set of circumstances that occur only every 100 years or so. Mrs Thatcher said, "You can't buck the markets." Might I therefore suggest to HBOS shareholders, the employees of HBOS and Lloyds TSB, and people of good will who have the best interests of the Edinburgh, Glasgow and Scottish economies at heart, that it would be prudent to get their retaliation in first to the proposed takeover of HBOS by Lloyds TSB? The chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Bankers in Scotland, Simon Thompson, whom other members have mentioned, practised what I am preaching when he said last night that banks were discredited rather than in credit. He urged not just regulation but education to help to rebuild confidence in the banking system. Bankers must be honourable because their decisions directly affect the lives of every one of us. In Scotland, bankers enjoy a reputation for probity but, as the past few days have rollercoastered onwards, that priceless asset has been damaged by what many people consider to have been the unseemly haste with which the  terms of takeover were agreed by HBOS and Lloyds TSB. Only a week ago, on the basis of the bald evidence that the collapse in the share price of HBOS had been stopped by news of the proposed takeover, in common with most MSPs, I thought that Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling had had no choice other than to fast-track the takeover and skip over some of the usual processes surrounding mergers and takeovers, such as giving the stock exchange early warning so that share dealing might be suspended in order to protect the value of shares against speculators and the seedy elements that attach themselves like limpets to the money markets. Most of us did not know all that much about the processes that were in play during the takeover, but we ken noo. It is just possible that the Prime Minister and the chancellor really had no choice, but after the chairmen of the two banks admitted that for years they had desired to merge them but had been unable to do so because of competition law, a suspicion no bigger than a man's hand came into sight, as people marvelled at how the ill wind of sub-prime mortgage lending coming in from the other side of the Atlantic had done such good for the chairmen's hitherto forbidden dreams of merger. Should we ignore Sir George Mathewson when he says that some people were trying to do down the banks? After hearing highly credible figures in financial services praise the business management of HBOS, other people began to ask whether another response might have been adopted to the run on share prices. Even now, shareholders in both banks, who still have to endorse the deal, will no doubt have seen Carla Antunes da Silva's comments casting doubts on how good the agreement is for HBOS and Lloyds TSB shareholders alike. Although that particular market analyst, who works for JPMorgan, says that now is precisely the wrong time to create the size of bank that is proposed, its size has been stressed by proponents of the merger as one of the strongest points in its favour. The possible loss to customers as a result of the loss of competition in the sector has been skimmed over. In Scotland, we were assured of the sensitivity to, and knowledge of, the Scottish situation. The whole Scottish economy has blossomed as a result of the critical mass of financial services that has been established in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Given that Edinburgh is arguably the driver of the Scottish economy, Lloyds TSB has stressed how the proposed merger will pan out. Annual general meetings will be held here, as Ross Finnie said. As I suggested yesterday, maybe Lloyds TSB people will come up for the festival and give  everyone some free tickets so that we can make a real show of things. What a transfer! The Mound will still be home to the new bank's Scottish HQ, but no one has yet told me what level of corporate function will be practised from there. I hope that when the minister sums up, he will say whether the Government has established a baseline for the services that it wants to be operated from that location. Such high-quality jobs inside the sector, and the highly skilled and well-paid jobs that link into financial services—to say nothing of the hairdressers, the taxi drivers and the leisure and entertainment industry staff—will also be gone from Edinburgh if we do not get this right. We are told by the Prime Minister, the chancellor and the men who made the deal that these are problems of the global economy. The Prime Minister—of course, it could have been his wife—said yesterday that there had to be a global solution. I do not disagree, but, if HBOS is to be taken over, would it not be a better solution for the Scottish economy if, rather than rebuilding from within, with the Bank of Scotland reverting to a more traditional role, as outlined by Donald MacKay today, we went really big? A big global bank could take us over and we could be the European headquarters of such an outfit. That sounds a good job for anyone working on the Mound. That way, the integrity of the corporate functions would stay here. However, as people in top jobs relocate and other Edinburgh people see their businesses grow smaller or their jobs outside the financial centre disappear, the market value of houses will fall, and many of the people whom I represent could find themselves in the same position as American home owners who took on mortgages that left them with no financial security and who have been hit by unemployment and are now homeless. I do not want to talk down the possibility of a good deal being made but neither do I want to flatter people who think that they will give only what they have got on offer at present.

Does Ross Finnie agree that the situation that he has just described points to the need for immediate and much better regulation?

The chairmen of both banks are on record as having said that they had talked about a merger of their banks for years.

I agree completely that that message must be sent furth of Scotland, but I wonder how the leader of the Opposition thinks it will play in London, where the corporate functions that are being practised day and daily make up much more of a critical mass.

I welcome the Parliamentary Bureau's decision to have an emergency debate on Wednesday, but I regret that we will not meet in the Parliament tomorrow. Thousands of people in Scotland are most concerned, not just about their jobs but about housing—a topic that was introduced by the First Minister. As a matter of urgency, I ask the First Minister to call the City of Edinburgh Council and other authorities that have an interest in housing to discuss many people's fears that they may be  unable to pay their mortgages and stay in their homes.

I have heard rumours about fiscal fines. I wonder if the proceeds of those could be diverted to develop sport in communities, like the other source of revenue to which the minister referred.

I appreciate what the minister said about keeping the enthusiasm going, but does he agree that he would now meet hardly anybody in the street who could tell him who won the rings gold medal for Scotland at the Manchester Commonwealth games? It is necessary to keep providing facilities to get people into sport—it is not only Olympians who do that.

I thank Jack McConnell and, through him, Patricia Ferguson for having lodged the motion and for the work that she has done in this area over the years. I agree that the year 2014 should be marked out as Scotland's year of sport. However, we should not wait until then—we should do it now. I particularly take to heart Sandra White's remarks about funding. That is all important, as all sorts of strictures will be placed on local councils for the next few years, given the present economic situation. The year of sport will showcase Scotland, will bring benefits in terms of health and community development and will, we hope, raise the bar in our sporting prowess. I make no apology for making a special case for Scotland, but members will be pleased to hear that I will not make too much of a special case for Edinburgh on this occasion. It is important that there should be community access to the facilities that are provided. I have news for Jamie Stone. At the weekend, my husband attended an athletics meeting in Dingwall to watch one of our granddaughters take part. The minister should look at those outlying areas, as they are deprived of the sort of facilities that we are beginning to see in and around the central belt. Having said that, I must criticise a bit the facilities that are attached to the new schools and that double as community facilities. They are often of a minimum standard. That is not raising the bar. We must be a bit more ambitious than that. Jack McConnell talked about the requirement for volunteering, which is the second big requirement that we have in moving towards the year of sport. We need properly qualified coaches, who, by and large, will come from the ranks of volunteers. We must make it a bit easier for them to gain qualifications in their sports. We tend to forget that it costs money to get qualifications. We might encourage more people to take part in sport, but we will not raise the standards unless we have very good coaching. Therefore, the minister should seek out the best ways in which to quickly increase the number of coaches that we have. It is not good enough to look only to PE teachers; parents, grandparents and so on must be drawn  upon. I have some ideas about that, and if the minister wants to talk to me about them after the debate, I can tell him how they might be put into effect. I do not have the time to go into that just now. Sportscotland is doing a grand job, although it could do better. Unfortunately, its attention will be distracted from the task in hand because it is having to move to Glasgow—but that is another topic. My final remarks concern the provision of PE in schools. It is an utter nonsense to continue to talk of the aim of having two hours of good-quality PE in schools. That is not happening, and I would like an audit done soon of the number of PE teachers who are unemployed, teaching other things, working in leisure centres and so on. We are not meeting that target and doing so will require much more than the lip service that it is paid in this chamber in debate after debate. I am given one opportunity every parliamentary session to have a motion debated in the chamber and I am using my upcoming opportunity to deal with the subject of sport. I hope that every party will take part and support my suggestions—the motion has been supported by representatives of every party. The debate will take place next Thursday; I will see members here.

Does Jack McConnell agree that we can make the most of the inspiration that has been provided through the summer's activities only if facilities are in place, and that if facilities do not exist people will go back to being couch potatoes?

I hope that the member will tell me who is this Andrew Lansley who everybody talks about. On a more serious note, if we can put on cigarette packets warnings such as "This will damage your health" or "This will kill you" or whatever, can we put on the appropriate foods a warning such as "This will make you very fat"?

I was a bit put off at the start of the debate when a skinny malink like Margaret Curran said that she was drawing in her breath—I thought, "Heaven help the rest of us who live in the fatty puff world." I commend the minister for the general sweep of the obesity action plan. I agree with it and it is fine. If I appear to be too critical, I apologise in advance. The most impressive speeches—apart from that of Nigel Don, who obviously knows what he is talking about—came from Elaine Smith and Michael Matheson, who put their finger on it. The issue is about poverty and inequality; it is not just about some folk being fat and some being thin. We must change social attitudes and the division of the good things in society—I do not just mean cream cakes. I suggested to the minister years ago—I think in the first session of Parliament; she looked at me askance when I made the suggestion—that if we were serious about the issue, we would think about taxing salt, sugar and fat content in foods when it went above recommended guidelines. I am serious about that. If we want genuinely to give people a choice, we should ensure that products are on a level playing field and that cheaper food is not the food with the high salt, sugar and fat content. I do not know whether, like me, the minister uses her local public baths. They all have vending machines because they have to eke out their incomes. What is in the vending machines? There are Mars bars and everything else that is great—we do not need to know the salt, fat and sugar content to know what they will do to us. Why on earth are vending machines like that still in schools? They are not in all schools and not in all local authorities, but they are in some public buildings such as swimming baths and leisure centres. The vending machines have lethal food in them that is very easy for someone to reach for as soon as they have finished terrific physical activity.  We should not beat ourselves up about it. We should instead measure how successful the penetration of companies such as McDonald's and the sweet makers has been. When Rebecca Adlington won her second fantastic gold medal and smashed the world record, she was asked what she was going to do and she said, "I am going for a McDonald's." All these folk say that we want athletes to be beacons of hope and the best examples to young people so that they will not eat such food, but that is what she thought was the biggest treat she could possibly get after pulling off such a fantastic feat. Another issue is cookery classes in schools. In a previous session of Parliament I asked questions about that and told the education minister that we should try to teach the healthy lifestyle in respect of physical education and nutrition in a collegiate way, and that physical education should not just be about physical jerks. Physical education is also about what we eat and how our bodies process what we eat. People have to know about cooking and there have to be what used to be called home economics teachers—I do not know what they are now called in schools, but I know that there are not enough of them. When I checked how many are in training, I discovered that in the year prior to the one in which I made my inquiries 11 had graduated in Scotland. The subject has fallen out of the curriculum. Ross Finnie said that physical activity should replace some topics in the curriculum. It will be hard to persuade parents that that should happen, but if we are serious, it has to happen. We will also have to start teaching pupils about nutrition and cooking in schools, because there is now a generational gap. It is no longer someone's grannie who can tell them how to make a pot of soup or a pot of mince; they have to go to their great-grannie to find someone who did that, because their grannie was probably out working all the hours that God sent to take part in the new economy and so did not have time to cook like that. When Mary Scanlon talked about regaining skills and informing people about good eating, I instanced the community health flats that have been established in Edinburgh. We were absolutely adamant that nutritional advice should be on hand in those flats, particularly for very young mothers. That can be done quite easily. On physical activity, people talk airily about two hours of good-quality physical education. I ask them to define good quality. We need well-trained specialist teachers, good facilities and an acceptance on the part of schools that PE is part of holistic education. However, that does not happen.  Nigel Don was absolutely right when he talked about trends. Do not look at the figures and spend time working out that we are the second-fattest country after the United States of America. Instead, look at what is happening in the Mediterranean countries, which were previously held up as ideal places in terms of diet and fitness. They now have exactly the same problems we have because the big food manufacturers are packing the same rotten food into those people. Many recipes in Portugal and France now end with "ping", because the folk who normally did the cooking in the house are out working. We have to address the big changes that have taken place in the past 20 or 30 years.

The member asked whether a system exists whereby help can be accessed at community level. At the community health flats that have been established in Edinburgh, people can learn about diet, learn to cook and be helped. Islands of community activity can provide a template.

Will the front-bench spokesperson tell us where Labour stands on the question of this kind of harm being self-inflicted? She listed the possible conditions and diseases that can be caused—at least in part—by obesity. However, in some quarters, it is felt that such conditions are self-inflicted, which might have implications for the delivery of health services.

Does that apply to Frank McAveety and his pies?

Will the member give way?

The Parliament is not sovereign and, therefore, must expedite its procedures according to the law of Scotland, its customs and practice. That means that, when Parliament sits in judgment on one of its members it must act and, most important—as Jamie McGrigor pointed out—it must be perceived to act as an impartial and unbiased tribunal. From the start, that principle was tainted in that the perception is that the complaint against Wendy Alexander originated from an SNP researcher who shared a common interest with, and a direct line of communication to, Wendy Alexander's political opponents on the committee. In its report, the committee also admits that there is ambiguity as to whether Ms Alexander contravened the Parliament's rules on the declaration of interests. Scots law dictates that the committee must, therefore, give the benefit of the doubt to the accused person and should dismiss the complaint against her. That much is crystal clear, so the committee should be thanked for its work and no further action should be taken on the complaint against Ms Alexander. We should be guided in the matter by the procurator fiscal. However, the experience has shown us some unsatisfactory and disturbing aspects of our procedures. Those must be addressed. At the very least, an examination must be made of the standing of the legal advice that is given to members directly or via committee clerks. I feel sure that the Parliament can rely on you, Presiding Officer, to set that in train in the interests of clarity, fairness and, above all, public trust in the procedures and probity of the Scottish Parliament.

This morning, the First Minister said that we need a reflationary programme. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development confirms that the UK economy is in recession, so it might seem strange—perhaps even frivolous—that I should urge the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth to honour the promise made by the First Minister about the provision of facilities to ensure that the young, upcoming cyclists who are being coached in Edinburgh realise their potential in time to compete in the Glasgow Commonwealth games and the 2020 Olympics. It takes eight years to produce a world-class cyclist. Currently, there are 50 riders aged between seven and 16 in training, of whom three are already British champions. If Chris Hoy and Alan Edgar are to be joined on the podium in Glasgow, the facilities must be in place as soon as possible. That means that a new velodrome must be started ASAP. The City of Edinburgh Council is investigating the cost of a covered velodrome, and I believe that its officials think that about £3 million might produce a satisfactory feeder facility to complement the new facility being built in Glasgow. Experienced cyclists and coaches have told me that the figure could be nearer £4 million. However, the space in the centre of the track would be completely suitable for judo and gymnastics—I have checked—both of which sports are looking for suitable venues for their elite competitors and community participants alike. For  a modest outlay, the Government could make good its intentions to support and help to develop Scottish sport and produce a fitter Scotland. My reason for associating the Government with the required spend on facilities such as those that I have briefly outlined is the inference I drew from the First Minister's remarks after Chris Hoy's triumph. The First Minister obviously understood that the standard of facility required to make Scotland a centre of excellence for cycling is much higher than the replacement local practice track originally envisaged by the City of Edinburgh Council. The costs I refer to would provide a Scottish national facility. They represent very good value for money, but it is money that is not now available to Edinburgh because of the economic downturn, which has resulted in a drastic downward revision of the projected income from the sale of part of the Meadowbank site. While discussing how the City of Edinburgh Council would juggle its resources to maximise the possibilities afforded by modern, standardised cycling facilities, I discovered that there may be a suitable piece of land available in the Leith docks to provide a world-class white-water course for canoeing, kayaking and rafting. The site would also provide a centre for community use and outdoor education for schools. If the new velodrome and an artificial white-water facility were located side by side, economies of scale would be possible in shared facilities. The resulting centre of coaching expertise could prove very attractive to coaches and competitors alike. Without such a centre, people will continue to work and train outside Scotland. At present, even though we lack facilities of international standard, cycling, water sports and judo are three sports in which Scotland can realistically claim to be right at the top of the world class. Or, to be more accurate, they are three sports in which Scotland can claim to produce world-class athletes who have to leave Scotland to access the best coaching and facilities. Everyone now knows that our cyclists live and train in Manchester. Make no mistake: in the world of top-class sport, there are centres of excellence for all sports. The Jamaican sprinters, so much admired by our own dear Minister for Communities and Sport, are produced from an excellent system of competitive school sport, and follow the same path as Liz McColgan did in living and being coached to world-beating standard in the American college system. Some top athletes will probably always seek outside Scotland for the top coaches in their sport. However, we currently have dozens of water sports athletes who could well beat a path to the white-water facility that is being built in Cardiff  docks, even though the regeneration of Leith docks is on-going and Scottish canoeists have identified suitable locations and have supplied me with a basic outline proposal that is based on the Cardiff facility and costed at £5 million. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will agree to consider the imaginative idea of investing in a conjoined sports centre. As we speak, Forth Ports is being supplied with the relevant information, as is the City of Edinburgh Council. The Government must be involved. Such a facility would be not only for elite athletes; it would be suitable for every standard of participant and could greatly enhance the provision of facilities for the type of outdoor education advocated by Elizabeth Smith. I commend the idea to the cabinet secretary as the sort of investment that is entirely compatible with his Government's objectives and is entirely suitable as a proactive method of breaking out of the current depressive economic mood. It is always a good idea to aim high when the economy is going through a low-performance phase. Until sovereign economic powers are available to the cabinet secretary, he cannot do everything that might be done to buttress the Scottish economy against the effects of global economic difficulties. However, for a very modest outlay, he could provide a sports facility that would enhance our national fitness, health, sporting prowess and ability to host top-flight international competition. The cabinet secretary and the First Minister have implied in all their comments on the economy that we should not lose confidence in Scotland's ability to weather the storm. Investment in a world-class sports centre, such as the one that I have suggested, would help us not to lose confidence.

I am intrigued by whether the Labour Party agrees with the Government that Scotland is a special case as regards the overconsumption of alcohol and the violence that follows or whether it is aware of the number of Governments in Europe that are concerned about the trend.

Could it not be that education authorities are waking up to the fact that the figure of 18 is just a shibboleth and realising that the size of a class should be determined by who and what is being taught, by whom, and in what conditions?

Further to the member's point about concentrating on our current laws on the sale and safe use of alcohol, can he explain why licensing boards do not remove licences from those who are found guilty of selling drink to underage people?

Presiding Officer, you now have a rival for my affections, given the First Minister's kind words. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has confirmed that we face a recession. Given that the decisions of the Bank of  England monetary policy committee will have a profound effect on how that is dealt with, and given that the MPC is London-centric, will the First Minister seek an alliance with the First Ministers of Wales and Northern Ireland to press for the right to appoint members to the MPC to ensure that the needs of our nations are taken into account fully when its decisions are made?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The point of order is under rule 1.6 of the standing orders, which refers to the code of conduct. Proceedings in the Parliament that are on-going may have raised a serious difficulty for us, because there appears to be an argument about a point of law. On whether something is a registrable interest under the Interests of Members of the Scottish Parliament Act 2006, the Parliament's lawyers say no and the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner's lawyer says yes. We are advised under our code of conduct to seek the advice of parliamentary clerks, who take legal advice. If the standards commissioner then produces legal advice offering the opposite solution, in what position does that leave members? Where should they go for redress? I ask most respectfully that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body consider the whole matter, as the recent example may have illustrated a gap in our procedures.

On a point of order.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to rule 13.7.7 in the standing orders, which states: "A member asking a question shall, in asking the question, not depart from the terms of the question." I submit that there is an implicit acceptance in that of the need for the answer also to be relevant. I happen to have agreed with the First Minister in his initial answer to the initial question from Nicol Stephen. However, I regret to say that,  thereafter, the First Minister departed from the script and from the terms of the standing orders. Will you have a word with the leaders of the parties in here, so that next year's question times are not so abused?

And me.

In her statement, the cabinet secretary said that she intends to introduce legislation that will ensure that lenders who intend to repossess properties notify local authorities. Why? Is it an attempt to ensure that local authorities have enough houses to give to homeless people? What is the reason for that proposal? Perhaps the home owners support fund that the cabinet secretary mentioned is meant to be an advocacy service, because her statement made no reference to how people who are threatened with homelessness and who obviously do not have the money to pay a mortgage could find the money for an advocate. Finally—

The cabinet sectary made conflicting statements. As has been mentioned, she said that the Government would focus investment on meeting need, but—

She also said that the Government would concentrate resources where they would have the greatest impact. Those appear to be contradictory statements, certainly in relation to Edinburgh. Will she explain that apparent contradiction?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that you will be patient with me, because I seek only to add to what Mr McConnell said. He might be absolutely technically correct, but I think that I speak for several members when I say that how we prescribe the question time period that is open to us does not serve the Parliament's interests. Will you take a wider view than just considering the point that Mr McConnell asked you to address?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to support the alliance of southern European members of the European Union supported by President Sarkozy but opposed by Chancellor Merkel. (S3O-3776)

Presiding officer, with all due respect, I asked the minister which side the Government will back. We have a real interest in supporting the development of regional alliances in the European Union. We have such an alliance between the United Kingdom and Ireland—the offshore group of islands. It would be a much better thing to believe that the Government understands that the development of regional interests with which people can identify is preferable to supporting the centralising requirements of the Lisbon treaty, with which no one can identify.

Will the First Minister say why the Government did not call in the plans for Caltongate, given that the area is central to Edinburgh's status as a world heritage city? The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is to meet to discuss the danger that the development might pose to that status.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way to me instead? [ Laughter. ]

Will Jeremy Purvis explain why both the Government and the previous Executive are hung up on a scheme that neither of them really likes. Why do they not just fund things from the Public Works Loan Board?

The cabinet secretary referred to the need to get the best possible return on the Government's investment and the best possible infrastructure for Scotland. At the moment, a tram system is being constructed in Edinburgh that I suggest is for the benefit not merely of that city but of Scotland. The traders who have been affected by those works are actually experiencing a double squeeze: the expected one and an unexpected one caused by the credit crunch and the state of the British economy. Given the scheme's importance, is the cabinet secretary amenable to funding additional compensation for those traders who can demonstrate particular levels of hardship, using as  a comparator the results of the City of Edinburgh Council's baseline research into the effects of the credit crunch—

I am just as patient as the First Minister is generous in spirit. I seek his guidance on getting the answer to a question that I have asked eight times. It was first lodged on 10 January 2006, and Mr MacAskill answered it on 18 January 2006. Will the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body publish details of the Parliament's energy performance, as required by the European Union energy performance of buildings directive, which came into force on 4 January 2006? The directive requires a large, easily read poster to be put in a prominent place so that people can see how energy efficient we are—or are not.

Without responsibility for the supply chain into the United Kingdom, or, in our case, into Scotland, how rigorous can we be in our monitoring?

Does the member accept that administering methadone via a pharmacist is  cheaper than providing a team of support workers for a drug addict who is not taking methadone?

Will Brian Adam give way and explain why?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I believe that progress should be monitored, along with how the public pound is spent. If we are to have a more sophisticated evaluation of the services provided, as the minister described, how does the member propose to identify a new type of target?

On the outcome agreements I agree with the minister. However, has he received representations from the local authorities concerned that they cannot now recruit the number and, perhaps, quality of people that they require to act as counsellors and support workers?

Will the minister give way?

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. Am I correct in interpreting Karen Gillon's question to the First Minister as being in order, as she simply asked whether legal advice had been sought?

With respect, Presiding Officer, I think that the First Minister did not give a yes or no answer.

Will Elaine Murray give way?

On local government finance and the cuts that are being made at local level, does Elaine Murray insist that, had her party  been returned to government, there would have been no cuts?

Will the member give way to a non-member of the SNP?

Is the member advocating that the SNP should stick to its ridiculous promise on class sizes or that it should consider what is being taught, where it is being taught and by whom it is being taught?

Is it an argument in favour of the union that Scotland's economic growth should lag behind that of the rest of the United Kingdom?

The member asserts that seeing devolution work properly has given people in Scotland confidence that independence would work just as well. What is her source for that assertion?

Will the member take an intervention?

Presiding Officer, I apologise for arriving in the chamber late. The member said that the previous Administration's action on housing debt was the right thing to do. Does he agree that the right thing to do would be to give City of Edinburgh Council tenants an equal playing field by cancelling the council's debt, which is holding back the housing programme?

My question relates to the scanners that are often used in diagnosis and which can be used for research into cardiovascular conditions. The minister will be aware of the generous donation of a scanner to Lothian NHS Board during the week. Can she put my mind at rest by assuring me and others that—this in no way affects the propriety of that donation to NHS Lothian—the conditional donation will not be seen as a precedent? Will guidelines be issued to health boards on the conditions that may appropriately be associated with such donations?

Does the member think that we have to be in Europe, or signed up to the common agricultural policy, to maintain standards?

Will the cabinet secretary help me to interpret his statement? It says that the Scottish futures trust will bring together the expertise to  "provide a Scotland-wide municipal bond to fund future infrastructure projects." Is that wishful thinking or weasel words? It does not say that the Scottish futures trust will provide the municipal bond; it says that it will provide the expertise—in other words, the know-how. Will he confirm that for me? The cabinet secretary said that schools projects such as those in Aberdeen and Falkirk will be considered on their merits. Will he give an undertaking to consider the merits of the case that the City of Edinburgh Council has made, which is not about how the schools are to be funded but about where it will get the money to fund them?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that a high proportion of the people who are being trained in PE are one-year graduate trainees and will not be what fully trained PE teachers like me consider to be specialist PE teachers? I ask that in passing. Members asked the cabinet secretary when the two hours of quality PE will be delivered. The answer is probably never—[ Interruption. ] Do not worry, that was just one of my sticks falling over—[ Interruption. ] That was the one that I was going to use on the cabinet secretary.

Neither do I, Presiding Officer. I have been banging this drum for a number of years. I hope that the cabinet secretary agrees that the important point is that primary school children should form the habit of taking daily exercise. Head teachers do not have the money in their budgets to employ the specialist PE teachers who are currently in training. I suggest that an achievable target would be for every child in every  primary school to have a period of activities every day—perhaps as short as 15 or 20 minutes—which could be managed by a primary school teacher who is already overburdened with all sorts of curricular demands. Will the minister comment on my suggestion?

To ask the Scottish Executive why there have been no approvals to the scheme designed to produce proper competition in the legal services market in Scotland, incorporated under sections 25 to 29 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. (S3O-3272)

I hope that the cabinet secretary realises that I offer the suggestion that I am about to make in the best possible faith. I have reason to believe that there is not a particularly good working relationship between the Association of Commercial Attorneys and the Lord President's office—I stress that it is the Lord President's office, rather than the Lord President himself. It might help to cut this Gordian knot and provide the sort of consumer protection that Scots clients should  have, and which is now enjoyed in England, if the cabinet secretary were to agree to meet the Association of Commercial Attorneys. Will he do so?

When does the First Minister plan to introduce a programme of education and information on the choices that will be implicit and explicit in the referendum bill? I hope that he agrees that it is not enough to rely on the Scottish conversations. For example, the requirement for benefits to march hand in hand with taxation, to which Aileen Campbell referred, is not understood by most people in Scotland. The Parliament has a duty to ensure that people understand all the implications of all the constitutional choices that are open to them.

Talking of outcomes, there is agreement that the Government is tackling the issue in a new and fresh way. However, we must not forget that resources are required to service those outcomes successfully. I have not heard much about the alleged shortfall in resources that the Government might have expected and, perhaps, did expect when it drew up its proposed outcomes.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

If the member accepts the need for efficiency in the delivery of service, the corollary of which is that fewer people will be employed in delivering that service, does he agree with his colleague Mr McCabe that we should have no fear of that because the Scottish economy is capable of building more jobs?

I do not mean to put the member on the spot, but does he accept—I think that he has the imagination to do so—the corollary of what he said, which is that unemployment will rise at a time when we do not have the economic levers to hand to cope with it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hope that this is not too nit-picking a point. The minority Scottish Government has a mandate, as it has been elected by the people of Scotland. The mandate was endorsed when this Parliament agreed that it should form the Government. I am therefore concerned about—no, not concerned about, but certainly interested in—the competency of the resolution.

The election of the Scottish Parliament.

In interpreting what voters thought of what the Labour Party said, will the cabinet secretary accept that voters thought that the SNP's proposed local income tax would mean not that everybody in a family would pay but that only the person who paid the hated council tax would pay?

On the matter of legality, do we not also have to consider the legitimacy that is conferred on elected representatives by voters? Voters voted against having a council tax.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that that is why there is so much concern about the income tax that will be levied on the young people to whom he refers?

Will the member give way?

Does Joe FitzPatrick have any case studies of a family of two adults with two grown-up children who cannot afford to pay mortgages living at home? Will they look forward to paying four times what they pay now?

Much as I am thoroughly enjoying an excellent speech, I wonder whether the member agrees that outside these hallowed walls, people are much more concerned about whether they can pay their mortgage and the collapse of the international monetary system than fancy dancing on something that will never happen.

Some of us believe that local income tax as proposed by the Scottish Government is impossible to bolt on to a comprehensive, cohesive system of taxation set in Westminster. Will the same apply to land value tax, or is there a way round the problem?

To ask the First Minister whether he has met any representatives from the Scottish financial services industry, in light of the current uncertainties in global financial markets. (S3F-668)

I thank the First Minister for his reply. I am slightly mollified, but I would like an assurance from him that the lack of monitoring and foresight that we now realise was present in the management of Northern Rock is absolutely absent in Scotland. If he cannot give that guarantee—which I agree is a bit of a tall order—what can he say to reassure me that we will not make the same mistakes?

It is very healthy for all of us to consider the value of our life. In fact, it should be mandatory for the human condition. We should all concern ourselves with the contribution that we make to society in general throughout our life, right up to the moment of death. As the chamber knows, I have a degenerative condition. I would like to have the right to determine by how much my capacity to fulfil my social, familial and personal functions will be truncated. I would like the ability to take that decision. I do not want to burden any doctor, friend or family member; I want to find a way in which I can take the decision to end my life in the event that I am unlucky enough to have the worst form of Parkinson's near the end of my life. From the responses to interventions, we can see that the medical practitioners among us have admitted that palliative care is not as effective in all cases as everyone wants it to be. I am mindful of that. I may be one of the unlucky ones. I apologise for the personal nature of my contribution, but this is not theory for me.  I fully appreciate why Michael Matheson wanted to invoke the law. However, in this case, yet again the law may be an ass. To say that it is illegal for anyone to force themselves to die is to deny the bravery of countless soldiers over the ages. People have taken that decision for one reason or another. It is just that we are now accepting that it is possible for someone to take that decision when they are in sound mind and they can do so in a measured capacity. I am mindful of what the doctors say and how difficult it is for them. However, I have read the personal testimony of doctors and have seen doctors who have admitted in court to assisting a suicide. They are no less doctors in my estimation for having done that. I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on bringing the debate to the chamber as quickly as he could. Many people have a lot less time than I have.

Does the member contend that there is effective palliative care for every condition, or does he accept that there are some conditions for which there is no effective palliative care?

Does the member have information on the percentage or number of doctors in this country who have owned up to effective euthanasia?

I thank Gil Paterson for bringing this matter to the attention of the chamber. I share the abhorrence of human trafficking that members have referred to. However, I think that, although getting the UK Government to sign the convention on action against trafficking will do no harm, it will not do all that much good, either. As Christine Grahame said in her excellent speech, we do not know the size of the problem that we are dealing with, which means that we do not know how to deal with it or what resources must be committed to it. I suggest that the first step must involve prevention, if at all possible. Therefore, any resources that are to be devoted to the fight against trafficking should be spent in the countries from which people are trafficked. I would like there to be an imaginative information and warning programme in Bulgaria, Romania, Poland, the Baltic states and throughout the countries of eastern Europe from which people have come—some legitimately and others because they have been trafficked. I mention legitimate means because—some people will not want to hear this—not all those  involved are the victims that Trish Godman and Gil Paterson mentioned. Sex workers, who are already employed in selling sexual services, are also migrating here from eastern Europe. How are they to be treated and evaluated if they are picked up in a brothel? Are they to be treated in exactly the same way as underage girls who have been trafficked against their will and told that they would get a job as a nanny? As a result of our abhorrence of trafficking, we overlook some of the harsh realities that anyone making a policy must deal with. I go back to prevention being better than cure, certainly in the first instance until we have a much better idea of the size and definition of the problem that we are dealing with. Members have mentioned the TARA project. I am delighted to know that there is such a project, but we require better information about outcomes from that project than we have received from, for example, Routes Out of Prostitution. I pay tribute to Pauline McNeill's work in that organisation, but we do not have the information that we should have after the years for which it has operated. I hope that we have learned the lesson and will apply it to the TARA project. It is all very well to talk about the support that people deserve if they find themselves in the position of being a trafficked prostitute, but are we willing to commit resources to the issue? We have not been willing to commit the resources to prostitutes who were not trafficked but have ended up on the streets in this country because of drugs, family breakdown and the litany of disasters of which members are well aware. Let us not put the cart before the horse. We should first try to identify what the problem is and we can then start to look for a solution.

The minister referred to teacher training and  professional development. How much work has been done to assess whether the current teacher training curriculum meets the needs identified in curriculum for excellence?

Will the member give way?

I asked a question a couple of days ago about the advanced higher. I respectfully ask the minister to take on board the fact that Hugh Henry and I are concerned about its purpose. Will the minister examine the new UCAS form? It treats the advanced higher differently to how it used to be treated.

I take issue with David McLetchie's suggestion that advanced highers help pupils gain access to higher education. In fact, they do no such thing; they help to prepare students for individual learning and the sort of study that is required in higher or further education. Does the minister have any figures to confirm  my suspicion that pupils who take advanced highers are those who are already best suited to individual study? Does she agree that advanced highers are therefore less of a priority need and that the 3,000 teachers whom she mentioned should be used to mop up the shortfall that Bill Butler mentioned in his question about schools in areas with the greatest social deprivation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point refers to the standing orders of the Parliament, but I apologise for not having my copy of them with me. It concerns how long it takes to get an SSI into a bill, which seems to be a central point in this afternoon's debate. Will you guide me, Presiding Officer? Is there a prescribed time in standing orders for the insertion of an SSI into a bill?

On the overcrowding at Barlinnie—I assume that there is also  overcrowding, to a greater or lesser degree, in other prisons—when will the Scottish Executive be subject to challenge under the European convention on human rights because prisoners are in such overcrowded conditions?

If we discover, during the course of the investigation into the length of time that it has taken to produce the new prison, that a shortage of craftsmen and skilled construction workers is the cause, how will the member accommodate the rising number of prisoners?

On a more positive note, can the First Minister outline any education measures that will be undertaken? If we seek to reduce violence against women in the home, men have to be educated from the cradle to the grave.

I rather clumsily intervened on the closing speaker for the Conservative party on the question of judgment as to what is attractive clothing and what is provocative clothing. If clothing is provocative, whom is it designed to provoke and what is it designed to provoke? How do we advise juries until we have decided that question of taste and, perhaps, morality, on which we are bound to differ?

I will just raise an intriguing point. If the way in which the style of dress can be provocative is not to contribute to being attacked—I agree that that is not an invitation to rape—what is the positive side of that negative instruction?

Has the member considered that the attitudes of juries might determine the matter about which he asks?

I join the debate because I want clarification on only one point that was reported in the newspapers during the week. The Lord Advocate will be pleased to know that I did not believe a word of what they said about her. However, I believed what I read about Rape Crisis Scotland's suggestion of what should be included in the proposed bill, which disturbed me, although I am not at all disturbed about the introduction of equality into the legislation, which is long overdue. I am interested in how corroboration will be maintained. The Labour Party is absolutely right that more time is needed to consider many aspects of the draft bill. I want to speak in the debate because I do not believe that it serves any good purpose for Rape Crisis Scotland to suggest that we can tackle the problems that are additional to the ones that are traditionally associated with prostitution by saying that any woman who is trafficked should be considered to be raped. That would confuse several legal concepts.

I thank the member for that information, of which I am aware—I abhor that situation as much as the member does. However, the same treatment can be meted out to young women who, for example, are groomed prior to leaving care homes. They might come from south of the border or from Dundee. That is what I was referring to. Trying to tackle one problem through a law that is designed to address another is usually flawed. In this case, that approach would be severely flawed. Many cases would fail if they came to court, because they would be wrongfully based. Although I agree with Rape Crisis Scotland's intentions, I ask it to withdraw its request. I would like an assurance from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that it will not be considered as part of the proposed bill. That is all that I have to say. I wish the proposed bill well.

Further to that point—

Hear, hear.

The member has voiced concerns about the timing of the proposed commission's work. However, that need not be a problem if Parliament were to say that the commission must report within the timescale that is set out in the Conservative amendment.

The member said that the more members of our population we can get through the system—I presume she means the higher education system—the better. Does she believe that higher education and further education must be structured as they are just now and that the students in both sectors must be supported as they are just now?

Will the member clarify something for me? Am I correct in thinking that the motion says that the graduate endowment will go, and that Labour's amendment merely adds a measure to that?

I am anxious to discover from the various parties how they approach the issue of higher education philosophically. The  member has given me the impression that if people do not go to university they can just lie down and die—I did not.

I do not mean to be facetious, but if people who have reached the age of 17 and mean to go to university do not know what "bursary" means, they should think again about their choice of career development. That brings me to the point that I made to Murdo Fraser. Does the SNP, anywhere in its planning, foresee a realignment of further and higher education, because that would have big funding implications?

Will the member give way?

If the member believes that it is time to look at the future, the structure—presumably—and the funding of higher and further education, does that include redrawing the demarcation line between the two and reassessing whether the competitiveness of the universities is needed as much as it was?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to instigate a programme of GP-prescribed exercise. (S3O-2269)

I thank the minister for her answer, but I repeat my question: when? I appreciate that the budget has come and gone, but more money could be found within the health budget to instigate a programme of GP-prescribed exercise before the working group is likely to report, which would lead to savings. We know the benefits of exercise. We do not need to wait for any more reports.

Members will know that, in relation to the Government's spending allocations, my first priority was to persuade the cabinet secretary of the good sense  and fairness of introducing a new budget heading for a capital city supplement. When he first presented his budget, John Swinney, in promising to implement such an idea in 2009-10, after consultation with the City of Edinburgh Council, made me an offer that could prove difficult to refuse. Members will note that he repeated that offer today. Yesterday evening, I mulled over my options, because I have tried to use the opportunities that are provided by the Parliament's composition to obtain other benefits for the people of Lothian. I take on board Patrick Harvie's comments about the need to fine tune our process for handling the budget. I await with interest Mr Swinney's response to my letter requesting that the shortfall in the financial settlement received by NHS Lothian under the Arbuthnott formula—£11 million, in case he forgets—be made good immediately, given the pressures on health services in Lothian, particularly in maternity and accident and emergency units. That, of course, comes under the responsibility of the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, but the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is the man who decides strategic spending priorities. I therefore presume that he works very closely with the big spenders, hence my wish that he spend a little time with my request. Just as I was reaching a conclusion after mulling things over, there he was on television—the First Minister. He appeared to make me an offer that I definitely could not refuse: if I did not vote for him, he would go. However, the First Minister has form with that sort of decision, so I am inclined to stick with what I consider to be a good budget that will benefit most people. I approve of returning decision making to local councils, I approve of ending prescription charges and I approve of the freeze in council tax until a fairer taxation method is found. However, I record my doubts that local income tax can be introduced properly while we are simply devolved and lack the cohesive and comprehensive range of powers that are available to sovereign Parliaments. As is my custom when dealing with minority Governments, I will continue to peruse my options until I hear the final thoughts of all the parties in the wind-up speeches. Sometimes, last-gasp verbal commitments are offered and received. Labour's amendment offends nobody. It would not bust Mr Swinney's spending plans and it appears no different in essence from the Government's ideas. In short, it is a textbook example of a motherhood-and-humble-pie amendment. In the interests of demonstrating that this Parliament has learned the art of minority government, might I urge the Government to accept it?

It just needs someone at a local level to organise it.

I thank Elizabeth Smith for lodging the motion and for the kind words at the start of her speech. I will concentrate on what I know most about—physical education—and talk about the big, beefy sports, such as high-level walking, climbing, orienteering and mountain biking. I will link them to a particular interest of mine: trying to recruit from the ranks of people whom we stupidly describe as NEETs—those not in education, employment or training—thus categorising them in a pejorative fashion. A great number of young people from the ranks of those who are not in education and who perhaps did not find school a satisfactory experience could be recruited because of their skills in sports, usually football. They are the sort of people who, if they were encouraged to gain certification from the governing bodies of sport—this goes for all sports because, once somebody is into one, they are into umpteen—could work with children from Easterhouse, for example, in outdoor physical education. That would be worth trying, so I would like a pilot or two to be attempted. It would not cost much money. Money is one of the things that holds back programmes and implementation of the intention behind the motion. Local authorities might take up the sort of ideas that they took up in the 1970s and to which Robin Harper referred, but they say that they are strapped for cash, so they are unlikely to spend a lot of money on such initiatives. However, they could declutter the school timetable. The terms "outdoor education" and "extra-curricular" imply somehow that such activities will be done outwith the school day, but such education should be incorporated into the school day or the school week. Local authorities should be helped to declutter their timetables to achieve that.

I reiterate my points about where we might find coaches to take young people in hand and how we might find time for them to do that. Robin Harper referred to Glenmore lodge. I was there—not as a school pupil but as a physical education student—and have never forgotten the experience. I had to write a diary at the end of the stay. When I look at it now, I cannot believe that I was that person and that I derived from it what I did. It was a wonderful experience. I remember doing high-level walking and passing Utsi's reindeer. They were going down the hill because  they knew what we did not know—a storm was coming. We were all nipping over corries. I did things that I never thought I would attempt in my lifetime: I would like every young Scot to get the same opportunity.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth knows that I am thinking, "So far, so good," about the capital city supplement. However, I urge him to take on board the question that Sarah Boyack asked and which I am going to repeat. Will he match, brick for brick, the cost of building new schools in Edinburgh? The situation is as serious as that.

I have a suggestion. If we pilot the welcome desks, the people who run the  Polish website should be partners in the project, so that it is not seen as a patronising gesture.

Malcolm Chisholm and Gavin Brown expressed similar concerns about the suggested pilot, but we already know that people coming from eastern Europe have a sensitivity to official intervention. Perhaps a face-to-face, informal welcome will reassure them. When they then go down to the Fort community centre or other community networking places, the word will spread that the pilot scheme is okay.

I hope that I can reassure the member to some extent. There is a publication—I am looking for it among my papers, but I cannot find it—that is available to employers that enables them to equate, roughly, qualifications, but he is still correct. Gavin Brown talked about our going into Poland to provide information. The previous Executive tried distributing leaflets, but there were not enough and it was a fast-moving game that it could not keep up with. Someone is trying to address the problem, but it needs to be pulled together.

The genesis of this debate lies in a spell that I had in hospital about three years ago, when I made the acquaintance of Monika, who had recently arrived from Poland and was putting in 12-hour shifts cleaning mainly toilets and bathrooms in the infirmary. Had she not come to Scotland with the first of the young Poles after her country became a European Union member, she would have been studying for her third-year exams in law. That made me quite interested in Monika, and I got to know her. Her English was not great and my Polish is on a par with my command of Urdu or Gaelic, but she had a bureaucratic problem that my office was able to resolve for her. Since then, we have kept in touch and have worked out a couple of other wee difficulties—concerning housing, as I recall—and, through her, I have gained an insight into the community that we are all aware of but which we cannot quantify. We do not know what size the community is or what the average age of people in the community is, even though the overwhelming majority of Scots have—I am happy to say—welcomed these hard-working migrants from eastern Europe and their skills. I will concentrate on the Polish community because—although we do not know for sure—there appears to be a greater concentration of Poles in and around Edinburgh than of other people from eastern Europe, and it is certainly the group that I know a bit about. The welcome that the Poles have received is not just because of the delicious treats to be found in the new Polish delis, or even because of the universal appeal of Polish plumbers, but because they have filled a gap in Scotland's aging, shrinking population. Last year was the first year in  quite a while in which our population grew. However, there are no figures showing how many of those welcome children were born to migrant mothers or how many are likely to stay long enough to pull on the dark blue jerseys of Scotland's sporting teams. The motion asks for a better way of incorporating all the positive aspects of this new pattern of migration into Scotland, both for those who stay here to become new Scots and those who live and work among us for some months or a few years. The Irish, in particular, are philosophical about the people who go to Ireland for a few months or years and then go back to their country of origin. The Irish want them to have as good an experience of Ireland as possible, so that, when it comes to doing business or organising school or university exchanges and so on, those people have the best possible opinion and experience of Ireland. That is another good idea that we can copy. With the fresh talent initiative, the previous Executive, under Jack McConnell, set the tone of the relationship between migrants and indigenous Scots. He is to be congratulated on and thanked for his foresight. We should cheer him for his persistence in the face of the lack of interest and even hostility that was displayed by Whitehall and Westminster. However, now that the Scottish advantage that was established by the fresh talent initiative has been eroded by Westminster's adoption of the same procedure for keeping overseas students around for longer after graduation, we need to refresh fresh talent. That is the spirit in which I would approach any strategic overview in relation to the people who have come from eastern Europe. Basically, we need to make migrants' experience in Scotland so satisfying that, first, a greater proportion put down roots and stay with their energy, talent and families, and secondly, as I said earlier, those who return to their native countries carry with them a positive picture of a country that made them welcome and with which they are happy to do business. I do not want to seem to be suggesting that nothing has been happening in building relationships and so on. There are networking groups around the country, particularly for the Poles, and they do a pretty good job, drawing on their own resources, of providing personal support, advice and information for their countrymen and women. I visited such a club, which runs on Monday afternoons and evenings in Fort primary school in Leith, and I was struck by the almost palpable energy and vitality. Malcolm Chisholm, the constituency MSP, may have visited that club, too. If he has not, I advise him to go because it is  uplifting to see so many dynamic young people thinking that Scotland and Leith are great places—but then, Leith is a great place. Are we doing all that we could be doing to help the migrants progress? From work undertaken for Scottish Enterprise, we know that many of the migrants come to Scotland to enhance their skills and qualifications. It is in our interest that they should do so, which takes us back to my comments about encouraging more people to stay. Is there a strategic overview of the next 10 years that encompasses information on how migrants might help us to meet the demand for high-end skills, whether they have the skills to move from production to service jobs—we know that that is where the growth is going to be—whether a sufficient number of migrants will reverse the decline in Scotland's working-age population, and whether Poles and other eastern Europeans will continue to come here, either temporarily or permanently, as our economy slows and theirs expands? Poland's economy, for example, is growing at 5 per cent per annum. We are in competition with Germany and the other countries that have lifted the barriers to people moving there. It seems daft to say that this is one area in which we must be competitive, but I believe that to be the case. We must consider the people who are coming to Scotland. We must quantify the numbers, and we must know who they are and what interventions are sensitive to the fact that they have done a great deal for themselves and that they are not used to state or official agency intervention that is as benign and liberal as ours. The suggestion in the motion is simply that there should be a pilot welcome desk scheme, which could be operated in conjunction with, for example, the company that runs the excellent portal on the web for Poles. That would identify the people coming in and give us some idea of how many there were, where they aimed to go to and, roughly, the information that we need. Booklets and a telephone line could be provided—I do not need to spell out the scheme for members as I am sure that they can work it out for themselves. The idea behind the motion is not to provide a whole answer but simply to make people aware of the additional work that we must do to ensure that the people who are coming to Scotland and the people who are receiving them get the best of everything for both groups.

In reference to the answer that was given to Mr Brownlee, am I correct in assuming that the First Minister sees the amalgamations as a process as well as a decided policy? If it turns out that some of the announced amalgamations do not produce the required results, will there be some mechanism by which we can return without great upheaval? I am thinking, of course, about the sportscotland decision. I am sure that, when we look at the books properly, we will discover that the proposed merger will cost far too much money for no great change. Might the decision on the organisation's relocation to Glasgow be reversed?

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and his predecessor—both of whom are the kind of men with whom I can do business— know that, since the Parliament's first session, I have pursued the matter of the additional funding that City of Edinburgh Council requires to allow it to discharge the city's unique duties as Scotland's capital. I have not sought to raid the financial settlements that have been made with other local authorities but have urged finance ministers to create a budget heading that would make clear the reason for and the function of a funding stream that was unique to the capital. I hope that that reassures Bill Aitken, who was a bit of a narrow nationalist, the way I interpreted his remarks on the subject. It should not seem that I am asking for a perk for living in what is arguably the most attractive city in northern Europe. Instead, a capital city supplement is the means whereby Scotland will be able to build on Edinburgh's success in generating nearly 13 per cent of Scotland's GDP from only 9 per cent of the nation's population. Edinburgh brings jobs and investment that would not otherwise come to Scotland; it is the main engine for economic growth and wealth creation. The capital generates 33 per cent of spend by overseas tourists in Scotland and is the UK's second most visited city. It acts as the gateway to Scotland, with tourists spending two days elsewhere in the country in addition to three days in the capital. The role that Edinburgh's festivals play in stimulating interest in Scotland is well known. Perhaps less well known is the fact that they benefit Scotland to the tune of £184 million per annum. Members should note that organisers of those national money-spinning events are warning that a lack of money in Edinburgh's budget is endangering the city's position as the market leader, given the competition from cities in England and continental Europe, whose local authorities know a good thing when they see Edinburgh's festivals. It was right and fair to acknowledge the additional resources that Lothian and Borders Police requires through the allocation of a capital policing supplement, and I thank the previous Executive for doing so. I hope that John Swinney will allocate funding to the three little words that I have longed to hear a Cabinet minister use—capital city supplement—by agreeing that there should be such a budget heading in next year's budget. I would have liked that heading to have appeared in this year's budget, but if the cabinet secretary promises me that it will appear in next year's, you never know what might happen in the vote at decision time.

Will the member give way?

Before the cabinet secretary develops his speech further, I would like to hear, just once more, those three little words that I have waited so long for. [ Interruption. ]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I was going to write to you about the issue of how questions and answers are delivered in First Minister's question time, but I will raise it now, given Ms Marwick's point of order. I believe that one senior member was out of order in asking the First Minister's opinion about an opinion poll. The First Minister is here to give an account of his Government's actions, not to say what he thinks of opinion polls. I suggest with all due humility that you get the business managers together and go through the format for First Minister's question time.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way on that point about leadership?

I wonder whether the member is as puzzled as I am about the gap in attainment regarding children who are classified as coming from poorer homes. According to all the measurements that we can produce, if those children were taught using the older methods of teaching, they would achieve a higher standard of attainment in the basics that provide entry to employment—reading, writing and counting. However, that is not how children are being taught now. Does the member agree that that is one practical thing that we could do to narrow the gap?

How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

I will try to speak for less than that, because I am grateful to the members who took interventions.  I said in one of my interventions that I did not want to denigrate the OECD's report. However, I hope that it makes the comparisons that we would want to be made, because I have a horrible fear that education in its widest application is greatly influenced by a creeping Americanisation of all cultures—not only the United Kingdom, but Europe—and that, in the satellite technology that is now to hand, what we would have considered to be the essential building blocks of any civilised culture are short-changed. I say that to start off with, but I will not be too philosophical. Robin Harper talked about the purpose of education and got right to the core of it. The OECD report refers a great deal to examinations but, as he asked, what do we have exams for? It is to test what we have learned. Why are we learning? It is to cultivate—we hope—a civilised, compassionate and humane society and the civilised, educated and humane man. If we do not do that, or if we think that we are cultivating people who do not reach those standards, is our education system what we would want it to be? Peter Peacock asked the OECD to undertake the research. In passing, I pay tribute to his excellent speech, which I thoroughly enjoyed—more please! However, the OECD did not go into the reasons for education or consider how it is measured. For example, the report talks about the teaching profession in Scotland and, although it does not say that teachers' morale is high, everything implies that it is. Morale in the teaching profession in Scotland is not particularly high, but that has nothing to with what the OECD examined and everything to do with the behaviour of the young putative citizens in the teachers' care. The report does not refer to the lack of discipline in schools and greatly undermines what many excellent teachers and headteachers are trying to do. The report does not compare the timetable that we have now with the one that we had when I was at school—although it does not look it, that was quite a while ago. The timetable is grossly overcrowded now and, as a result, we have overstressed and overstretched teachers. We would do well to greatly reduce the number of formal teaching blocks per subject in the timetable. Some subjects that are taught in schools are imaginative—not necessary informative, but certainly imaginative. Teachers are required to prepare and correct lessons in those subjects, all of which diminishes the energy and enthusiasm of teachers and perhaps gives us a clue why many of them opt out before they have reached their requisite length of teaching time. However, the OECD talks about standard grades. There might be agreement in the Parliament—with the exception of Bob Doris, who  was cruelly done down by them—that the standard grades have outlived their usefulness. I prefer the OECD's recommendation of adopting a Scottish certificate of education that is flexible and can reflect all the different strands of learning.

I agree with what the cabinet secretary said but, with all due respect to her, far too much emphasis is put on entrance into university, for example. Students are processed down that pathway, which presupposes that they have to think about attainment within the curriculum for excellence, rather than achievement. I move on to the socioeconomic argument that was advanced as the main indicator of the gap between those who achieve and those who do not. 'Twas ever thus. In the 1930s, people leaving junior secondaries—as they were called in Scotland—were usually a lot poorer than the people leaving senior secondaries. However, many of those who left the junior secondaries could go to night school and get a qualification that, although it was not a university qualification, would qualify them for the sort of job that a university graduate might do. We threw out a baby with the bathwater with our attitude to how people from poorer backgrounds would learn. That is a disgrace. I would not expect the OECD to tell us this straight to our faces, but we let down people like me, my brother and my sister, who were maximum grant students. We were able to learn because we had ambition to learn and there was nothing to stop us learning. We are letting down children because the right sort of attitude is not inculcated in parents. I want much more work to be done in that regard. I was glad to hear Peter Peacock—I think that it was him—saying that we should have pilot-led studies. Could we please have a pilot for learning English grammar, alongside Latin grammar? I am convinced that we should go back to basics and learn grammar. One of the ways in which we could teach ourselves might be to go back to that tried and true method.  Peter Peacock was right to say that the OECD report has given us a lift-off. However, it has not given us absolution. There is a great deal that we must still get much better.

I might be a bit of a greybeard, but the concept behind standard grades built on the foundation of comprehensive education. What people got wrong was the fact  that comprehensive education was meant to be social education, and that transferred to how standard grades were used in schools. The idea was not that everyone had to do exactly the same courses at the same time in the same way. If the member reads his history books, he will find that that is what standard grades did not get right.

I do not wish in any way to denigrate the findings of the report, nor to question the PISA standards, but how does the minister balance what the investigation into Scottish education standards found with the Government's own programme, which is running a television advert saying that one in five—almost one in four—adult Scots has difficulty with reading and counting?

I am happy to hear that the Government is aware of the issue and plans to address it. Will the minister's starting point be people in the 50-plus age group? It might be found that people who left school in Scotland that length of time ago were better equipped in respect of basic reading, writing and counting skills than people who left school in Scotland 30 years ago.

I want to give two quick points of information. First, the independents in the previous session of Parliament did not agree with the approach that was taken. Secondly, for the benefit of members such as Patricia Ferguson who seem to misunderstand the process, independents have to put up the same money as other candidates to be on the regional list. I had to pay £500, as did Patrick Harvie.

On that point, regardless of what we think, we should have the voter in mind. The voter believes that we are responsible for all aspects of what happens in the elections to the Parliament and the proceedings of the Parliament. That suggests that we should have legislative and administrative powers.

I am curious to know what the member thinks about one woman without a dog.

Has the member heard rumours that the counting machines that were used particularly in Edinburgh and, I am told, in Glasgow were below par?

Yes.

I ask about the logic of what George Foulkes has just said. If he is concerned that we should not have administrative responsibility for our own elections, for which we must account to members of the public who might ask us about them, does he therefore propose that Northern Ireland should look after the Welsh elections, that they could look after ours and that we could look after theirs?

Will the member take an intervention?

On the response from the UK Government, is it true that if it can be shown that all members in the chamber agree with the specifics of the changes that we would like to see, that would be a stronger position than the wider terms of the Scottish Government's motion? Does the minister agree with me on that point?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for raising this point of order yet again, but we do not have the same tradition as at Westminster, where the Speaker can name members. If we cannot do that, can we please have microphones that will allow those of us who want to hear the First Minister being brought to account to do so? Without that, the meeting is useless.

The member referred to long sentences for serious criminals. Does she see that being balanced by shorter sentences for less serious crimes?

I very much appreciate what the minister has just said, but what will be done differently to persuade young people that there is another way—other than joining the criminal economy, which is often, unfortunately, the only way that is open to them?

On the effectiveness of Europol in helping to prevent crime in Scotland, is the minister satisfied that the intelligence that he receives from Europol regarding the trafficking of women in particular for use in the sex industry is of the required standard for him to do something about the matter?

I thank the minister for allowing prior sight of the statement. I do not care how many U-turns this Government or any other Government makes—as long as they end up looking the right way, I am quite happy. By and large, the minister has got it right. I was very interested in what the minister said about the hubs. I have only one criticism, which is married to the possible loss of corporate memory. People are the resource on which sportscotland depends. If the hub structure is set in train, negotiations on how the organisation will retain people will be difficult. I ask the minister not to go too fast. In his statement he says that he wants all the changes to take place "as soon as possible". However, it is better to get it right than to get it quick.

Does the member welcome the proposal for a foreign minister to represent all of Europe, who will be able to initiate policy and sign treaties on behalf of Europe?

I accept that it is much better to advance the positive side of the EU. If we had a referendum, what exactly would we advance as being the positive effects of the EU as it is developing?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer—it is really a point of clarification. We should all be aware of how much  privilege we have in the Parliament. You have just ruled that members are entirely responsible for what they say. Is there no privilege such as exists in Westminster?

Will the member give way?

The minister read my mind. Although, in common with the other Edinburgh members, I am glad that Edinburgh's situation has been recognised and that a study is to be carried out, I am worried about the two years that the study will take. I spoke on the telephone to officials  this afternoon, but they were not absolutely certain of the up-to-date situation for Edinburgh. However, I notice that annex B of the explanatory notes on the local government finance settlement has a line that says, "To be distributed later". Could we have money distributed later to bridge the terrible crisis that may well arise in Edinburgh in the next two years?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is giving to the slow food movement. (S3O-1578)

I thank the minister for the slow way that he spoke, because I really understood that. There may not be much of an understanding of the Cittaslow network of towns among other members. Is the cabinet secretary—I am sorry, the stand-in for the cabinet secretary—aware that at the moment only one town in Scotland, Perth, has applied for Cittaslow status but that it is soon to be joined by Linlithgow? Is there anything that the Scottish Government can do both to help Linlithgow in its bid to join the movement and to publicise the fact that the movement exists?

Is the First Minister aware of the dire situation as regards affordable housing in Edinburgh? Last week, 1,024 applications were lodged for one former council house. Next week, it is entirely possible that the city will be unable to meet its obligations under the homeless persons legislation for priority needs cases. Can he assure me that the new Government will do what the previous Government failed to do and urge the Treasury to create a level playing field for places where people voted to remain in council control rather than to transfer?

Will the minister confirm that a growing number of those stakeholders are in favour of retaining sportscotland?

I apologise to Ross Finnie for failing to be here for the start of his speech. In mitigation, I would plead that I was  speaking to a man about setting up more than 35 sports in Edinburgh—that was what kept me. This is sportscotland's mission statement: "Our mission is to encourage everyone in Scotland to discover and develop their own sporting experience, helping to increase participation and improve performances in Scottish sport." In 2003, my colleague Peter Warren and I went to the annual general meeting of sportscotland. We were not impressed. Contrary to the sentiments in the mission statement, the emphasis in 2003 was on improving the performance of elite athletes. There was little understanding or sympathy for the people sitting up the back, who provide the underpinning for the production of elite medal winners and keep the structure of sport in Scotland in place—the coaches, the club officials, the family members and other volunteers. When Peter and I left the AGM, we were surrounded by the representatives of smaller sporting organisations and clubs for sports such as badminton, boxing and water sports. They were concerned about the thread that had run through the AGM, which was the relevance of the so-called minority sports and local clubs in plans for greater sporting glory in track and field and in the biggest team sports, which of course are rugby and football. The skewed emphasis on the elite athletes has now gone, and sportscotland is fulfilling its function, as outlined in the mission statement. That is not just what it says; it is what it does. I have a lot of sympathy with Michael Matheson—he and I usually agree on such matters—but he must accept that sportscotland has mended its ways. We talk about sinners who repent—I am sure that, as a good Christian gentleman, he would agree. Sportscotland has done things at local level. For example, in Stevenson, a lottery grant went to the Evolution skate park. Sportscotland helped to get the club organised and to develop a supervision and activity programme. Active membership grew to 1,500, and 250 women go each week—previously it was five. In Kinross, sportscotland was approached by a community group that wanted a swimming pool. Sportscotland did the research and advised the group about moveable floors, which mean that handicapped swimmers can take part. Sportscotland is doing the practical business for which it was put in place. It is linking extremely well with the Scottish Institute of Sport, and we are beginning to see the results, including improved performance by elite athletes. I doubt that we could devise a better way to improve our national health indices and to widen and deepen the pool of potential champions than by persuading by example and providing facilities such as those that  I have mentioned, by joining up the schools and club sport, and by expanding the number of qualified coaches. Those are the activities that win medals—the medals come only when enough people are taking part. Sportscotland has switched its emphasis to that. Although there is money involved and the Government will want to consult more about how that money is dispensed, I urge the Government to support sportscotland.

The cabinet secretary said that "Scotland needs firm foundations for learning and the Government will provide them." Why, in that case, is it not advising local authorities that they should use phonics to teach reading? That would be the single most successful way of improving the reading standards to which she correctly referred. Also, were more than 450 applicants for teacher training denied places on this year's training courses? I fail to see how, at present, she can maintain the high quality of entrants into teacher training and get the number of students that she wants unless she turns away that number.

At last, a question!

How do we differentiate between breaking promises and overturning a previous Government's decisions?

I will be brief, Deputy Presiding Officer. I am sorry that I cannot take interventions, but I have only two minutes. I asked Malcolm Chisholm whether he thinks that people in Russia and Greece celebrate the  fact that Scotland shares a patron saint with them because I wanted to illustrate the fact that I think that he was being too careful to internationalise a national day. It is an occasion on which to be whole-hearted about being Scots and about Scotland. We are here because we want to be here—or because we do not have the points to get into Australia. The Government should do more in the lead-up to St Andrew's day next year. It should watch the Scottish Rugby Union film that the cross-party group on sports saw at lunch time. "This is my country," it said. That goes for everybody who is here. We should not get knotted up trying to explain how we are reaching out to the folk who have come to live here. Of course we are doing that—they know that, and we should not make such a song and dance about it. I associate myself with the remarks of Bill Butler. The STUC was enthusiastic about Dennis Canavan's bill and the Government could work more with the STUC. It could also do more about having schools promote the notion of "Scotland: this is my country." With all due respect to Ted Brocklebank, I am not at all sure where St Andrews comes into it. We have latched on and said that 30 November is our national day. There is nothing wrong with that. The Irish have shown us how to do it and we should copy them—it is a good idea. I am afraid to say—to Robert Brown and the other poor mooths in here—that we will continue to have the debate about our identity until we have sorted the national question. People in Scotland will continue to enjoy St Andrew's day, if the occasion is there for them to enjoy, without getting into all the trouble that we get into by trying to link it too closely to the political. It is about Scotland and her people.

Does the member think that Russia and Greece remember that St Andrew is the patron saint of Scotland? Perhaps they concentrate on the fact that he is their patron saint, too.

My genuine and heartfelt thanks, Presiding Officer. The minister talked about the connection between learning Scots and an improved understanding of the English language. May I commend to her the teaching of Latin alongside Scots and English? According to a letter that I received today from a former HM inspector of schools, such an approach would undoubtedly help to promote the correct use of grammar and syntax.

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

I was unable to speak in the debate or I would have asked how much of the fund will be used for an evaluation of the kerb-crawling legislation. The evidence to date is that violence against women has increased—the situation has deteriorated.

I am intrigued that the member quotes statistics showing a rise in domestic violence, given that the Conservative front-bench member said that it was diminishing. Which is it?

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and her predecessors for, and congratulate them on, the state of preparedness that obviously exists. I may be being too specific in asking this, but has the cabinet secretary considered the fact that a great programme lies ahead for the construction industry? I appreciate that she has emphasised the preventive role of health care workers and her communication strategies, but perhaps she ought also to bear that programme in mind when it comes to drawing together the people who will make local plans. The construction programme is important not only to the economy, but to the feeling of well-being in Scotland.

Is the minister prepared to see new year's day as a normal day—for example, in Edinburgh—with all the attendant services that will be brought into play if large stores are open?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

As an independent MSP, and not being a member of the Finance Committee, I will not have the opportunity to move an amendment. I wonder if anyone else would be interested in moving one that saves money on the schools project and spends it instead on a capital city supplement?

Does the member know the relative situation for skilled workers as opposed to more academically qualified people?

The member might be interested to hear that the matter was discussed at a meeting of the Edinburgh airport consultative committee this week. Although he might well be correct in identifying a lack of action on the part of the Government in Scotland, there has also been a lack of action in England. English airports have been caught in the same trap.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. However, it is not a new thing. I was persistent yesterday, too, and I would prefer to ask the First Minister the question that I wanted to ask the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. I will just slip it in very quickly. I sincerely hope that we are thinking about capital city funding for the city of Edinburgh, because of its financial situation. On the policing question, which the First Minister has answered—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Will you take a motion without notice, Presiding Officer?

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I think that I am correct in saying that our standing orders require speeches to be relevant to the motion or issue being discussed. I suggest that taking up more than two minutes criticising the process and the conduct of other parties is not relevant.

Is Mr Adam aware of whether the legal responsibility and legally enforceable contract between patient and health board is still part of the budget, and whether that has been costed?

To save time, I will just say well done to everyone. Will the First Minister assure me that the decision on whether to retain sportscotland or amalgamate it with the Scottish Institute of Sport will not hinge solely on the role that sportscotland will play in the Commonwealth games? Sportscotland's primary purpose is to build up community sport, while the Scottish Institute of Sport's purpose is to protect elite athletes. Both objectives should be safeguarded. We would safeguard them better where the expertise has been accumulated—in Edinburgh—but I will not argue about that if the First Minister assures me that the percentage split for the cost of providing the diving facility at the Royal Commonwealth pool will be fair and certainly not detrimental to the City of Edinburgh Council, which, as I am sure he knows, has a great deal of manoeuvring to do to cope with the change at Meadowbank.  I make a direct plea to the First Minister not to listen to all the siren voices that say that simply having the games will inspire young Scots to become physically active. If that were the case, obese young Scots and young Europeans of other nationalities would not be wearing Ronaldo and Ronaldinho strips. We need good coaching and good local facilities to get people into a healthy lifestyle.

Will the member take an intervention?

"Este tratado? Nada mau ... para Sócrates!" I apologise for not using one of the Parliament's normal languages. I was in a Portuguese bar when that was said to me. A very understanding Portuguese gentleman and I were watching the Portuguese Prime Minister being interviewed on television in a way that Gordon Brown has not been interviewed on television here. The Portuguese Prime Minister was having to answer some very hard questions. Portugal is a country that, like Ireland, embraced the European Union but has found, since the EU's expansion, that it is perhaps not all a bed of roses for the country's economic development. Many of the factories that took advantage of Portuguese membership of the EU have now gone to the newer members of the EU, and there is very bad unemployment in Portugal. The Portuguese gentleman, of short acquaintance, explained to me that there would be  plenty work in the new European Union "para Sócrates"—for the Prime Minister and his like; for the grandes senhores—because plenty more bureaucrats would be needed in Europe. His comment made me think about what is in it for us. That is why I was interested to hear what Liam McArthur said about energy. I have been concerned that control over energy policy will move to Brussels and away from London—further away from us. I can see strategic reasons for that. We know that Russia is prepared to use oil as an economic and political weapon. We can see the temptation for Europe to ensure that it has the same level of control over the supply of energy and the concentration of investment in different forms of energy. I would like Scotland to be represented in the international forum that takes that decision. We have spoken a great deal about fishing, and I will not even attempt to talk about fish—I like mine with black pepper and a twist of lemon. We have not got down to the level at which most folk understand fish and fishing. I will say no more about it, however, other than that I am glad that the SNP has—I think—now widened its reasons to be a little more critically analytical of the new treaty when it is finally published. There is more in the treaty that we should be concerned about than fishing. We should be concerned about what Michael Connarty said, having examined the claims that were made by Gordon Brown, about the possibility of rubbing out the red lines that have been drawn in fields such as legal affairs through application to the European Court of Justice. I am also concerned about what Chris Harvie said: he told us that there is a future for us in Europe, and he mentioned all sorts of academic co-operation. I am reminded that, without the sort of status that independent representation would give us, that is a bit like the discussion at Yalta after the war, when Stalin asked, "And how many battalions does the Pope have?" People thought that the Pope and the Catholic Church would be influential in the post-war settlement, but in fact they did not have power; rather, they had influence. I would prefer us to have power.

His influence was immense, because he came straight from Poland and he was in tune with the times. He did not have to push water uphill, which we would have to. I think that there is a difference, with all due respect. I am much more inclined to listen to Valéry Giscard d'Estaing and to Margot Wallström. They  have explained that there are two types of player in Europe: the big players and the small players. We will not even be a small player; we will be the small cousin of a smaller player. I do not see how we can possibly venture into the new Europe without taking people with us and having people understand. That is where the referendum comes in. Portugal, Ireland, the Netherlands, France and other mainly pro-European countries still want to hold referenda. That way, we spread information and people have to analyse things and look at them honestly and openly. I do not know why Gordon Brown does not want to hold a referendum. Does he think that he would lose it, because there is a fear in England that sovereignty would be lost? That is probably the answer. We should have a discussion on whether sovereignty would be lost, bearing in mind what Michael Connarty's European Scrutiny Committee has come up with. I will not take up my full time. I am happy to have been able to contribute to the debate, and I am glad that it was not too much about fishing.

Will the member give way?

Could there be a parallel between energy policy and the steel policy—the member might be too young to remember it, but I do—whereby a quota was allocated from Brussels? Could exploitation rates and recovery be set in Brussels rather than in London, as currently happens?

Can the member give an example of how we benefited from being part of a strong UK delegation when the matter under discussion was the banning of British beef, given that in Scotland we did not have any of the infection concerned?

Does size matter in Europe? That question might sound facetious, but I am interested in whether, in contributing to a better Europe, this Government believes that there is no end to the size of Europe. Is there a limit to the number of countries that could join the European Union?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

If the five mini debates were to be introduced into the process, would they be part of the budget process or simply an addition to the information that we can all draw on? If they were part of the budget process, they could be voted on and the Government could lose its budget. Is that correct or incorrect?

Further to the question of excessive water throughout the Parliament, I suggest that it is time to get rid of the three wee ponds in front of the Parliament, which are things of neither beauty nor utility. It is reasonable that we should keep the big ponds in the area where people exercise their dogs at the weekend, but I can see no continuing reason for the three wee ponds.

I may be wrong, Presiding Officer, but I think that that was a challenge to the chair from the First Minister. On decluttering bureaucracy in Scotland, the First Minister has the support of most people in the chamber, and we hope that it can be done sensibly. I was happy to hear him say, honestly, that he was not certain whether much money would be saved. I ask him to look at efficiency before everything else. If he does that, he will come to the same conclusion that I have reached, after having watched sportscotland get on top of its job. If he agrees that sportscotland should be wound up, does he realise that 32 local authorities and 54 sports governing bodies will have to do the job that sportscotland currently does in distributing lottery funds? That would not be decluttering the landscape.

I would like to ask a question before the minister moves away from the point that he is making. He said that the Government will not shy away from taking difficult actions in cases where a family crisis is severe. Presumably, that means removing the child from the family and providing foster care. Does the Government have a programme to extend training for foster carers? How big a part is played by foster carers in the grand strategy?

I congratulate the cabinet secretary on tackling the right to buy; however, I remind her that the objection to the right to buy was that the councils were unable to replace lost stock. I fear that much of what is in the consultation paper could lead to that mistake being made again. Unlike Michael Matheson, I have great suspicions about the single survey. Has the minister looked at what is happening to the single survey procedure in England? It appears to be discredited. Also, under the heading of "Direct Support for Home Ownership", reference is made in the consultation document to the Government working with lenders to develop "mortgage related products". What will those products be? Will their availability be selective or will they be a right for any category of buyer? Also, will she consider—

I will be brief. Will the minister consider suggesting to councils that they put their houses in trust so that, in the future, it will be much more difficult to take them out of council ownership? That would help if we are trying to keep a balanced supply of all different types of housing.

Should we infer from the tenor of the cabinet secretary's comments that the Government wants the whole Parliament to urge the Chancellor of the Exchequer to increase the tax on alcohol?

I sincerely hope that the paper will not be of interest only to David Whitton's constituents, although I am sure that they are lovely people. In Edinburgh 25,000 of my constituents are waiting on the council housing list. In Edinburgh, we are very good at building houses, but will the Government make it easier for the City of Edinburgh Council to build council houses, as Midlothian Council is doing? Will the Government explain to Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling that they must give the same opportunity to the City of Edinburgh Council that they have given to Midlothian Council, by cancelling the council housing debt that Edinburgh still carries because tenants voted against stock transfer?

Does the member know whether West Lothian is an exception in its ability to recruit foster carers? I had a conversation—coincidentally—with a foster carer a couple of days ago. Her experience is that a smaller number of people are coming forward because of the very difficulties to which the member refers.

First, I thank the minister for giving us prior sight of her statement, in which, in the section entitled "18-week Whole Journey Guarantee", she says: "practically all patients requiring to see a consultant ... following referral ... now receive an appointment well within the 18 week target." Is NHS Lothian an exception to that? I have two  letters, one from the Western general hospital and the other from the Edinburgh royal infirmary, that concern two different departments—dermatology and gastroenterology. The common factor in both is that the waiting time is stated as 26 weeks. Secondly, why is there a difference with regard to diagnostic tests? Immediately after the paragraph that I have quoted, the minister seems to suggest that there is a bit of an opt-out in that respect. Finally, as Ian McKee pointed out, does the minister expect there to be a requirement for a massive increase in the number of staff to meet the 18-week waiting time target by 2011?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not wish to challenge the chair but, in such a debate, which concerns Parliament and not merely one party—or even all the parties—and in which we are considering the effect on Parliament's composition of how the elections were conducted, we should have found time to hear an independent voice. Parliament's founders meant for more independent voices to be heard. It is arguable that the conduct of the election and the electoral procedure militated against that.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for not having been able to give prior notice of this point of order, but I did not know that the business had been changed. Will we have a statement on the First Minister's American visit and, if so, when?

I suggest to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning that, as well as being mindful of the number of graduates that we have, and of their falling numbers, she ought to be mindful of the fact that one in five adult Scots is identified as falling below acceptable standards in literacy and numeracy. The big plus programme, which is running at the moment, is due to come to an end next year, so I seek the cabinet secretary's assurance that we will get a hard-edged report that will identify the expected outcomes, and that even if the programme has fallen short in the seven years of its existence, its essence of ensuring that we lower that 20 per cent figure, and the funding for it, are untouched.

Parliament knows that I am a stickler for the rules and regulations of the chamber. Therefore, I hope that the minister will take it in good part when I say that it was not exactly sensible or diplomatic to conduct business in this way. Having said that, I doubt that any member will vote against a measure that will definitely test the nutritional road that we should be on with regard to future Scots. Let me cut to the chase and ask the minister a question that I would have asked had we been able to debate the matter in the chamber. Has he thought of extending the parameters of the pilot scheme to include the supermarkets and shops where the children's parents buy their food? Although a pilot scheme for school meals is well intentioned and will provide excellent research material, it would be sensible to try to rope in the  real villains of the piece—the people who make a huge profit out of selling bad food—and get them on board. I wonder whether that has been attempted. Could it be attempted in any of the local authority areas that have been selected for the pilot scheme? Having said that, I wish the pilot scheme all the best.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I refer to the same motion as Robert Brown. Is it not the case that, under standing orders, a majority vote determines the matter that is under debate?

Will the member give way?

The cabinet secretary can talk about me later. He and Christine Grahame have referred to the question of risk. Who picked up the insurance tab for the Heathrow job?

I hesitate to follow such an expert. I am a mere politician, so I will pose some questions that I feel may have gone unanswered, even though the Government's case has probably been demolished by the excellent speeches from Iain Gray, Tavish Scott and Margaret Smith. I am not sure about the minister's statement that BAA does not want control of a tunnel. I can understand that point, but did BAA say that it thought that the tunnel was a non-starter? Can we have a straight answer to that when the minister sums up?  The minister also said that the EARL project is not safe. If he was referring to its financial management, I can understand that, although—as other members have said—the Government was charged with ensuring that the project was robust and safe. Is it quite impossible for the Government to have done that in the time in hand? If so, the Government should have asked for more time, which I am sure Parliament would have provided. If the project is not safe in an engineering sense, why is it that other people have managed to construct tunnels under other airports? Shirley-Anne Somerville said that no other city has tunnelled under its airport, but I think that Texas and Shanghai, for example, have done exactly that. Of course, I may be wrong about that. As Mary Mulligan mentioned, we are also supposed to be considering another tunnel, which would be under the Forth. That is supposed to be out to consultation. Is that a big kid-on? Have we already made the decision? We have heard it said in the chamber that we have neither the engineering ability and skill nor the ability to organise the governance for a project that would allow for such risk. There is risk in any big project, but there is definitely risk in giving the outside world the impression that we are just too wee and too scared to take anything on. I am happy to note that George Foulkes is becoming as nationalist as I am. In his analysis, if they can do it, so can we, and if it is good enough for them, it is good enough for us. I would hate to give the impression that we are backing away from EARL because of the risk. My friend Christine Grahame and I agree on many things, but we disagree on EARL. She kept on referring to the limited budget. Usually, like me, she is a woman who does not recognise barriers. If the price of oil is approaching $200 a barrel, why on earth should the Parliament be concerned about a limited budget for something that is integral to the development of the Scottish economy? When Charlie Gordon and I debated the matter previously, we agreed that windfall taxation had been extracted from companies that operate in the North Sea. Why did we not put in a bid for some of that money, saying, "We will invest it in this project." That is what we do with windfall taxation—we invest it in something that we need and something that we really want. We do not talk about limited budgets.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When the guidance has been reviewed, will there be any sanctions? If so, will there be a prescribed list of sanctions or will any sanction be yours to determine?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will pursue the write-off of Edinburgh's housing debt. (S3O-707)

I was glad to hear the second part of the answer; at first, I thought we were getting only his master's voice. Members know well that I have pursued the issue of housing debt for some time, given the unfairness that is being visited on Edinburgh and other places. I will therefore not rehearse the story, other than to say that I know of other members who wish to add their plea to mine to step up pressure on the Treasury. The situation is massively unfair. In Edinburgh's case, it militates against the proper development of the city.

Will Mary Scanlon give way?

I make this appeal to the member: please do not underestimate the understanding that exists among those of us who do not have an immediate interest in the problem.  We know that the previous Government did not do everything that it should have done and that lots of mistakes were made. However, before I vote tonight, I want to know the difference between the Government's proposal and the Labour amendment—I think that I can understand the Liberal Democrat position. I want to know the practical difference between what Labour will do and what the Government will do.

Will the member give way?

I have two specific questions about the stock transfer. First, does the cabinet secretary have a number for the small-scale transfers that she expects? Secondly, will the business case alone determine which ones she will accept?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I would be obliged if you would clarify that after the bureau has reached a decision—to which, as I recall, a member of the bureau can record dissent—it is open to any member to challenge it or to seek more information on it when the matter comes to Parliament.

Does the shadow minister accept that there are a great number of activists and lawyers in Europe who believe that every one of those triple locks can be challenged under European legislation?

Quelle surprise! I pay tribute to Gil Paterson's speech, which was on the money. It was also full of humanity and understanding of the place of people in the great European Union. I agree with Keith Brown that we must work as team Scotland in Europe because, as Gil Paterson rightly said, an awful lot of Europeans do not have a clue about who or where we are. At yesterday's meeting of the European and External Relations Committee, a couple of members said what a terrific reputation Scotland has in Europe. Well, it is better now after James McFadden's goal. He probably did a great deal more than many of the lobbyists have done over the years. That indicates part of the answer to George Foulkes's question about whether we can imagine Spain saying yes to Scottish independence. I seem to remember Canon Wright asking a similar sort of question about what would happen if England said no. We decided that it did not really matter a hoot if England said no if we said yes. If the intention is clear, we will make it, but we will have to get deep down and dirty, and get into realpolitik, with other European nations—I would welcome that. A word has come up in this debate that we did not hear at all at yesterday's European and External Relations Committee meeting—subsidiarity. That was supposed to be the essence of the European Union. All decisions were to be taken at national or local level, and only those that could not be taken there would be taken at European level. That position is somewhat at odds with the comment of Guy Verhofstadt, the Belgian Prime Minister, that the European Union has acquired all the instruments of a federal state and that the capstone is the constitutional treaty. Nicolas Sarkozy, the new French President, said that the project of the founding fathers is complete and that the economic union is becoming a political union. Romano Prodi himself said that the constitution represents a big change from the basic concept of nation states and that it has changed centuries of history. While we sit here talking to ourselves about what we think about Europe, they are in Europe and running it. I would like to put their ideas and ours to the test, which is why Ming Campbell is right: why not have a contemporary referendum? When the Berlin wall came down, it changed the European Union's potential and its parameters, but we have never properly talked about that. I would be willing to do that. Indeed, I would welcome that discussion. We would then see  whether the reform treaty offers Scotland a distinctive place or whether we should oppose the treaty.

I will answer Helen Eadie, because her question went right to the heart of the matter. We do not need to go to Europe to decide what to do about children's homes—

Communities in Europe differ hugely in their social and cultural history and contemporary life. They should determine such issues for themselves. That takes us right to the heart of the matter, and it is why I am uncomfortable about the step towards political union that the leaders of Europe have proposed, and why I would welcome a referendum. I do not know why the Scottish National Party is running scared on the issue.

rose—

I want to complete the history lesson. I campaigned on the slogan "No voice, no entry" not because I was against what has become the European Union, but because I did not think that George Foulkes had all the answers.

Will the member give way?

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for giving way and welcome him to the Labour front bench in his new role. Does he think that Jean- Claude Juncker, the Prime Minister of Luxembourg, is telling lies—or does he just have it wrong—when he says: "Britain is different. Of course there will be transfers of sovereignty. But would I be intelligent to draw the attention of public opinion to this fact"?

The minister and I covered some of this ground yesterday. Does she understand my concern that it is a poor bargain to trade a veto, which finishes a matter once and for all, for her assurance that  the system is likely to work well? The two things cannot be equated legally, and it is an extension of the law.

I thank the Lord Advocate for her detailed and clear statement. Lord Clarke in his opinion stated: "There was no forensic evidence linking the accused with acts of violence said to have been the cause of death. There was no evidence that the accused had been the actor in the case of the rape or murder of either of the girls." Given that, can the Lord Advocate explain why DNA from skin that was present in the centre of the knot in one of the ligatures that were the murder weapons that killed Christine Eadie and Helen Scott was not produced in evidence? Why was the case not prosecuted by the Solicitor General, given its complexity and the fact that it was prepared during his time as procurator fiscal in the Lothians, which meant that he had great knowledge of all the evidence?

I wonder whether the First Minister will take advice from an independent MSP. We can expect Labour members to attack everything that his Government says in policy terms. However, the future leader of the Labour Party got it right when she said that the Government should not stick itself in a corner on class sizes, but should consider areas of deprivation, in which pupils need to be in classes that are as small as possible, which might come out as being less than 18. However, in other areas, particularly Edinburgh, I know well that if the Government told parents that their children would have to be moved from popular schools because there were to be only 18 pupils in certain classes, they would sincerely disagree with that, and they would be right to do so.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is absolutely true that the whole chamber agreed to today's order of business, but it is also true that any member is entitled to express an opinion on it.

I ask the First Minister for a reply to the questions that I posed to his deputy yesterday, but which she forgot—by accident, I am sure—to answer. Edinburgh's situation in relation to the schools programme points to the unsatisfactory nature of the funding stream for the capital city of Scotland, which provides the services that we all expect for the rest of the country. Will the First Minister give me an undertaking that he will give serious consideration to the introduction of capital city funding? When he next meets the Prime Minister, will he tell him that it is just unfair that Edinburgh tenants, who chose to stay with the council rather than transfer their stock, have a burden of debt that Glasgow tenants no longer have?

My remarks will pertain mainly to the strategic spending review but, first, I assure the First Minister and his deputy that some of us think it no bad thing to feel the quality, not the width, of bills.  They should also not take too much to heart what Pauline McNeill said about poverty, as that is the legacy of the union, not of a national Parliament in Scotland. The First Minister said earlier that Scotland needs flexibility, not rigid conventions. I could not agree more. I therefore urge the Government to depart from the rigid formula for funding local government, accepting that Edinburgh has a unique role that the Government should recognise by introducing a capital city funding stream. That could be done through the strategic spending review. Such an initiative should attract the Labour party's support, given the fact that, during the past week, the city's need to provide affordable family housing to ensure that Edinburgh is a good place to grow up and go to school has been highlighted. The occupancy rate of schools in Edinburgh is inextricably linked to the fact that many young families cannot afford to live in the city and are living outwith its boundaries. The Government must consider planning, housing and education in the one way. If it does that, it will recognise the need to fund the city for providing those services to the degree that is expected of it while it also carries the burden of promoting and marketing Scotland more than any other single area. Edinburgh is also, perhaps, the main driver for the Scottish economy. While we are talking about the Scottish economy and money, I should say that I voted for the trams, which are linked to the housing development on the waterfront and the new development that is being planned for Leith, and that I am concerned that the money for phases 2 and 3, which make complete sense of the trams project, might not be found. I urge the Government, now that it is committed to supporting the trams project, to look at the full picture and the funding for phases 2 and 3. Colleagues in the Labour Party mentioned council housing. I noticed that no one in the Labour Party or in the SNP said that they are willing to go to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who is an Edinburgh MP, and the Prime Minister to emphasise how Edinburgh tenants have been given a raw deal. They voted against stock transfer and there should be advocacy on their behalf so that they are treated equally with the tenants who voted for it. If that burden were removed from the City of Edinburgh Council's debt, I doubt that we would see deficits of £9 million or £14 million. The First Minister skated over the issue of the European Union. Will he demand that there be a referendum now, before we are landed with a constitution that gives European institutions governance over our energy sources? It is  important that we hear what the Government has to say about that. Finally, I suggest to the First Minister that instead of asking for oil revenues—he will not get them right off—he should detail the cost of some of the capital projects and investment needed for Scotland, set that against the extra windfall revenues that have gone to the chancellor, and ask for it to be reinvested in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I prefer to sit in the cheap seats, but I believe that from your elevated seat you are responsible for good conduct and the effective passage of business in the chamber. It has long been my belief that we should have proper microphones in here. As you are responsible for the effective conduct of business, I ask that, during the summer recess, you undertake to investigate better miking for the chamber. No one could hear a word that any of us up here was saying earlier. [ Interruption. ] I have been rudely interrupted by Mr Ewing, but it is okay, Presiding Officer—you do not need to discipline him.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that it would be only fair that any additional costs that might be incurred by a delay in either project until autumn should be borne by the Executive?

I am sure that the member will not want to give the impression that she is  unmindful of those people who work in the public sector, in many cases earning public sector low wages, who try to live in Edinburgh but find that increasingly difficult and without whom this would be much less of a city.

I congratulate Willie Coffey on his maiden speech; I think that he will fit in very well here. I agree with Hugh O'Donnell's concluding remarks that tenants should be consulted—they are the one group that we had not heard about. I was the director of Shelter about 30 years ago. When the Conservatives introduced the right to buy, we warned them that, 25 or 30 years down the road, we would have a housing crisis in Scotland. It gives me no pleasure to say that we were right. The Conservatives, perhaps more than most, have a duty to help the Government put things right. The right to buy should be suspended in areas such as Edinburgh where it is perfectly obvious that the loss of housing stock cannot be made up in the required time. We should consider that suspension not as a national measure, but a local one, because the situation in other areas is different. However, I speak for Edinburgh and it would be a good idea to suspend the right to buy there for some time. As Malcolm Chisholm said, people cannot afford to live in Edinburgh—the sort of people we need if the city is to remain vibrant and feasible. They are not poor people—they are holding down well-paid jobs—but they cannot afford to buy houses, given that the average house price in Edinburgh is £220,000, which is eight times the average annual salary. Of the 10,400 new homes built in the city since 2001, only 18 were affordable homes. We need 12,000 affordable homes to be built over 10 years if we are to keep the people I referred to living in the city. The tenants in Edinburgh, who are the sort of people I am concerned about, used their democratic right to vote against the stock transfer. I will not go into the reasons, but simply acknowledge that they did so as intelligent people who considered what had happened with stock transfer elsewhere and made their decision. The debt should be written off for them, as it was written off for the people in other local authorities who voted for stock transfer. I appreciate that the issue concerns lots of other housing authorities too, but the minister should make representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer—whoever that is after next week—that we should be fair and even-handed in our treatment of tenants. I will finish with another plea for capital city funding. Edinburgh gets much less money from the Executive for public investment in affordable  houses and other things than does any other place in Scotland. If we want a capital city that will showcase the country and if we acknowledge the part that Edinburgh plays in the economy of the country, we need capital city funding.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With the greatest respect, I ask that members address one another through the chair.

Does the minister agree that co-operation with the United Kingdom Government on measures to tackle  climate change is almost a template for the way in which a southern Parliament would co-operate sensibly with any Government in London on obviously pan-national matters? If he agrees with that proposition, does he also agree that it would be sensible to include the Republic of Ireland? It would be daft to have carbon emissions trading with Belfast but not with Dublin. Will the cabinet secretary incorporate energy efficiency standards in public buildings? If so, I presume he will start with the directive that should have been in effect for the Parliament building from 6 January last year.

I ask the minister whether the issue of energy appears anywhere in the draft treaty that is being prepared. If it does appear, will she promise the chamber that she will vote against any European competency over energy policy? Will she undertake to find out the will of the Parliament before she enters further discussions?

How does the First Minister plan to approach the Prime Minister to discover what was decided in Europe without a by-your-leave or information being sought from this Parliament or the Northern Ireland Assembly? From reading the Scotland Act 1998, I think that we should have been consulted.

Do those figures refer to Mr Swinney's proposals or to a general example of a local income tax?

rose—

I have another question. Keith Brown said that 60 to 70 per cent of people would benefit from the Executive's proposals. First, what if ministers are wrong? Secondly, what happens to the 30 per cent? By how much would they lose?

Will Robert Brown give way?

Would that figure apply to what is proposed for Scotland, which would not be a local income tax and would miss out much of the local administration?

I shall endeavour to be brief, Presiding Officer. I have to tell members that Robin Harper's land value tax proposal is winning me over. However, I accept what he said, which is that this will not be the last time that we hear of his proposal in the chamber; I imagine that debate on it will be a long haul. The choice that I face today is whether to  vote for a local income tax that is not local, or for a reformed council tax that is not a reform. I have not come to this question late in the day. I wrote to Alex Salmond during the election campaign and asked him about the Scottish National Party's policy on the replacement of the council tax, but he has not phoned and he has not written. I will, therefore, put my questions to John Swinney. The SNP's proposed 3p tax rate would be set nationally and, according to the SNP's March statement, it would be collected through HM Revenue and Customs at Westminster. Does Mr Swinney have Westminster agreement on that? That is a straightforward question. If money is to be allocated to a council according to the income that is raised from income tax payers in the council's area, what would be the financial position of those Scottish councils that have a low income-tax base because of the level of poverty in their areas? How would that problem be tackled? Can John Swinney provide examples of the expected tax yield from Edinburgh, for example, compared with the Western Isles or the Vale of Leven? That would give us a parameter for comparing benefits for different taxpayers. How would a dispute be resolved between a council and HM Revenue and Customs about the accuracy of the figure for the amount of local income tax to be raised in a local authority area, given that employers hold the information on the place of abode of the LIT payers? I foresee a great number of practical problems in what John Swinney is attempting to do, because he is attempting to make a silk purse out of a sow's ear. Without having at his disposal the full panoply of fiscal measures that could be applied by any Government in Scotland, he cannot successfully bolt on this brave attempt to bring in a fairer system of paying for council services. It is important that we have straight answers to straight questions. Will Mr Swinney expect employers, particularly small business employers, to carry the additional administration costs for the proposed local income tax? Employers, not HM Revenue and Customs, are the actual gatherers of PAYE tax. That is another of the questions that I asked of Alex Salmond and which I now put to John Swinney and his team. I regret that I cannot enthusiastically support the introduction of a local income tax, because, as I said, I do not believe that the proposed scheme is a local income tax. My vote will depend on whether I believe the putative payer of the local income tax will benefit. Has an estimate been made of the expected revenue? How would that revenue be redistributed? I think that that is the clincher.  The promise is that the council tax will be frozen for two years. What would happen if HM Revenue and Customs took longer than two years to work out a system for the proposed local income tax? The period of two years seems rather prescriptive given the history of HM Revenue and Customs, for example its handling of the tax credit system. I apologise, Presiding Officer, for only asking questions, but time is short.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that the issue is facilities rather than nationality? The best Scottish sprinters go where the best international sprinting coaches are, which is likely to be America. That is why Liz McColgan went to America. I am rather shocked by how narrow the debate is and by its failure to take account of the athletes and the facilities. The issue has nothing to do with nationality.

Does the minister agree that the notion of national teams competing at the Olympic games is somewhat old fashioned, given the number of international athletes who pick and choose which nationality they are going to adopt in order to get to the Olympic games?

I apologise for being late—I had to go back home this morning. The member referred to the athletes. Although he is a lot younger than I am, does he recall that most Scots who have won Olympic medals have sought to distinguish themselves in some way as Scots? For example, Bobby McGregor wore a tartan towel, and Ian Black and Elenor Gordon also distinguished themselves as Scottish. Does that not indicate something?

I agree entirely with the line that the member is taking. However, instead of getting together a set of statistics over which will we will argue, it would be quicker to get recordings of teachers' stress lines. A record of what teachers feel and know about pupils' attacks on them could be available from the Educational Institute of Scotland or the other unions.

How long do I have, Presiding Officer?

That is what I thought. I urge on the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning the wisdom of not believing that, simply by reducing class sizes to 18, all will be well. A number of members have said that the Government is right to aim for a maximum of 18 pupils in primary 1 classes, but that elsewhere we need a much more sophisticated and subtle solution. I believe that the solution should also be more localised. I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary did not mention children with special needs; a number of other members talked about it, so I will not. I will, however, mention the fact that there was not a single reference to specialist physical education teachers. In this chamber, we have heard ad nauseam that we will not have a smarter Scotland unless we have a healthier and stronger Scotland. We therefore need PE specialists, who also ensure better academic performance. I will repeat a wee story to the members who believe that simply reducing class sizes will produce a better academic performance. In China, it is not unknown for classes of 100 to sit and learn maths, because China has a different attitude and different discipline. It is wrong to imagine that there is a panacea and that by reducing class sizes we will pass China in the OECD attainment levels in mathematics. I also refer the cabinet secretary to the four-year and one-year courses for teachers that were mentioned, and the situation of PE teachers especially. There has come to my notice some of the disquiet that is felt in staffrooms up and down the country because of the disparity in content between PE courses for graduates and the full four-year PE courses. I ask her to pay attention to that. I would also like a policy on how parents will be integrated into encouragement of their children and support for teachers and schools. Will that be delivered through parenting classes or community education? I would like to hear much more on that. I would also like to know whether the welcome extra money that the cabinet secretary has released will be strings-free. Will local authorities determine the priorities in their areas and allocate resources accordingly?  I will finish on a point that disturbed me. David Whitton—a former colleague of mine—seems to think that science teachers might be paid more money just because they learn how to use a Bunsen burner. I think not. If science teachers are so important in ensuring a smarter Scotland that we give them more money for it, what are we going to do about PE teachers? I presume that they will get even more because children have to be healthy before we can let them loose with Bunsen burners. A number of things have been said in the debate that some members might live to regret, but I have found it extremely interesting. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on her first appearance with a statement, but I hope that the next one will be full of detail.

Will the member give way?

Perhaps the member will not wish to hear what I say. Although no supporter of the previous Administration in all aspects of its education policy, I think that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development reports rather contradict what the member said, which was that there was no improvement in attainment standards in Scottish education. It is better to start from where we are than from where we were perhaps 20 years ago.

Will the Opposition be flexible and support the idea that headteachers should work with local authorities to determine the best mix of class sizes for the area? As we heard, some areas in Scotland have growing populations, although not many. Most areas have declining populations. There are different remedies for different areas. Does the Opposition agree that local authorities should be allowed to play a much bigger part?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for making this point, but since George Foulkes has raised the issue of First Ministers taking executive decisions, I would like to know whether the Parliament could also be consulted by the Prime Minister before he signs up to a European constitution by any other name.

Did the minister discuss the question of the complaint of racism made by Spartans Football Club against another local player or did he discuss its footballing academy? I am just interested.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. If Parliament believes the matter to be of paramount importance to the integrity of Scots law—apart from anything else—would it be in order for you to accept a motion  without notice that the whole Parliament deprecates the action of the Prime Minister in signing the memorandum with the Libyan leader without having regard to co-operation on legal proceedings, which is outlined at point D3.13 of the memorandum of understanding with this Parliament?

I thank the minister for her response, and I hope that this will be the first of many pleasant exchanges. Although I appreciate that the Scottish National Party is committed to phasing out these charges, what is its timescale for doing so? I also make a special plea that, when the matter is reviewed, particular attention be paid to the position of people with long-term ailments. Asthma sufferers, for example, have to pay over the long term for essential medication and medicinal equipment. Indeed, I could go through a full list of similar examples with which the minister is no doubt familiar.

Allied to general practitioners' contract, wages and conditions is the out-of-hours service. Although I agree that the review should be of general practitioners first and foremost, does the First Minister agree that it would not be a comprehensive review of primary care services unless it included an up-to-date review of the cost- effectiveness of and patient satisfaction with the helpline?

Skelp them.

I do not need to ask my question because, happily, the minister has already answered it.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hesitate to pursue this point but I imagine that, given that the Parliament is so finely balanced, it will be revisited in future. We need to know exactly where we stand and which resolutions are or are not binding. If I inadvertently gave the impression that Donald Dewar said that none was binding, I apologise. The First Minister referred to what he said was a quotation from the late First Minister. I have before me a copy of that very quotation. Donald Dewar said: "The position is simply that this Parliament is master at the end of the day, but that not every motion that is passed by this Parliament is binding upon the Executive."— [ Official Report , 16 September 1999; Vol 2, c 555.]  He then went on to indicate how the Parliament could assert its supremacy. With the greatest of respect, Presiding Officer, I think that we could still  do with some clarification of the matter.

Listening to the member talk about what the SNP believed and what it did not believe, I am terribly confused. I have in front of me a statement on the tram project by Kenny MacAskill, in which he says: "It will be costly and it will take time. However this is a network not just for a few years but for many generations to come. It will be the basis upon which Edinburgh can grow and flourish." Mr MacAskill says that it is essential that we have trams. I wonder whether the SNP mentioned that.

Will the member give way?

I want to ask a question that arises from what the minister said in response to Marilyn Livingstone's question. Can we take it that the commitment to ditch or trash the Edinburgh trams, which was made during the election campaign, was made in an arbitrary fashion without the information that the minister now needs before he can take a decision?

Will the minister consider establishing lines of communication with the bodies in the European Union that are presently considering the formation of a European energy policy? Much of the robust promotion of his vision could be undermined unless we have a relationship with the policy-making bodies that is different to the relationship that we had with the fisheries bodies, for example.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I did not want to interrupt the first First Minister's questions, but the First Minister did invoke the will of Parliament in two different respects. I would like from you, if possible, a definitive ruling on the rule of Parliament and how it refers to any actions that are undertaken by the Executive, should the Executive disagree with the expressed will of  Parliament. I do not think that it is correct to say that the late Donald Dewar set that in stone.

Given the narrowness of the Government's majority, I wonder whether—in  referring to the contract made with the voters prior to an election—the Opposition feels that it, too, has a duty and responsibility to try to enact its programme for government.

Does the member accept that many of the efficiencies that he mentions were brought about because of the lower wages that were paid to the people, such as hospital cleaners, who moved from the public sector into the private sector?

We left. [ Laughter. ]

Before I start, I should tell the shadow minister that I love "The Very Hungry Caterpillar". The minister outlined his Government's ideas for its smooth running, but things cannot run smoothly if we do not have an effective Parliament that is infused with good will. We have just come through a bruising, sometimes bitter and constantly divisive election campaign. Of course, that is how it is in democratic politics: groups of people held together by shared ideologies—or more limited  objectives—personal loyalties, self-interest, history and comradeship all compete for the right to govern their fellow citizens. However, in Scotland our political contests contain an additional element that can overshadow and poison debate on the policies and issues that quite properly distinguish one political party from another. The national question—or what is known as the constitutional or independence question—bedevils every election fought in Scotland. At a time of great change in the global economy, in security, in the environment and in the balance of power, that unresolved question can divert our energies and focus from those 21 st century facts of life that we can deal with only if our society is united. How do we in this Parliament resolve that question—or, if I can put it more accurately, how do we enable our fellow citizens to do so? It will not go away, because it is too deeply embedded in our politics and attitudes, nor will a resolution be arrived at unless the issue ceases to be the prerogative of one party and all Scots are empowered to decide the issue by knowledge rather than mythology and by opinion formulated by facts rather than bile or vested interest. What part should be played by this Parliament—the forum of the nation? Cannot this institution take responsibility for however Scots wish its powers to be developed? The parties elected here have a duty to govern according to law and to scrutinise the policies and actions of Government. This Parliament has the function of providing the means for that to take place. To bring about as good as possible a programme of governance, would we not be assisted by having the national question addressed by a special committee or unit of the Parliament charged with investigating, analysing and then publicising for public information the powers and relationships of this Parliament, drawing on the experience of the last two sessions and this third one? We all know of the confusion among our constituents on the powers of, and therefore the responsibilities of and possible outcome of actions undertaken by, the Parliament and its Governments. Opinion polls usually show a clear majority of those polled to be in favour of more powers being vested in this Parliament. Even among MSPs on the other side of the constitutional divide from myself, there is acknowledgement of the need to enhance some powers, acquire some others and re-examine the terms of the memorandum on co-operation and understanding that we have with Westminster. It is fair to say that it has fallen into disrepair, and we are not exploiting the potential.  Had parties other than the Scottish National Party become the Government, it might have proved easier for all opinions represented here to act on those democratic and opportunity deficits. The hitherto expected response to initiatives such as I suggest, were they to be proposed by the SNP, would have been outright rejection by the unionists on the grounds that the intention would be to break up the UK and that voters do not want that, but voters in general have only a sketchy knowledge of the respective implications of the Parliament exercising sovereign or devolved powers. However, it is no longer the function of the SNP, now that it is in government, to concentrate on a campaign of information and persuasion on the merits of sovereignty. Would that it had done so consistently over the past decade, instead of confusing the issue by substituting a tactic—a referendum—for a policy: the establishment of sovereignty. However, we are where we are, and we must devise a way of focusing on what Annabel Goldie called bread-and-butter issues. We must separate them from consideration of how our present powers are used, whether they help or hinder Scottish Governments to meet the expectations of Scots, what powers if any might be transferred from Westminster, whether our representation in the European Union is satisfactory—particularly with the onset of a new constitution—and whether our relationships with countries outwith the UK and the EU allow us appropriate participation in international activities. Because of the Government's very narrow advantage over the main Opposition party, the Parliament will find it difficult to agree and to agree to differ on specific policies, never mind to agree on how best to develop the effectiveness of Parliament's powers, yet that is what we must do to keep faith with our electors. I propose that an ad-hoc research and development, non-policy-making unit of the Parliament be established to provide researched information on the powers and operation of the Parliament. That might lead to another constitutional convention, or it might not, but it is certainly preferable to having our every exchange of views in this chamber permeated and undermined by attacks on and defence of a referendum that is highly unlikely ever to take place on constitutional choices that are unresearched, underpublicised and misunderstood by many—perhaps most—of our fellow citizens. I therefore appeal to the minister to consider my proposal.

Local decision making by local people presumably includes local councils. Does that mean we are getting the trams in Edinburgh?

I congratulate the First Minister on almost conquering the poor-quality microphones in the chamber. The couple of questions that I have are meant to be helpful. Margaret Smith anticipated some of them, but I listened carefully to his answers. I take it that he did not just forget to mention the Forth crossing in his statement, but that his Government is revisiting the pre-election pledge to get rid of EARL and the trams for Edinburgh. That is what I take from his answer but, if I am wrong, perhaps he could enlighten me. Will the First Minister arrange for parliamentary time to be given over to a debate on the re-emergence of an EU constitution under Chancellor Merkel's direction? He was right in saying that the Parliament has an international responsibility and a role to play in Europe. It therefore seems logical that, before the Prime Minister demits office, he  should know our opinion on the EU constitution before he signs up to it without our having been given a chance to say what we think of it.

Will the First Minister give way?

Ah! Thank you.

I do.

The nice one from Tavish Scott.  Amendment S3M-26.2, by agreement, withdrawn.

I rise to support Tavish Scott's amendment S3M-26.1. It is nothing personal against Mr Swinney, although some people think that it could be. I am letting bygones be bygones and am looking forward to the sustainable development of Scotland. I should say to Mr Swinney that, if I get the assurances that I am looking for, my vote could be won. However, that will happen only if Edinburgh gets the fair deal that was asked for yesterday by the Edinburgh business assembly. Part of that fair deal is a tram system, which is an absolute necessity, and the airport link, which should be seen not as an Edinburgh venture but as one that will help to open up the entire Scottish economy. I have written proof of that, should Mr Swinney want to visit me in my eyrie. I am seeking not unfair advantage, but a fair deal for Edinburgh. If I get the assurance that I ask for, Mr Swinney will get my vote, otherwise, he will not.

Presiding Officer, it was not just yesterday that you and I and some other political anoraks sat discussing Scotland's possible futures well into the wee small hours in the Salutation Hotel in Perth. I have never said anything about that night and I do not intend to now, so do not worry. Seen from this distance, our thoughts and ideas appear to have come from another age. Actually, it was another age—it was before Andy Kerr. Although the cleaners were hoovering round us, nobody suggested that you leave the lounge for a cigarette. Our professional paths crossed again about 25 years later, if I recall correctly, when we shared a broadcasting award. I was delving into drugs and you were running the show at a general election. I suspect that that is when you found that you liked being in the chair and steering things—Parliament has benefited from that. We needed a champion and, as others have said, you have filled the position more than admirably, for which you have our sincere thanks. If Dennis Canavan were here, he would have done as I have—he would not have said anything about what happened 30 years ago, either. Like you, he leaves front-line politics today. His contribution, like yours, has enhanced Parliament.  Brian Monteith is another colleague who will leave our happy and eclectic group of independents. As with Dennis Canavan and you, I have known Brian for years. I will miss his free-thinking intellect as much as I will miss the same qualities in Dennis Canavan and you. On this occasion, I can claim to speak for the independents. I have not always done that—I have always said that I was just the one who was pushed to the front while they all talked behind my back. However, I speak for the independents when I thank you and Dee and wish you well in your new ventures, although I fear that those will range wider than visits to garden centres, as I think Dee was hoping. As I am the last member to speak on the motion, I sincerely thank you very much on behalf of the whole Parliament.

I thank you, Presiding Officer, and Ms Robison. I regret to say that I have to leave soon and I apologise to members who will speak after me. I agree with Nicol Stephen that we should look forward, not back, but I ask my colleagues in all parties and none to look beyond the immediate future. During the election, policy differences will be emphasised and exaggerated and intentions will be questioned and misrepresented. It will be all good, clean fun or dirty-dog politicking—take your pick. However, after the parties have done their best to defend their corners, perhaps creating bitterness and division among themselves in doing so, the members elected to the new session of  Parliament must quickly find a collegiate way of working, for the sake of Scotland. The fault line of the constitutional question is already dominating debate, but we must take heed of our fellow Scots' perceptions of what the election is about. If we, as professional politicians, and, in the main, members of political parties, judge that Scots' priorities are different from ours, we must be big enough to admit that and act on the mandates that electors give us, rather than claim to have won the argument on the basis of the votes of fewer than 40 per cent of the people who voted. I think that members will find that there is a general desire on the part of people in Scotland for the Scottish Parliament to be proactive in improving and governing aspects of life in Scotland over which we have no control, such as broadcasting, or over which we have limited decision-making powers, such as drugs policy or the representation of our interests in the European Union. The details are not all that important at this stage; what is important is how we go about meeting the hopes and expectations of Scots, who, according to opinion polls, look to the Parliament for leadership and the strategies and policies that will make Scotland prosper. That is my plea to the members who will return in the next session. I ask them to work on building on the common ground that is occupied by the electorate. This institution is the means by which we can advance the governance of Scotland, enhancing our statutory powers and ensuring stable administration and government while we do so—as our fellow countrymen and women would prefer. There are any number of ways in which we could structure and operate a constitutional unit or convention. The important factor is the open-mindedness of those who take part and their appreciation of the need to reflect the wish among Scots that the Parliament should be the voice of the people, not the voice of any one political party. During the next session of Parliament attempts will be made to introduce a new constitution for the EU, and this morning we learned about fundamental changes that are planned for the Home Office. Such issues will be for the Parliament to resolve and I think that the parties represented here will have much in common, rather than great differences between them. Members know of my commitment to the Scottish Parliament assuming sovereign powers. However, for more than 30 years I have also advocated a new intergovernmental relationship between all the countries and regions of the UK and Ireland. I think that I first wrote about the social union of the UK as the union that would  survive the modernisation of the machinery of government in 1974. I see no reason to change that analysis. The ties that bind us are emotional. The Scottish Parliament offers a way of marrying the refinement of our powers with the maintenance of the social union. Whether Annabel Goldie is right or I am right in interpreting the wishes of Scots, this Parliament—rather than one party—is the institution that must determine the future of Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It has come to my attention that many of us who were in the chamber this afternoon attempted to put on record our feelings of sadness at the departure of some members, regret at the departure of others and—I will say no more. However, I do not think that anything in our standing orders precludes us from having a proper greetin meeting, which would be a much better way of doing it. Presiding Officer, will you look at the standing orders and, if we are allowed to do that, see whether it could be accommodated before the end of the session?

I think that Ken Macintosh forgot to mention the plague of boils that will hit us all if the SNP is successful. I associate myself with the genuine and warm tributes that have been paid to James Douglas-Hamilton. I also notice that Donald Gorrie may well have delivered his last speech to the chamber and that Susan Deacon is about to make her final contribution. I would not want to allow things to pass without expressing my gratitude to Donald Gorrie for the help and support that he has given me and for the patience that he has shown with my impatience. I wish Susan Deacon all the best. I can tell her that it is my experience that, when people take a while out to see and learn a bit more, they are better when they come back. I have probably known James Douglas-Hamilton longer than any other member—we met at a murder trial, but I will not go into that—and I am certain that he will continue to adorn the House of Lords in a way that many of the newer arrivistes might not. To protect the innocent, I will say no more than that.  I almost decided to vote for James Douglas-Hamilton's amendment—not just on sentimental grounds, but because it is well expressed—but I have doubts about the extent of autonomy that we should grant to head teachers. I am not at all certain about where the limit should be set if our local authorities are to provide an organised and orderly system of education. I agree that the Executive deserves perhaps a bronze star. I would not give it a gold star or a silver star—out of principle—but it has done much to improve education. The Executive has tried to identify many areas that should have been priorities. That said, the Executive should not ignore the points that Dave Petrie made. As I have mentioned in the chamber on previous occasions, our universities need to run catch-up classes on basic literacy. That should not be ignored when we are congratulating ourselves on some of the good things that have emanated from the Parliament. An indeterminate thing that has emanated from the Parliament is the emphasis on class sizes. I urge ministers not to get hung up on class sizes any more than they should get hung up on waiting lists. We are dealing with people, and people do not fit lists. In China, maths classes may have 100 children but, because there are 100 motivated sets of parents behind those children, the teacher does not have to cope with the ill-discipline that our teachers face. As I tried to suggest when I asked Fiona Hyslop for more information during her speech, in the more affluent areas, where parents are self-confident and work with teachers, larger classes could easily be accommodated even in subjects for which the teacher must do a lot of preparation and jotter work the night before, but in areas that are under stress it will be true to say that the smaller the class, the better it will be. In those areas, the more direct one-on-one communication pupils have, the better. I have noticed that we have begun to slip into the bad habit of looking at class sizes as we looked at waiting lists for hospital treatment—and look at the mess that got everybody into. Furthermore, can we please admit that subject setting in schools is a sensible way to teach? Comprehensive education was meant to be a socialising policy; it was not meant to be about trying to teach children of all abilities in the same way in the same class at the same time. Subject setting according to ability is better for the child and will improve their confidence and attainment levels—and make life a little more bearable for teachers. As the minister will know, I have a particular interest in PE. Much has been done in that area—I appreciate that a target of each pupil having two hours of physical education a week has been set—but much remains to be done. For example,  we talked at lunch time in the cross-party group for sport about the difficulty of meeting that two-hour target in two-stream schools that have only one hall that serves as the dining hall, the assembly hall, the gym hall and so on. There are particular difficulties, and if the minister and I are back in the next session I will let him know about them. There is also the question of the PE content in the teacher-training modules that are undergone by general classroom teachers. It is not good enough and must improve. A new goal should be set—for primary schools at this stage. It should not be about having two hours of physical activity a week, but about having some form of physical activity every day. That would require a more imaginative use of facilities and could involve other forms of physical activity that are perhaps neglected and which could be undertaken off the school premises. Again, if the minister and I come back, we will talk about that. I commend to the minister what Donald Gorrie said about the socialisation that goes on in sport. I also commend to him the sensible remark passed by Ken Macintosh's child, who knew fine that she had come in first in a race. It does not matter how we try to fool kids, they know—so we should allow them to learn how to win and lose gracefully. While we are doing that, because we cannot do it all through schools, we must go to really good football clubs, such as the winners of the CIS cup last Saturday, and ask them how they manage to imbue their young players with a standard of behaviour on the pitch that acts as a standard for young followers. Poor behaviour by young people is one of the things that teachers should not be blamed for. We must look more widely than schools for encouragement of socialisation and good behaviour through sport. I will not vote for the SNP amendment because, although I share the SNP's attitude to PPP, I doubt its methodology on this one. I am not quite sure that it has worked out all the wrinkles. I have decided, however, that I really cannot vote with a party that tells me about education with syntax as atrocious as is found in its amendment. Therefore, I might yet vote for James Douglas-Hamilton's amendment.

Will the Treasury have an interest in whether the PPP-style mechanism can be replaced with another one, or will it be  something that is just for the Scottish Parliament to determine? I ask the question seriously.

Does the member have any information on the geographical location and sociological demographics of the classes that she describes as being too big?

Does the minister accept that part of the reason for some local authorities' disappointing compliance levels as regards housing the homeless tracks back to the shortage of accommodation that is suitable not only for single homeless people, but for families? Will she consider approaching the Chancellor, whoever he may be, to have money restored to the local authorities whose tenants voted against stock transfer and which are now toiling to produce affordable housing?

I thank the member for giving way to allow me to correct Mr Gallie right away. As we speak, a European energy policy is  being developed. I would like us to take part in that and not be excluded. Look what happened when we were excluded from decisions on fishing.

Will the member give way?

Which is the union that is worth preserving: the social union among the people who live in the British Isles or the artificial political union that was set up to meet the needs of the early 18 th century?

Let me first say how much we will miss the member when he departs the Parliament. The theme of his speech is the benefits that we derive from being part of a political union with the rest of the United Kingdom. In what way does that benefit us when Europe is deciding on an energy policy and we cannot take part in our own right?

Will the member make plain whether he believes that we need a referendum or whether there could be another way of advancing the case, if it is the will of the people? This institution could take the case forward, rather than us having a referendum that would divide the parties along party-political lines and confuse the concepts of independence and the union.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I was not at school in the mid-1970s; I was in Westminster. I was told by the Chancellor of the Exchequer a few years after that that Scotland was not an economic basket-case, that my case was watertight and that he would oppose me every inch of the way. That was Denis Healey.

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree with much of what Mike Rumbles has said—

There is a first time for everything. Will Mike Rumbles make plain what he believes the benefits of the union are? Some members said that our education depends on the union; others think that our economic success or failure depends on the union. What does he think?

Will the member explain what is so different about Scotland that we have to depend on another nation for our economic well-being?

Is the minister arguing that the SNP's economic policies would bring penury or that independence, if the Scots chose that, would impoverish us?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to extend the list of conditions exempt from prescription charges. (S2O-12404)

I impress upon the minister the particular complaint of asthma sufferers, who might be asked to have three different types of inhaler to deal with three different aspects of their condition. Those inhalers are delivered via three different prescriptions—at £6.85 each, we see how expensive it gets. Given that the yearly prescription charge is almost £100, people who suffer from asthma have a particular case. I make a plea to the minister to come up with a favourable response.

I hope that the Minister for Education and Young People agrees that he is, in fact, anything but a Luddite. I have always found him to be a listening minister. I hope, therefore, that he will listen to my plea that he should get in touch with local authorities that are currently refurbishing or rebuilding schools and replacing sports facilities. In many cases, the outdoor pitches that are being provided are not  what is required to ensure the greatest use by greatest number of sports. Grass and artificial turf are of different lengths, for example. It is a small point, but it is worth mentioning because so much money is involved in such developments.

I thank the minister for the information on the technology that is involved and the work that has been done. I wonder whether it will help to reassure the sceptics about the possibilities of the scheme if I remind them that, in technological terms, we went where no one had gone before in relation to the North sea. I do not remember the same arguments coming from the SNP when we talked about opening up the North sea.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that, although there is concern that the promised rolling stock might not even be on the drawing board yet—I do not know whether it is; I hope that the minister can tell us—that issue and electrification are challenges and not reasons for dumping a whole strategy?

I will vote in favour of the EARL project because I am not—unlike the Greens, I regret to say—thinking small and locally. I am trying to think strategically. We need to join up Scotland. Scott Barrie, Bristow Muldoon, the minister and David McLetchie said more than I can say, sometimes from a very informed point of view, about the connectivity that the EARL project will introduce. Sixty two stations will be linked. Do we have to say anything else? It sounds like a slogan, but the connectivity will be real for people who live near the stations, who may even use those stations for local purposes. I concede that the cost of the project remains a bit of a concern. However, I tend to put my trust in the minister because he is ambitious enough not to tie his career to a promise that cannot possibly be met. I am sorry if that sounds cynical, but I, too, am aware that there are forthcoming elections. I thank David McLetchie for being as straight as he was, about his conversion to the tunnel project from the Turnhouse project. I castigate those who unexpectedly suggested that we couldnae dig a tunnel and that nobody would provide the  insurance for it. Who held the insurance notes for the tunnel that has already been dug under a functioning airport? I am really concerned about the folk in Inverkeithing, because, by my reckoning, they will have to spend an extra eight minutes a day travelling—four minutes each way—if they happen to use EARL. I can see why Fergus Ewing was terribly upset about that. I can also understand Fergus Ewing's concern about whether his constituents would benefit from the project, so I seek to put his mind at rest. I have a letter from Sandy Cumming, who is the chief executive of Highlands and Islands Enterprise. He tells me: "As an agency we are wholly in favour of a direct rail link between the Highlands (and the rest of Scotland) and Edinburgh Airport. This would enhance Highlands and Islands connectivity, offering opportunities for straightforward links to and from new and existing destinations. The integrated nature of the proposal, facilitating easy transfer of passengers between modes, is seen as important. In addition, the higher performance rolling stock proposed for EARL would bring further benefits." Sandy Cumming probably knows what he is talking about, and I am prepared to trust him. I am concerned about the premium fares policy, which I suggest to the committee and the minister needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency. However, I am grateful—because I feel empathy with them—that old bats will be protected under the scheme. I thank Scott Barrie's committee, which I think had a thankless task. It tried to reconcile the irreconcilable, given that an election is fast approaching. For example, members should look at the position that Kenny MacAskill has been put in. I notice that he is not here. I wonder whether he will be frog-marched in tonight to vote against his conscience or whether some folk will have the humility to allow the man to use his common sense and either abstain or vote for EARL, which he knows makes sense, not just for the capital but for the whole of Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to Mr Neil's point of order, although standing orders do not cover every jot and tittle of what has gone on in the past 10 minutes, they provide for fairness and equality of treatment, which Mr Monteith has not received. I sincerely hope members will ensure that in future a member in such a position receives equality of treatment.

Although I do not wish to comment on many of the issues that Brian Monteith covered, I do not wish to be part of what can look like a kangaroo court. He was accused of offending against the Parliament's rules, but he was not given an opportunity to answer. He should have been given that opportunity. If he had, we would not see the puzzled faces that we now see around the chamber. People are unsure about what they are being asked to vote on. We need the clarity that Mark Ballard mentioned, because there is great confusion throughout the Parliament about how embargos are used. Brian Monteith was not given the chance to face his detractors and accusers. I thought that the chance to do that was a basic element of what we call justice.

I do not disagree with many of Dave Petrie's assertions, and I support the moves to end sectarian and  racist behaviour that Alasdair Morrison spoke about. However, has Dave Petrie given any thought to the fact that there are club groupings all over Europe—never mind South America—that kick one another to death if they can get away with it? That has nothing to do with either religion or racism.

Rather than being a public health issue, is binge drinking not a matter of fashion? How do we change such attitudes?

Will the member give way?

It is just a quick question. Will the Executive ban drink that is considered to be too high in its alcoholic content?

Will the member explain what the purchasing of sex entails? Does money always have to change hands? Would jewellery suffice? How about a nice night out at the casino followed by a few drinks? Would that do? How are we to make that illegal? How stupid!

In which areas did that occur? Aberdeen has a management zone. People know it well and know its perimeters well. I am interested in whether people are being accosted in other areas.

Does the member agree with Fergus Ewing that the purchase of sex should be a crime? I quote exactly.

The bill should be quietly voted down. The Executive admits that the bill in front of us is radically different from the one bearing the same name, introduced last year and based on the report  produced by the expert group convened by Sandra Hood. The group produced a balanced, sensible approach to the management of street prostitution. It was even-handed in exercising a duty of care towards vulnerable sex workers and towards the general community, particularly those people whose privacy or sense of well-being and security is adversely affected by the behaviour of either the buyers or the sellers of sex. I put that on record because that was the original intention—certainly, my original intention—but as I have only two minutes, I must answer some of the points that have been made. The Hood group report also advised that the Executive should require councils to produce a local plan to ensure that support and services were accessible for street sex workers, including advice and help to exit prostitution. That would have allowed the councils in Aberdeen, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dundee, in partnership with the police, health authorities, voluntary organisations representing sex workers, drugs services and residents to produce a local plan to manage prostitution according to the different situations in our four big cities. David McLetchie said that that would simply institutionalise prostitution. I think not. We had a tolerance zone, as it was called, in Edinburgh for almost 20 years and it did not institutionalise prostitution. We can point to statistics that show that the number of prostitutes working on the streets in Edinburgh fell during the period of the tolerance zone. The same cannot be done in Glasgow, where Routes Out is quoted as providing instances of best practice. Yesterday, my office tried to obtain up-to-date statistics from Routes Out on how many women had exited prostitution using the money that had already been made available by a previous minister. As always, we were given no figures at all. Therefore, although I welcome the proposed funding, I am concerned about how the money that is going to be spent on helping vulnerable women will be apportioned and how the services will be delivered. I ask the minister to take into account what Ewan Aitken, the leader of the City of Edinburgh Council, said this week. He said that it is better to manage prostitution in a humane and sensible way, trying to moderate the harm that is done by it, than to adopt the sort of measures that are proposed in the bill. I am convinced that we will put the safety of the women in jeopardy by driving prostitution underground. The examples in England show that violence has risen in areas where strict kerb-crawling measures have been introduced. It is not that I oppose measures against kerb crawling, but the bill does not meet the needs as regards how kerb crawling is affected by changes such as  those that are proposed. I ask members not to pass further bad legislation today, but to vote against the bill.

Will the member be of the same opinion as to the validity of driving street prostitution underground if women are killed and more women are beaten up and violently attacked?

I appreciate the Executive's intention, but how does the minister think the third objective that he outlined will be achieved unless direct contact can be made with people who are selling sex?

I seek clarification on whether drug treatment and testing orders can be handed down from a district court as well as a sheriff court. Under the current legislation on soliciting and loitering with intent, prostitutes can end up before a district court. If Parliament were to support amendment 4, would not that require a further change in the law? I think that only sheriff courts can hand out that sort of remedy. Perhaps Tommy Sheridan can respond to that question.

I appreciate that it is a great invasion of the privacy and well-being of a woman who is entirely unconnected with prostitution that someone who seeks to purchase sexual services should stalk or follow her in a car, but Mr Ewing referred to the violence that the car driver perpetrates. In intervening, I wanted to make it plain that few—if any—cases of violent attacks on such women have occurred. I appreciate—and the expert group on prostitution, of which I was a member, appreciated—why we should do whatever we can to ensure that people who are unconnected with the sale of sex on the streets should not be offended or alarmed or have nuisance caused to them by it. However, I suggest that the unforeseen consequence of these amendments, which I have no doubt are well intentioned, would be to drive prostitution further underground and therefore put at risk vulnerable women. I am sure that he does not intend that. However, if he can show that in other places where his measure has been put into effect, prostitution has reduced, I may think again.

I agree with the legal points that the member makes. Does he agree that the unforeseen consequence of the power in amendment 1—should the Parliament decide to agree to it—could be to further endanger women, given that prostitution would be driven out of sight and out of the control of police forces?

Will the minister give way?

I ask the minister to state on the record exactly what the offence would entail. Would someone who was found driving slowly in a known red light area be supposed to have committed an offence, or must they make contact with a seller of sexual services? If the person is to lose their means of livelihood, it is important for us to work out exactly what they would be losing their livelihood for.

Will the member make it plain that the abuse to which he refers is not on the part of the kerb-crawler against women unconnected with selling sex? Is he confusing the prostitute with the passer-by?

I will not comment on people's rights or their expressions of preference in other areas but, in Edinburgh, tenants voted against stock transfer. I say that their rights must be respected and that they require equal treatment—given what they would have been entitled to had they voted for stock transfer—in relation to the Treasury write-off of the debt.

Like Cathie Craigie, I have no bias against any form of tenure. Every home should be secure and we should have a mixture of tenure, which is what I thought 30 years ago, when I was the director of Shelter. However, the need for rented accommodation is every bit as great as it was then. I agreed with the outline of the reasons Tricia Marwick gave in her speech, so I will not go into them. I am particularly concerned about Edinburgh at the moment. There is such a boom in the city's economy, and house prices and land prices have gone so high, that we risk driving out all the people with the skills that we must have for a balanced community. By and large, those people will want to rent. Nobody who has spoken has defined affordability. Although homestake is a good idea for home buyers, a great number of the people whom we want to have in the city cannot afford to buy due to the current state of the private market. That is why I asked about the Edinburgh tenants who voted against stock transfer. Their wishes must be respected. Edinburgh will come under dreadful pressure because it will have a gap of eight years between the demolition of some houses, which must be demolished, and the provision of other affordable  or social rented housing. The Executive should be much more active in asking the Chancellor of the Exchequer to create a level playing field for councils and housing associations. I commend to the minister the attitude of Midlothian Council. It is an honourable exception to the councils mentioned by Sylvia Jackson, which have perhaps not done all the homework that they should have done. Midlothian Council has 3,500 people on its waiting list, so it is building 1,000 houses and is going into partnership with other housing associations to provide 800 more. Conditions will be attached to the right to buy the houses that Midlothian Council builds and a higher minimum price will be asked for them. That council went ahead to identify the need and then acted; it did not sit around worrying about what was the correct thing to do. The Treasury has a large part to play in addressing the problem. The Auditor General said that there is no difference between writing off the debt that local authorities have incurred if tenants agree to stock transfer and not writing off the debt if tenants say that they prefer to stay with the local authority. I make a plea for the Treasury to address the issue, and ask for a better reason for not writing off the debt than we have had to date.

Does Phil Gallie agree that the right to buy would have been a better policy if the local councils had been able to replace the stock that was lost to the common good?

Does the member agree that, had the Treasury created a level playing field between councils and housing associations, Highland Council would have been able to write off its debt in exactly the same way as the housing associations across the Minch have done?

Exactly. It is shameful.

I am looking for pledges. In the event of a Scottish National Party-led Executive, will ministers be willing to restore the same financial support to local authorities as is currently enjoyed by housing associations? We have a good case in Midlothian, which I will put to the minister if I am lucky enough to be called to speak.

Would an SNP-led Executive ensure that the City of Edinburgh Council was able to build council houses, as the tenants in Edinburgh have said no to stock transfer?

My question relates directly to the composition of the group. Are tenants in the majority?

I hope that members will forgive me if—purely because of the constraints of time—I do not refer to all the speeches. I support Brian Monteith in his basic thrust, which is that someone should inspect the inspectors. Who watches the watcher? I am grateful to the minister for explaining the chain of management and accountability. I read HMIE's report, "Improving Physical Education in Primary Schools", and found that it contradicted itself. For example, while paragraph 2 said that there was quite a good standard of teaching, paragraph 4 talked about a lack of confidence in physical education teachers. I hope that the Presiding Officer will indulge me, because I will confine my remarks to that subject. I would like to be able to question the inspector about those apparent contradictions. According to paragraph 3.1 of the last report that I read, only 30 per cent of schools had programmes that were very good. The report stated clearly that visiting teachers made a huge difference, but it also referred to the lack of confidence among the classroom teachers who now take physical education in accordance with the target of two hours' PE a week for school children. It said that they often lacked the confidence to explain their attitudes and their reasons for programming physical education as they did.  Those issues are detailed and definitive. To be frank and with all due respect, ministers who are merely lawyers, such as Robert Brown, would probably not be able to answer my questions when they come before the Education Committee.

I thank the minister for that offer. It would be in the spirit of the debate for me to say that we will talk about it. The report concluded: "Key issues for education authorities to consider, include: • ways of supporting schools and teachers through staff development in - developing effective programmes - teaching and assessment in physical education - managing physical education; • the provision and deployment of visiting teachers of physical education; and • ways of supporting schools in developing outward-looking programmes". That is quite a bundle. It appears that not all is well in physical education, although, if one were to read the report from cover to cover, one could gain the impression that things are getting better and, as Fiona Hyslop and Adam Ingram pointed out, the inspection rate seems to be improving. Brian Monteith spoke historically and was right to do so in order to point out that we had to catch up. The report makes his point for him: a great number of questions are left unanswered by the written report and the inspector's appearance before the committee. He was not there to report on, answer questions about or explain his own work; he was there to comment on other people's work. I ask the minister to take the matter away and think about whether PE as a specialist area would benefit from the inspector having to be accountable to Parliament, perhaps through the Education Committee. I invite members to support the motion heartily at decision time. It has been a pleasure to work with Brian Monteith. I am surprised that members have mentioned that he is a contentious person, because I have found him to be a pussycat.

If every headmaster had complete freedom to set their own priorities, how could we avoid a situation in which parents decided that they preferred the management of a particular school to that of the school next door, which would unbalance the whole school system?

Can the minister explain why the chief inspector of schools says that standards of literacy and numeracy have risen while, at the same time, universities complain that they have to run basic literacy classes before students can take advantage of university teaching?

The minister knows that I entirely support the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland and mentioned it to Coeliac UK. However, if Coeliac UK is willing to come out to play, will he come out to play and meet its representatives, perhaps when the election is over and done with? A meeting should consider two things: first, early diagnosis and screening; and secondly the evaluation of foods. That is essential, because if people cannot afford the foods, it is not much use having a good display of them on the supermarket shelf. Those are the two key issues.

The percentage of the population that is calculated to have coeliac disease indicates that up to 50,000 Scots, or one in 100, could be sufferers. As only one in eight of that number is calculated to have been diagnosed, at any one time more than 40,000 of our fellow citizens are enduring bloating, diarrhoea and nausea. They might also experience weight loss and depression, for which their general practitioner might prescribe Prozac or something like that. Their quality of life is very much affected by coeliac disease, but they might not know it—more important, their GP might not know it. Not all GPs would miss the symptoms of the disease, but too many do. That causes the sort of distress that Yvonne Murray described for us this morning at the awareness-raising breakfast that we held in committee room 3. Before I remind members of the dreadful experience that Yvonne's family had to endure before Laura, her daughter, was diagnosed, I thank them for their support this morning. When Yvonne Murray first contacted us to raise her concern that we were not dealing properly with this very debilitating disease, I knew what she was talking about without too much briefing because one of my granddaughters has coeliac disease. We were lucky, in that our experience was not like Yvonne's. Josephine was diagnosed as a very young child. She has never known anything other than a gluten-free diet and the whole extended family understands the implications.  We were lucky, but Yvonne Murray was not. She has given me a copy of her speech, because I wanted to remind members of Yvonne's experience and to share it with members who were not in committee room 3 this morning. She said: "When my daughter's symptoms first started back in 2003, it was put down to the fact that she was in nursery picking up everyday infections. The GP did mention at the time that my daughter could be gluten intolerant, but at no point did she offer to do a blood test for coeliac disease. During this time I was in and out of the GP practice every month with symptoms which included diarrhoea, vomiting and abdominal pains—my daughter was constantly sick. As time went on she then developed mouth ulcers on top of everything else. It was at this point that our lives were turned upside down. Her weight started to drop at an alarming rate and she stopped growing. She would cry constantly because her tummy was sore and would crawl up on to the sofa and was so lethargic that she couldn't play with her friends—she didn't have the energy. She then stopped eating and drinking because the mouth ulcers had become so bad and was finally admitted to hospital, where I had to almost beg a Consultant to give her the coeliac blood test. During this time we tried desperately to get my daughter to eat as we had the threat of a gastric tube being inserted hanging over our heads." Hearing that had a dramatic effect on the people who were at this morning's event. Those things happened, but they should not have done. A number of basic needs of coeliac sufferers can be identified, a range of which other members want to speak about. I will deal with just two of them. A suitable standard diagnosis procedure that is known to potential patients and to parents with young children should be commonly practised by general practitioners or specialist nurses. We know that an inexpensive and highly effective blood test is produced by Adastra Medical. I do not wish to promote one company at the expense of others, but it demonstrated its product this morning and I believe that it has a 97 per cent accuracy rate. That product or products like it could be commended to GPs. It is perhaps even more important for GPs to be made aware of the fact that many of the people who present with the symptoms of coeliac disease will not be suffering from some other complaint and will certainly not be imagining their symptoms. It might be possible to provide smart card access to suitable food products. Once again, my family was lucky—we were in a financial position to buy the gluten-free products that are available in the stores. The excellent booklet that is produced by Coeliac UK makes it possible to identify easily which supermarket products are gluten free.

The minister came along to this morning's event and he is interested in that area. Perhaps when he sums up he will outline some of the routes that the Executive might pursue. Today's events have helped to ensure that minds are open on the issue, which is the important thing. In conversation with me earlier this evening, John Home Robertson said that it might be a good idea for people's blood to be tested for a wide range of conditions, including coeliac disease, when they first donate blood. That is a straightforward and sensible idea. I know that it is unusual for John Home Robertson to have such an idea, but I should give him credit for it.

As I have only a minute left, I will not go into my smart card idea, but I have discussed it with other people and the minister knows that I have put it on the table. It fits perfectly with the prevention and self-management regime for the national health service that was announced earlier this afternoon. The situation of the many people who suffer from coeliac disease can be improved. I hope that today's activities and the work that has been put into them by Coeliac UK, Yvonne Murray and members of the campaign groups from all over Scotland—some of whom are in the public gallery—along with the interest that has been shown by ministers, the First Minister and other MSPs and the effort that has been made by Peter Warren from my office, will raise awareness of the disease, improve the NHS service to sufferers and allow them to have the much better quality of life that follows from an early diagnosis, access to gluten-free foods and participation in groups such as those that I have met in the Parliament today, as well as the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland. My motion is reasonable and just and I ask members to support it.

I will extend the member's point about the role played by community pharmacists. Given the experience of the coeliac breakfast this morning, does he agree that it might be a good idea to take the concept and extend it to access to the special foods that coeliacs need?

Oh, well spotted, sir.

My question concerns the prevention of serious, if not organised, crime. In the light of the very serious attack on the Polish worker Patryk Mnich, will the Scottish Executive urgently review the reception arrangements for, and the advice given to, Polish and other immigrant workers to ensure that they have a safe and satisfactory experience during their time here? As I am sure that other members have done, I have heard anecdotal evidence of some unrest in areas that have a concentration of immigrant workers. I believe that some of the police officers who cover those areas are of the view that we should anticipate and seek to head off trouble.

I will inject an element of sweetness and light into the contretemps between the two putative Executives in the next session of the Parliament. I think that the current Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform is doing a wonderful job and I thank him for the £350,000 that he has given to Edinburgh to help with this year's festival. We are so grateful.  I have talked to the minister about special funding in recognition of the part that Edinburgh plays as capital of Scotland in providing services and facilities that benefit all of Scotland—I use the term "capital city status". I had thought that in a meeting between the First Minister and the new leader of City of Edinburgh Council, Ewan Aitken, an agreement had been reached—or at least that a way forward had been identified. However, I was shocked when the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business told me in answer to a question I asked him the week before last that the cities growth fund should suffice. I have spoken to Mr Aitken about that and he agrees that that will not suffice. Where is the Executive in its plans for the granting of special funding status to Edinburgh on account of its capital city status?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the minister on changing his mind. I certainly remember the time when he and people of his age group denigrated tartan—I will come back to that thought. I ask him to ensure that the tartan week organisers do not instruct the Scottish Enterprise team that is going to try to evaluate tartan's importance. I also congratulate Jamie McGrigor. There is no doubt about it: he has done the right thing at the right time. It is big of the Executive to have taken his proposals on board. I wonder why the minister started by referring to the debate about tartan. Ken Macintosh's speech, and even Kenny MacAskill's speech, gave us the answer: they dismissed the thought of Harry Lauder. We can all get embarrassed about Harry Lauder if we like but, abroad, in all those places where people know about Scotland, they might just know about Scotland through Harry Lauder. The late Jimmy Logan explained to me how, in theatre terms, Harry Lauder was quite an icon. We must look less to the confusing images of the past and more to what we agree is the way to use such icons, even if we are a bit embarrassed about  them, to promote Scotland. There is a difficulty with promoting tartan while we are diluting Scots identity and its promotion. I will draw a parallel: I ask the gentlemen in the chamber to think of lederhosen for just a minute. Where do we associate with lederhosen? I see the minister slapping his thigh—good on him. Is it Austria, or is it Bavaria? I associate them with Bavaria, because I know the subtleties, but most folk are confused about where lederhosen come from. I put it to members that the same confusion might exist regarding where tartan fits into the panoply of the world's patterns. Where does Paisley pattern come from? That uncertainty exists because we have not promoted the Scottish identity and used tartan unashamedly to do so. That is one of those wee things that we will just have to sort out—I am sure that we are on the way to doing that. The minister said that he would listen to good ideas. I have about six. First, there is the recognition factor. We are kidding ourselves if we think that, everywhere in the globe, people know what Scotland is and can distinguish Scotland from other parts of the United Kingdom. We should not kid ourselves like that. Once, when I tried to check my bags through from Atlanta airport to Edinburgh, I had quite a discussion—it eventually became quite a heated discussion—with the helpful young woman behind the desk. She asked, "Edinburgh's in London, isn't it?" I replied, "No, it's not in London—it's in Scotland." "Yes," she said, "but that's in London, isn't it?" "No," I said. "Edinburgh is the capital of Scotland, which is a different country." Her nametag said that she was called Marie Stuart, but she did not have the faintest idea that she was part of the diaspora. We must not imagine that the opportunity is already there for us. I want lots of television advertisements and film placements. Let us start with Bollywood—a growing market, I point out to the minister—and there is Chinese television, too. Although Kenny MacAskill waxed lyrical about tartan week, I do not think that it is big enough or focused enough yet. We should be getting in touch with Craig Ferguson, for example, and ensuring that really nice tartan ties and other tartan accoutrements are sent to him, so that he can refer to them when he presents his show, which is one of the biggest coast-to-coast shows in America. Why does the Parliament not use tartan? The colours that we have are very fetching, but we could use tartan much more. I am sorry to see that the Presiding Officer is looking at me like that, because I wanted to go on to mention tartan tat. As a representative of this country, I am sometimes concerned when I see the tat on sale  up and down the High Street. However, I remember what I said at the start of my speech. Ken Macintosh should not get embarrassed about Harry Lauder, and I will not get embarrassed about the fact that some folk have different tastes from mine. That is what tartan tat amounts to, and no more.

With reference to the learned professor's claim that 98 per cent of the world's population has some idea of what Scotland means, do we have any notion of how the survey was carried out? I ask him to name two people in China who can tell us.

I am quite happy to talk about independence if the minister wants to. From the point of view of the holistic nature of governance, it would be preferable to have a statistical office here in Scotland than to have to depend on someone else's. What is more, instead of having to tap into resources that can be accessed only south of the border, why cannot we buy them in? We might want to get some Swedish statisticians to do some work for us; we could buy them in, too.

I do not query the validity of the member's basic theory. However, why should we be so suspicious of our objectivity in Scotland but accept the objectivity of a body in England?

I think that I am correct in saying that blue and brown asbestos were not made illegal until the late 1980s. People whom I spoke to at the time did not know that they had that one fibre in their lungs that causes mesothelioma. They are now coming to the end of the time in which they might develop the disease.

I had not meant to intervene in the debate; I came simply to listen. However, 20 years ago, I produced a BBC documentary in which I reported on mesothelioma. I met many of the people to whom Stewart Stevenson referred, as well as their families. Those people's illness has matured in those 20 years and they now approach the time when they really need the money. Anything that the minister can do to make the retrospection more generous would not be unreasonable.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. The motion is "that the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the ... Bill." The member in charge of the bill and others have confirmed that the fundamental principle is having directly elected members take decisions in health boards. It therefore seems somewhat incongruous that we could overturn that fundamental principle at stage 2.

Would the member like pilots to incorporate the basic principle of majority decision taking by elected members on the board? It seems to me that that is the absolute basic requirement of the bill.

Does Eleanor Scott have any information on whether a proportionately higher number of people would stand for elected health boards than stand for, for example, our community councils?

Me!

I simply want us to get our statistics in order. Do we know what percentage of the public is satisfied that they are properly represented in the decisions that are taken in the Parliament?

The member has pointed out the need for democracy, openness and accountability. Might they not be provided by a better system of accountability and report back on the part of health boards?

First, the member said that we have an opportunity to get things right, but can we ever get them right if the project is tied to the private finance initiative and a public-private partnership? Secondly, I apologise that I will not be able to stay for the whole debate, but the member has my 100 per cent support for his comments about parking.

I did not expect to be called. However, having listened to Mark Ballard, I now understand why Archie McPherson beat me by 70 votes about 22 years ago in the election of the rector of the University of Edinburgh. I move on to more serious topics. I have absolutely no wish to throw a spanner in the works of the local government elections. However, at the Local Government and Transport Committee earlier this week, I was heartened to hear that it was not as late as I had thought to make changes. At the meeting, I complained that independents in the local government elections are being put at a disadvantage because of the way that their names will appear on the ballot paper. Since then, I have looked forward to the minister putting my mind at rest on the matter. Will he  confirm that the ballot paper will not disadvantage independents? If an independent produces an emblem that is identifiable in some way with their independent status, surely that emblem can be included on the ballot paper. I am thinking of the local campaigns that local councillors promote; an emblem could help to associate in the public mind the campaign and the councillor. For independents not to have an emblem would definitely put them at a disadvantage. If the person was unable to use the emblem to promote their candidacy on the ballot paper, that would represent unfair and unequal treatment. Will the minister tell the chamber whether there is time to put right this wrong? I would be pleased to co-operate in any way that I can.

The member may be right. On the other hand, I might stand a better chance of getting re-elected if I were to put a battle axe beside my name. [ Laughter. ] That was just a suggestion. I am genuinely concerned that independents could be steamrollered in an election such as the one that we are about to hold. As Paul Martin—I was going to call him Michael—pointed out to me, some wards contain 25,000 people, which would require an independent candidate to put in a quite disproportionate effort if they were to be elected. I do not think that we should heap insult upon injury by putting independents at a disadvantage through their description on the ballot paper. I look forward to the minister setting my mind at rest on this point. I took legal advice and was told that there was a case to be made because unfairness is being visited upon independent candidates. That is all that I have to ask the minister; he has been so helpful already today that I hope he will help me with this question, too.

I want to hear more.

As I am an independent member, I have a particular interest in the matter. I do not speak for anyone else, but people to whom I have spoken who want to stand as independent candidates believe that they are at a disadvantage because the only description of them on the ballot paper is their name. They are not allowed an emblem or a photograph on the  ballot paper. I am interested to hear what the Scottish National Party has to say about that.

I ask my question in that spirit of all-round agreement. We know that the Tories are not going to give Edinburgh the money that I am asking for, but does the Scottish Executive intend to recognise the special status of Edinburgh in Scotland, and the contribution to the economy that it makes, by giving us capital city funding and status?

If the Scottish National Party is sitting in the middle seats in the chamber after May, will it ensure that Edinburgh gets special capital status in terms of funding?

Am I correct in deducing from what Mr Davidson says that he is prepared to confer special status on Edinburgh because of the outcome of expenditure in the city, which results in a growth rate of twice the Scottish average, I think?

I regret to say that I am not going to get the First Minister out of jail. My question derives from a ruling by the Court of Session this week that the Scottish information commissioner should have the internal papers that relate to the commencement of sections 25 to 29 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990. My reason for raising the issue is that, in September 2005, I was given an assurance by the then Minister for Justice that the commencement would come along shortly, and the next Minister for Justice repeated that in January of last year, when I was told that the commencement was imminent. When will the measures be commenced? If that will not happen as soon as possible, why not, and might that have anything to do with the ruling in the Court of Session? If not, why are we spending so much money on keeping internal papers on the matter from people who wish to know about it?

I want to associate myself with Ms Watt's remarks and to thank the minister for being sensitive to the work that local authorities have done.

The management zone in Aberdeen is a police policy; it was drawn up by Grampian police. The zone is in the docks area, where all the industries shut at night and—I think—only three houses overlook the zone.

Will Mr Martin give way?

Which other communities?

Mr Martin has attempted to demonstrate that the problem of kerb crawling is widespread. There is no kerb-crawling problem associated with Aberdeen. Even in Edinburgh, there is now no problem because the sex workers have moved to another area.

The number of prostitutes in Aberdeen, which employs a different  management method, has stabilised, and the number in Edinburgh has fallen.

Will those provisions apply to escorts and women who work indoors?

A management zone means not only that a potential problem for the general community is managed, but that the services that must be directed at the prostitutes or sex workers can be delivered. We know from experience—all the evidence points the same way—that we have to be able to reach prostitutes where they are working.

I challenge the contention that all prostitution is violence against women because such a contention is gender specific, which prostitution is not. Secondly, Carolyn Leckie may or may not know women who have chosen to escort. There is a fine line between doing extras after an escorting job and openly advertising oneself on the internet.

I thank the member for her kind remarks. Would she consider the bill a success if it led to a great number of prosecutions but there was no diminution in the number of women who prostitute themselves?

To be honest, I am surprised that the member is in favour of retaining the old law on soliciting and loitering. Does that not again tip the balance against the women—the seller—because it will be very much easier to prove that?

I confess that the bill is a great disappointment to me. Although elements of the suggested balanced approach to the management and, quite possibly, the minimisation of street prostitution that was the outcome of the work by Sandra Hood's expert group have been retained in the bill and in the proposed guidance to local authorities, the bill fails to achieve the means of exercising duties of care towards sex workers, who have the right not to be beaten and injured, and towards people in the general community, who have every right not to be alarmed or annoyed by the activities that surround prostitution. Instead, the bill simply introduces an anti-kerb-crawling measure to deter purchasers of sexual services. Although supporters of the bill claim that the legislation in England has resulted in more than 800 men being charged, they cannot point to proof that that caused those men to stop buying sex. If that was the case, far fewer women would be selling sex on the streets. The bill might give respite to people, such as the residents of Leith Links, who have been caused nuisance because of the proximity of their home or business to a red light zone. I say "might", because in English cities the kerb-crawling legislation has meant that red light zones now move about cities, playing hide and seek with police and residents. I think I am correct in saying that Liverpool intends formally to move its red light zones around. To anyone who is mistaken enough to believe that that deterrent to buyers will shrink the market for prostitution, I suggest that assignations will be made by phone or by internet. Members can look up the internet for themselves and they will find Scottishescorts.co.uk. If they look in the reference bible, McCoy's, they will see that sexual services can be found in Stirling or in the kingdom of Fife. I imagine that few members will want to take me up on that offer because they will not want to be seen reading the book. However, I have done my homework, so I know that the market will not shrink as intended by this simple measure.

In the first place, tolerance refers to the fact that the law of the land was put on hold inside a geographical area, which was not  satisfactory for anyone. It was not violence that was tolerated; having a management zone, non-harassment zone or tolerance zone was meant to prevent violence. If Elaine Smith has read that book, she will realise that the author advocates a safer zone—a management zone—so that violence can be minimised. That is one of my main concerns about the bill and it was one of the twin aims of Sandra Hood's committee. Incidentally, we should thank Sandra Hood for the amount and quality of work that went into producing the report. Another aspect of the kerb-crawling legislation as it stands concerns me—I know that it concerns the minister, too. If the same pattern that exists in English cities is repeated, say in Glasgow, it will be much more difficult for the support services, which help women to exit prostitution when they are ready to do so, to reach the women. We know from experience and from the work that has been undertaken by Neil McKeganey that the support services have to build a relationship with women. Bristow Muldoon suggested that the police could direct the women to services—that is not enough. The person who arrests someone is not the person to build up a relationship with them that is sufficient to convince them that they could muster the self-confidence to undertake the sort of job training that is offered by SCOT-PEP in Edinburgh to get women out of prostitution. The confines of the kerb-crawling legislation concern me greatly. I admit that the problem of intrusive and alarming kerb crawling presents a real difficulty in Glasgow. There was no such problem in Edinburgh during the operation of the original tolerance zone. Kenny MacAskill is right that there were occasions when the zone did not run smoothly, but I am talking about kerb crawling in particular. That is the case in Aberdeen, where the red light or management zone is located in the docks—which are not part of a residential area—at night, when business premises are shut. I regret that I do not have more time, because I would like to reply to some of the things that have been said and which are wrong. I asked Fergus Ewing whether he would take an intervention because I wanted to find out whether his attitude to legislation applied to all sex workers. I think that it should. Why should it apply to just the women in the street? Mike Rumbles thought that the market might shrink. I have referred to that. If the market had shrunk, we would be seeing fewer prostitutes. We should remember that there are fewer street prostitutes in Edinburgh and that the level is stable in Aberdeen, whereas in Glasgow the number of prostitutes has risen. Bristow Muldoon said that the police would refer the prostitutes to services. If we are talking about street prostitution, we are talking about only four cities, and there is no problem in Dundee. In Aberdeen, a potential  problem for the general community is managed. That arrangement appears to operate reasonably successfully from the Aberdeen citizen's point of view. I very much regret having to say that I will not support the bill. I will abstain, because I hope that amendments will be made to bring the bill closer to the principles that were outlined by Sandra Hood and to what I know to be good practice.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that the bill has a narrow focus, but why should the people who attempt to sell or buy sexual services on the street be made subject to the criminal law when the people who sell sexual services through the internet or use mobile phones to conduct their business are not being made subject to the same law?

Did the committee discuss how services can be delivered to women who are scattered because they are hiding from the police?

Do we take it that the bill is designed to address the fear, annoyance and alarm, and not the business of prostitution?

Does Fergus Ewing accept that if the references to nuisance, alarm and offence are removed from the bill, it becomes a morality bill?

The minister might have just reached the point in his speech that I was going to ask him about. He said that there is no statutory offence that can deal with the buyer's infringement of the law. Does breach of the peace legislation not take care of that?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With the greatest respect, I suggest that if we had less argy-bargy and more accountability and more questioning rather than commenting, we would not have reached the situation in which Frances Curran had to do what she did.

I offer my best wishes for the new year and say that things can only get better. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is satisfied that the present method of measuring pensioner poverty provides an accurate picture of its extent. (S2F-2652)

I thank the First Minister for a well-researched answer. He has announced that the new Minister for Communities will draw up a strategy for older people. Could she include in that strategy a unit that would assess more objectively pensioner inflation? According to Norwich Union, today pensioner inflation is running at 9 per cent, but next April pensioners can expect an increase in their pensions of only 3.6 per cent. That means that pensioners are often left to choose between heating and eating.

I thank the First Minister for his offer—I will take him up on it. I put it to him that the figures are just a few months behind the reality of the struggle that many pensioners face because of rising fuel prices and council tax. I repeat my first request—for a unit to be set up to measure accurately the difference between pensioner inflation and inflation generally.

In the light of the letter from the Deputy Minister for Finance, Public Service Reform and Parliamentary Business to the Local Government and Transport Committee in which he withdraws support for fairer and more regular management of prostitution on the streets, what plans does the Executive have to ensure that public opinion, which is almost uniformly in favour of the management of street prostitution, is reflected in any new legislation?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise, Presiding Officer. I disagree fundamentally with what the First Minister said, but that is not why I got to my feet. The First Minister said that he was speaking as leader of the Labour Party. This is First Minister's question time, not Labour Party leader's question time.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order that one of us should move an extension of 10 minutes so  that all of the questions that are notified today for the First Minister can be adequately attacked?

I congratulate Dennis Canavan on his achievement. I also thank the Executive, because it is good that it can say, "We was wrong." However, I urge it to do the whole-hearted thing and support the idea of a bank holiday. As Stewart Maxwell said, that can develop. If we do this properly—which is what Murdo Fraser urged—and celebrate our identity, we are likely to build a bit more pride in ourselves without all the caveats that we have been hearing from the Executive benches about how we should not go too far in terms of celebrating ourselves. Why not? The more pride we have in ourselves, the more we will venture, the bigger we will grow and the better we will do. If that happens, we might be able to think seriously about rivalling the St Patrick's day reward that the Irish reap. Speaking of rewards, I say to the minister that £300,000 sounds like a lot, but it is not a lot if we take into account the cost of a televised public information campaign to urge people to celebrate  their identity, or of making some DVDs for the foreign market. We could do with a bit more money behind the bill. The only thing that worries me is the thought that at some point in the future, with a forward-looking and imaginative foreign policy emanating from this Parliament, the first thing that we would do would be to send Alex Salmond to see the American president. I think not. Let us have a St Andrew's day holiday, and let us not make mistakes like that.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the police and procurator fiscal service ensure that anti-racism legislation is applied equally inside and outside sporting arenas. (S2O-11163)

I thank the Lord Advocate for her full and considered reply. I have no wish to see the long arm of the law move into sporting arenas because I believe that sporting bodies should promote anti-racism inside their arenas and among their players. However, my plea that the matter should be looked at to find out how the legislation works in practice arises from the case of my constituent Dan Gerrard, who was racially abused—the abuse was heard by witnesses. Unfortunately, the Scottish Football Association declined to pursue the matter further on this occasion. I would be most grateful if I could supply the Lord Advocate with the full details so that she might give me a considered opinion on the case.

What requirement, if any, does the Scottish Executive place on local authorities as regards the provision of sporting facilities and ground for play? There are disturbing reports of a reduction in the amount of space for sport in PPP schools.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister also please consider with an open mind the comments that have been made about holistic legislation on workers' rights being the Parliament's responsibility?

Will the member give way?

I will be brief. Customs have changed already; for example, there is so much online shopping that the big department stores might find that they do not lose much. Of course there is the other type of electronic shopping.

There are emporia in Edinburgh.

I find it hard to believe that anybody is ever bored in Edinburgh. The tourists could try Morningside, Bruntsfield, Stockbridge or any of the other villages in the city; they do not need to wander up and down Princes Street.

The point that Brian Monteith raised could be covered by a simple amendment that would provide that smaller shops that operate under the brand name of, or  are owned by, large stores would also be caught by any decision that we take on which shops should be open or closed.

Does the workforce planning work to which the minister has referred include a recommendation to health boards from the Scottish Executive on what level of coverage per capita would be sufficient? I refer the minister to the fact that, in the Lothian region, there is only one specialist physiotherapist for people who suffer from Parkinson's disease. He will agree that, if one person in 500 in the population has Parkinson's disease, that is not sufficient coverage. How can we address that?

I wonder whether the minister would care to retract his statement that the debacle in Glasgow has had no effect on the other referenda on the matter. It was a pertinent factor in people in Edinburgh rejecting the new style of ownership. Will the minister explain why, when there is so much proof that people's instincts and experience caution them against moving outwith council control, the Executive insists on pursuing that approach? It is a matter for the people as much as the politicians.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member explain what he means a little more? Why does he think that it is wrong-headed to have a soulful connection to independence but not to unionism?

Is it only about the money? Should not something about the soul of Scotland be encompassed in today's motion?

Some reports have indicated that we can expect a mild winter. Given today's reports from West Lothian where council officials are concerned that their resources are being stretched to the maximum in trying to cope with the influx of people from eastern Europe, and given West Lothian Council's concern about the diminution of service to West Lothian locals, might it not be feasible for the council to examine its budget for coping with bad winter weather? Will the First Minister and Tom McCabe meet the leaders of the City of Edinburgh Council and West Lothian Council to discuss the shortfall in their funds that could well arise from having to meet both the contingencies of a very bad winter and the influx of people into their areas?

I am pleased to be in this somewhat elite company, in which all the brains of the Parliament are gathered together. "O wad some Pow'r the giftie gie us  To see oursels as others see us!"  I am happy to say that in my colleague Jean Turner's contribution, part of that wish was fulfilled, because everybody loves the Scots. Even the folk who were locked up during the war and kept in jail love us. We can take it that we are popular. In Kenny MacAskill's excellent speech he suggested that there was some cachet in being associated with Scotland. Once again, people seem to love us. I wonder whether they know what it is that they love. That brings me to Sandra White's speech, in  which she talked about going to the Lebanon. Much as I appreciate and admire the sincerity of people who have been to the Lebanon, it does not prove the case that Scotland stands tall on the international stage when someone in the Lebanon kindly tells the Lebanese that we are Scottish. I have been in a similar situation in the past. I have been introduced to people in other countries as Scottish, to be met by a blank look. We have had lots of looking back, so I was happy to hear that the minister is looking forward. That is excellent, because that is what the independent members were hoping to find when we chose "Scotland International" as the debate title. However, it worried me when he said that of the students who were asked whether they would recommend Scotland to others as a place in which to study, only 83 per cent said that they would. What about the other 17 per cent? I hate to be puir-moothed about it but, after all, we are being very Scottish this afternoon. I am happy to say that not once in the debate have we heard that Scotland punches above its weight because it is part of the United Kingdom. Presumably, that would mean that we have more influence than, say, Merseyside or Tyneside in influencing and determining UK Government policy. Colin Fox's contribution put paid to that. We cannot claim more influence than any of the other regions of the UK, so we do not punch above our weight in that way. With all due respect to Irene Oldfather, who would like to punch it all herself, I do not believe that we punch above our weight in the European Union as far as policies are concerned. Irene is not old enough to remember this as vividly as I do, but I remember the carve-up over whisky. Just before Edward Heath signed up to Europe, the grape producers in Europe brought together an alcohol alliance to ensure that the grain producers—the Scots producers—were carved out of the industry. I also saw the carve-up in steel, which meant that we had no representation and no special weight to punch in the UK negotiating stance. We lost out in steel and tomatoes and we will soon lose out in energy policy, unless we take full responsibility and do not leave decisions to those who have sold us short in the past. Could this punching above our weight mean that we get favours that other regions do not get? We did not get any favours as regards the Poles, Bulgarians and Romanians who have the right to come here. The First Minister is to be congratulated, as are other members of the Cabinet, on trying to ensure that there was a distinctively Scottish response to that movement of people and that a welcome was given. However, it has been hard going and it is arguable just how much of a favour we have been done.  What about promoting Scotland abroad? Do we have more influence inside the United Kingdom than we would have as an independent country such as Ireland? I am not at all sure that we do. Phil Gallie talked about how our shipbuilding was greatly admired abroad and people knew about us. The Koreans and the Japanese knew about us, but they just went on and built ships. I do not think that Phil Gallie proved the case that he was trying to prove. He said that Eric Liddell had done great missionary work in China. That he may have done, but I doubt whether we could find three Chinese who could tell us his name now. What about coping with global developments? I happen to think that for a country the size of ours it is better to be nippy than weighty. The global economy is moving and changing so fast, and it is much easier to turn a wee tug boat than it is to turn the Queen Mary, if I may use that analogy. We could do rather well for ourselves, nipping in and out in the way that the smaller countries do in the big global movements of industrial and commercial change. What is so great about punching above our weight anyway if we are hidden inside the United Kingdom, as I believe that we are? Chris Ballance came up with the only advantage of punching above our weight. He said that Scotland could be the dirty man of Europe, but nobody would know—thank goodness—because it is the United Kingdom's CO 2 emissions that are measured, not the Scottish ones. That is one advantage; we can hide behind the United Kingdom. There is another advantage that we could exploit—Chris Ballance touched on this in his speech. Some time ago, during the cold war, an organisation called the Edinburgh Conversations was set up, of which I was part. It was a back channel for negotiation on arms reduction, believe it or not, and we could rehearse all the arguments in complete safety. Really top-level people came to the private meetings in Edinburgh or Moscow and we could do so because we were Scottish and could pretend that we were not British. I experienced that and when I have more time I will share some great stories with members. Chris Ballance is right that we could use the futures forum in a similar way. We could somehow pretend that we are not British, so no face would be lost. Do small countries like us envy us our political influence? Do the Nordic states long for the chance to be told what to do by America? I do not think so. They are quite happy that they were able to do what they did during the Icelandic cod war to preserve their interests and economy. Iceland played one of the few cards that it had as a small country and shut the base at Reykjavik and said to the American Government, "Get these trawlers out  of our economic zone and our fishing grounds. The base stays shut until you do it." It happened. If countries are adept, imaginative and bold, it is possible for them not to depend on the bigger power. They can do their own thing in the world. I would very much like us to do that, because it is good for countries to meet other countries eye to eye, knowing that they see each other as equals. At the moment, they might see us as a very nice place to visit, but they do not see us as an equal.

I cede to no one in my pride in Scotland or in my love for Scotland, but it was a contemporary Scotland, not all that long ago, that helped to nurture a number of people who went on to become successful African dictators. There are still one or two chinks in our armour.

Will Bill Aitken give way on that point?

I find the member's speech fascinating. However, it occurs to me that, if we take his argument to its logical conclusion, people who have come from the subcontinent, for example, to many different countries in Europe and who retain much of their culture will create in all those countries a homogeneous society and identity. Is the member happy about the loss and diminution of the different national identities that already exist?

That was a bad game.

I am absolutely supportive of the fresh talent initiative but, if the recent talk in  Westminster of extending the scheme to areas in England or all of England—I am not sure which—is realised, would we have any advantage from the devolved Government creating a policy that suits our particular needs in Scotland?

Does the member agree that we are also known for our modesty?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for raising this point of order. I have no wish to detract from the appointment of Elish Angiolini. However, I question the procedure whereby members have been presented with two names to approve at the same time. I feel uncomfortable, because I have no reason to suspect that the commendation given by the First Minister is anything other than correct. However, I am unhappy that there was no opportunity for separate scrutiny of the person for each post. I seek the Presiding Officer's guidance on whether that is the required procedure under the standing orders of the Scottish Parliament. If it is, will the Procedures Committee consider the matter and ascertain whether the procedure is sound?

If I recall correctly, the First Minister said that he first spoke to the person who is nominated for the post of Solicitor General a few days ago. That is what concerns many members in the chamber today. I fully accept that the gentleman has the distinguished record that the First Minister outlined, but who advised on his suitability for the post? Most members in the chamber would welcome the chance to know some of the history.

I thank Karen Gillon for her generosity in giving way. Does she agree that with better forward planning and business management we could be flexible and identify late sittings a week in advance?

I thank Donald Gorrie and congratulate his committee on both its reports, which are good reports. I will pick up where Susan Deacon left off—she asked how we can be spontaneous and flexible. In many respects, better party management is the answer; if we know what the Opposition business is and have enough time to plan ahead, we can decide to be more flexible about what shape the debate will take, who will take part in it and how long it will be. I am sometimes laughingly referred to as a party manager. I am not, of course, but I sit at the feet of the party managers. I do not blame them; I blame the shadowy people behind the scenes, although we do not have any such people in our grouping—we are all up front. Parliament should take on board the paradox that more flexibility and spontaneity might arise from better management of the business of the Opposition parties. By and large, the Government has to organise its business well in advance—Opposition parties might do the same. Wendy Alexander talked about the quality of debate influencing the quality of legislation. I suggest that we should do less, better. That is not an original thought, but I do not know why it was jettisoned along with many of the other promises that were made. One reason why our debates are less than satisfactory to a great number of us on the back benches is that we are so constrained by time. We need time to think, but we do not give ourselves that time. If we are honest with ourselves we will accept that we deliver speeches and afterwards, when we read them in the Official Report —if we have the nerve—we wish that we had had more time to think about them, because we would have said this, that and the next thing. I have no doubt that the quality of debate could achieve a tremendous peak of excellence, given how clever we all are. There is an element missing from this debate: it is the people outside Parliament, who are supposedly represented by the whisky-bottle shapes on the chamber walls. More than anything, we should worry about how we are perceived outside, rather than how we are perceived among ourselves. I am concerned about that and—from looking at the press gallery—I see that our words of wisdom will go unreported yet again. None of the mea culpas that we produce are acknowledged, so they are not relayed to the people who elect us—or who may not come out to  elect us to Parliament next time round. As well as examining the parliamentarians' procedures, perhaps the Procedures Committee might seek a rapprochement with the gentlemen of the press. Now that everybody drinks together in the White Heather Club bar, I do not see why we should not discuss how we should fulfil our functions in our democracy, because I do not think that the press are fulfilling theirs properly. That is me out of the papers for the next six months. In my defence, I will refer to a committee meeting that took place this week. It was an important meeting because the Prostitution (Public Places) (Scotland) Bill was discussed at it. The bill is not the main thrust of Parliament's business, but it is important and people outside Parliament are interested in it. However, there was not a single mention of it in the press apart from in a free sheet, although I do not know how it managed to wander into that—they must have had an incomplete page as it went to print.

Mea culpa. Good on The Press and Journal . Did the article mention that an Aberdeen man spoke? I welcome the idea of interpellation if it will introduce to Parliament greater accountability, which I would welcome in any guise. We should not even bother trialling it; we should just get on with it. We have reached the stage at which First Minister's question time in particular is farcical. We have a formulaic 20 minutes out of the only 30 minutes that are available for Parliament to call the Executive to account. It is becoming less and less satisfactory and the press have to pick through it for the peccadilloes and small change of our politics. We do ourselves no favours and—to return to my original assertion that we should think about how we are perceived when we consider our procedures—First Minister's question time does us no good whatever. That is no reflection on the First Minister, although it is a reflection on some other folk. The fact is that one often attends excellent question-and-answer sessions that no one from the press is present to record, although they are the meat of daily politics in which people outside Parliament are interested. The convener of the Procedures Committee should seek some sort of meeting with the press about their coverage. I have been talking about questions and how we organise business, and I have suggested that we would have more spontaneity and flexibility if we were better organised, but that does not extend to the Presiding Officer. He, too, is constrained by time—which he spends trying to find out before  question time what members' supplementary questions will be. I listen to the answers, and then I decide whether or not to ask a supplementary and what it might be. I will tell members what my supplementary would have been had I been able to get in today—no I will not, because I have run out of time and I do not want to fall out with the Deputy Presiding Officer, too.

I am not a straw man, although I confess to having had some concerns that the checks and balances in a unicameral Parliament would have been adversely affected in comparison with what Westminster has. I am partially won over, but we should not pat ourselves on the back too much because the only thing that we have got completely right is the accessibility. We can claim that the Parliament is genuinely accessible, but is it as effective as it might be?

I commend the proposal for a strategic air link at Edinburgh airport. I also express my astonishment and disappointment at the small thinking on the Opposition benches. When the First Minister coined the phrase "the best small country in the world", I told him that it would get him into trouble, but, to his credit, he put the emphasis on best, not small. The air link development proposal represents big thinking and a determination to act on it. What Donald Gorrie said is absolutely common sense. We do not have to go for every jot and tittle in the committee report just now; we will adapt and amend the proposal, so the fact that there are queries about details such as luggage racks should not rule it out. The debate on the development has also shown the Tory benches to be full of skinflints. They talk the talk on financial autonomy, they think big, but they do not walk the walk. Everything that they said was about the cost of the project; they said nothing about the benefit or the bravery of it. The faint hearts on the SNP benches timidly say that there should be a link, but  not the one proposed, and that we need a cheaper option because we do not have the money. Sadly, the last point is true. We probably do not have all the money that we need, but the money is there; it is just that we do not have it. I address these remarks to colleagues on the Labour benches. Just yesterday, it was announced that the oil and gas sector in the North sea has produced a £20.6 billion turnover—an increase from £8.7 billion in 1998. Somebody is getting the money, so why should the windfall that is going to the Westminster Treasury not come here? It should represent a windfall for us, for investment capital that is needed for strategic projects such as the Edinburgh airport rail link. If this Parliament—not a party in it, but the Parliament itself—demanded even a twentieth of that windfall, we could pay for the Edinburgh airport rail link project and for all the other projects that Fergus Ewing and Mark Ballard mentioned, because we all know that those schemes need attention as well. The money is there and I bet that, if we set out to get it, we would. I was surprised that the SNP spokespeople accepted the constraints of devolution. I was not surprised, I suppose, that they thought that we could not manage the project better than the Parliament project was managed, but I think that we could. We have learned a lesson. I echo what Donald Gorrie said about not being able to tunnel, after all the experience that Scottish engineers have had of tunnelling all over the world, so I discount that objection and believe that the tunnelling difficulties could be overcome. As I mentioned, the change from the £1 billion windfall would also pay for all the other projects. Bristow Muldoon said that the SNP lacked ambition and that the link could be done—he is wrong. It's the election, stupid! It has nothing to do with luggage rails, tunnelling or project management and everything to do with where constituency seats might be picked up. I hate saying it, but it is true, so we should just accept it. I look forward to picking up the project again once we have passed that wee hurdle. As members know, I am determined that Edinburgh's position as the capital should be recognised by everyone in the Parliament. I came here today in case there was puir-moothed talk about Edinburgh having loads of money and not needing any more. This is not about Edinburgh. What Helen Eadie said is true: this is about Scotland. It is about our future, our ambition, and our confidence, so act on it.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will instigate a review of policy in respect of the provision of wigs to patients undergoing chemotherapy. (S2O-10627)

I declare an interest as the patron of the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. I congratulate the Executive and the health boards on making the supply of wigs to chemotherapy patients much more satisfactory. Will the minister include in his review an examination of the Edinburgh-based organisation Wig Bank and the service that it operates? The non-profit-making service is run by a chemotherapy patient, who also offers advice and support of a unique nature to people who wish to use the service. Although, as I have conceded, the provision of wigs is now much more satisfactory, they have to be dressed, and they sometimes have to be changed in some way—

Could we have something running in tandem with that service to make it better?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek guidance from you on the conduct of business in the Parliament. I am well aware that Audit Scotland and the Auditor General for Scotland are not controlled either by the Executive or by Parliament, but Audit Scotland undertakes to produce reports for Parliament, properly to inform MSPs and the Executive. Is it therefore good practice—never mind good manners—that the press and other agencies outside Parliament should have prior sight of the report that is to be published tomorrow? All members have an interest in it and I know that, like me, other Edinburgh MSPs are anxious to see it. I will not touch on the contents of the report, but merely seek your guidance on the correct operation of how Audit Scotland interprets its responsibility to Parliament.

To ask the First Minister what the next agency to be relocated from Edinburgh will be and what the Scottish Executive considers will be the benefits for Edinburgh citizens and the capital's economy of such a move. (S2F-2434)

The First Minister is entitled to show me his figures and I will show him mine. Is he aware that the percentage of people in public sector jobs in Edinburgh is 27.9 per cent? In Dundee, 37 per cent of the city's workforce is employed in the public sector and in Glasgow the figure is 31.2 per cent. Now that he knows those facts and figures, does he understand the non-partisan, across-the-board opposition that was provoked by his statement that losing public sector jobs was a jolly good idea for Edinburgh? Does he now agree with the City of Edinburgh Council, the Edinburgh Chamber of Commerce and the people of Edinburgh that it would be perverse to move the Registers of Scotland out of the capital and to move the Scottish Arts Council out of the city that hosts the world's biggest arts festival, to say nothing of the turmoil that would be caused in at least 1,500 households in the city? I am heartened to hear that he will consider every case on its merits.

Does the First Minister agree that we can get too much of a good thing? It might have seemed like a good idea in 1999, but it is not such a good idea now. I would like an assurance from the First Minister that the two agencies that I mentioned are not in danger of being moved out of what should be their home in the capital of Scotland.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer.

My point also concerns the matter of discourtesy. As an ordinary back-bench member, I consider it discourteous for front-bench members to take up so much of the short period in which we may call the Executive to account by acting out their internal, internecine party squabbles. Could we have less of that and more questions next week?

The motion's clear implication is that the most secure future and the greatest prosperity to which the nation can reasonably aspire will be delivered by continuing with the current method by which we manage our resources, maintain our national social objectives and execute our foreign relationships. That would be laudable if, as a result of our current system of governing and safeguarding Scotland's interests, our fellow citizens enjoyed excellent health, our young people could fulfil their ambitions without having to leave Scotland and our poorer old people were free of the fear of eating or heating beyond the means that the state provides for them. There would be a rationale to wanting more of the same in the future if our present arrangements had not given rise to Carol Craig's brave attempt to help Scots to raise their expectations and develop the  confidence to pursue higher aspirations in personal achievement, community development and a national sense of well-being. If we did not have the pessimism and poverty that were revealed in official statistics that were published today, or malnourished children, or teenagers who are so unfit that they are judged not strong enough to join the armed services until they have undergone intensive training courses to reach an acceptable level of fitness, we might consider it sensible to continue with this system of governance. If we were not angry and frustrated at our own impotence as a national community to prevent our fellow citizens from becoming embroiled in wars that we do not support, and if we were able to develop relationships with other countries that enjoyed support in Scotland, that might constitute a reason for continuing with a political union that was forged to meet the needs of both Scotland and England in the 17 th and 18 th centuries. At its inception, the union was probably a good deal for both countries. England's back door was shut as regards her security, defence and foreign policies and, following the disaster of the Darien scheme, Scots gained access to England's empire, with economic and career development for ambitious Scots at home and abroad. However, although the great political, social and industrial movements of the 20 th century brought prosperity to some, they also centralised out of Scotland the machinery of public policy making and, therefore, the intrinsic sense of Scotland's national responsibility for the well-being of Scots. Scottish entrepreneurialism was denuded as ambitious risk-takers and innovators followed the headquarters and research and development departments of private sector companies—often, companies that were previously based in Scotland. Figures for emigration from Scotland during the 20 th century describe better than I can, due to the shortness of time, the imbalance in economic development and personal fulfilment that grew between the populations of Scotland and England. Scots excused themselves and rationalised the lack of opportunity in Scotland by persuading themselves that Scotland was too poor or too small, that it had too much marginal, unproductive land or that it was better off being run from London because we lacked people of ability. As was the case among a surprisingly high percentage of those who were elected by Scots to represent them at Westminster—whom I met when I was there—there was a commonly held belief that we Scots benefited from the civilising, liberal influence of the English establishment. That last point is probably one of the most urgent reasons for Scotland to place firmly in the  past those facts and the arguments that have raged over their interpretation. The facts of life in today's and tomorrow's world dictate that we take full responsibility for our own future rather than leave our fate to a pragmatic arrangement that suited our interests 300 years ago. Contemporary and future self-interest and pragmatism demand that we take action to cope with the widening social and demographic differences that exist between England and ourselves. Our needs regarding population growth are diametrically opposed; however, without sovereignty invested in the Scottish Parliament, we will be subject to whatever suits England's needs. The potential to develop in Scotland a less racially divided and more immigrant-friendly society than is currently developing in England will be lost, and that will be a huge loss not only to people in Scotland but to humanity in general. The old argument that we have benefited from being on England's economic and trading coat tails no longer applies. The Executive parties have, effectively, conceded that in their laudable attempts to establish direct communication and trading relationships with China, America, Europe and Australia. If proof is needed that a small country can turn around its economy and society although it was on the northern periphery of Europe, had an aging population and a high level of emigration among young people, and although its exports and economy were tied to a bigger neighbour, we should look at Ireland and think back about 20 years ago when one of the arguments that was advanced against Scottish independence was the fact that we did not want to be like Ireland. Times have changed, and it is time that we did. We can have the best of both worlds. We can maintain social harmony and union among all the people in the British isles and, at the same time, accept the responsibility—sovereignty by any other name—for our own future.

Does Euan Robson agree that there is something of a paradox in claiming as a strategic objective a greater number of social workers, whose function is presumably to clear up the mess that is made by social policies?

I am absolutely delighted that Eastwood should want to maximise the potential that the Commonwealth games offer, and am sure that there are many athletes of the calibre of Lee McConnell in Eastwood. However, there are also many promising athletes, some of whom are divers, in Edinburgh. Without hard cash being invested in facilities, it is possible that athletes—whether in Eastwood or Edinburgh—will not fulfil their potential.

Will the minister give way?

I apologise that my intervention is another about a justice matter. Children and young people can give anonymous testimony and we have set up courts specially to enable that. Could women who have been trafficked give anonymous testimony? The  minister will find that lack of anonymity is why no successful prosecutions have been made.

Cocklers as well.

Does the member agree that there is not enough protection for people who give evidence against professional gangs that organise human trafficking, and that we need to give victims more than 30 days' respite?

Does the member agree that she drew a distinction in the quotation that she read out, when she indicated that a woman could be trafficked into prostitution in a brothel or into a sweat shop as a machinist? The issue is the trafficking of human beings.

I doubt whether the figures that Sandra White has given refer to the current year. There was a drop in the figures immediately after Sweden criminalised the buying of sex, but the number of those involved in street prostitution has risen again. There are differences among the three main cities in Sweden, as there are among the three main cities in Scotland.

I thank—hardly congratulate, but thank—Trish Godman for bringing the matter to the attention of Parliament. I believe that the issue is trafficking, not necessarily prostitution. As Trish Godman pointed out, prostitution is the heartrending result, but the issue that must be tackled is trafficking. I applaud Trish Godman's comment about the need for the UK to sign the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. We cannot tackle trafficking unless we do that. I would go further than Trish Godman and say that women who can be persuaded to testify against the gangs who bring them here should be allowed some time to put their lives in order before they are sent back again. As we well know, there are ties that bind from here back to the countries of origin, where the women have family that can be terrorised and so on. It is not good enough for us to say, when a woman is brave enough to testify against the gangs that brought her here, that she should go back after a wee while. She should be allowed to stay if we are convinced that she is of sound character and that she came here with good intentions. We can determine that fairly. An issue that Trish Godman mentioned, almost in passing, is integral to tackling the problem. She referred to the position of the voluntary and support organisations. They must be funded and supported to the hilt as they are much better and much quicker at reaching the women than anybody else. I will not add much more. Members will know of my interest in the management of street  prostitution, but I do not see this issue as being about that, because those lassies are not on the street. They are hidden away where people cannot get at them. It is not even the same as women who are working in the indoor sex industry. It is more pernicious and horrible than that and must be tackled differently: it must be seen as a problem of people trafficking. I thank Trish Godman again for bringing the issue before Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will undertake to underwrite any funding gap in respect of the  planned tramline that is integral to the development of the Edinburgh waterfront project. (S2O-9921)

I, too, think that a robust business case should be presented to the Executive. Before the minister knocks me back again, I will tell him that I am confident in the council's ability to raise the funds under its own steam. However, given that the tramline is an integral part of a much-needed development, will the Executive agree at this stage not to knock back a request for funding in the contingency that there is a shortfall?

Just before Donald Gorrie summarises, will he tell us where the consumer's voice comes into this? At the moment, it appears as if we are Pooh-Bah and we do it all, yet there is supposed to be an ombudsman who responds to public complaints.

I think that all members want as many accident and emergency departments as possible so that people are given a feeling of comfort, but providing such services in rural areas is not possible in the way that it is in urban areas. In that context, the training of paramedic staff—who are the first people to reach patients—is all the more important and must be considered alongside the siting of accident and emergency units.

Adam Ingram said that it will take time to change the attitudes of the public and patients to the redesign of services, so the minister should not quickly chop off services with which people are familiar. Does David Davidson agree?

I accept that Fife is fabulous, but given that there are GP surgeries, walk-in services at hospitals and complementary services, how are the funding streams straightened out?

I do not disagree with a word that Duncan McNeil has said. However, does he agree that it is not the health service's policies or strategies that have brought about the situation that he describes, but the economic situation? If we are talking about tackling the inequalities in health, we must address that as well.

I am part of a group of people in Edinburgh who are trying to bring together medical GP services, associated complementary services, social work services and all the things that we have talked about and which the Kerr report talks about. I hope that Euan Robson agrees with me that we must address the point that David Davidson raised, which is that funding streams often get in the way of good ideas.

Good morning to you, Presiding Officer, and to those members who have got here in time. As one would expect from business in the independents' allocation of time, this morning's debate will not be used to bash Lewis Macdonald or to allow Lewis Macdonald to bash anybody else. We have had enough bashing without thought in here, so we will be thinking instead about the implications of Professor David Kerr's report for the NHS in Scotland. I believe the report to be a good analysis of the principal requirements of the NHS in the 21 st century. When it was published, some commentators talked down the importance and quality of "Building a Health Service Fit for the Future". Some said that we had heard most of the report's observations and recommendations before, which seemed to me to be a case of "Never mind the quality, feel the width." Of course, it is true that we have heard clinicians, academics and health workers in general expounding the need for a particular specialism to be located in one hospital because that is the only way in which the necessary throughput of patients can be achieved to enable surgical teams to develop their expertise to the highest level possible. However, the Kerr report is the first of its kind to remind us implicitly but quite firmly and consistently that there will be trade-offs in the redesign of health services delivery systems. To paraphrase Professor Kerr, if patients want to be admitted to hospital as soon as possible after diagnosis, within the timescale intimated to them, and to leave after as short a stay as is compatible with a good recovery, they—that is us—will have to take more responsibility for their own health, fitness and sense of well-being. In principle, that seems a fair enough trade-off to me, but such a  refocused approach will not just swing into place without the appropriate planning procedures or without excellent communication of ideas and objectives to health workers and their potential patients, before policies are signed and sealed. There must also be practical demonstrations from the Executive of how trade-offs can work in the interests of all parts of the Scottish community. It is important that the Executive should take the lead in demonstrating that. To give an example of what I mean by the Executive taking the lead in changing our perceptions about how the NHS can best nurture good health, as opposed to cure bad health, I commend Andy Kerr for his attendance at and support for the launch of the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland a couple of days ago. That new charity comprises voluntary organisations that have been campaigning for years on single conditions, representing people who live with diabetes, epilepsy, asthma, post-polio syndrome, lymphoedema, the after-effects of stroke, colitis, Parkinson's disease and many other conditions, some of which are life-threatening and some of which are not but which, nevertheless, are extremely debilitating and, if not managed properly, can easily act as catalysts for the development of other conditions and illnesses, including mental illness, resulting in misery for the sufferer and additional cost to the NHS. The minister has wisely pump-primed that new charity because if it is to contribute to the redesign of services as a genuine partner with health boards and social work and housing departments, it will need the money to engage staff who are equal to the task. Thought and energy are required to maximise the return on the resources committed by the Executive and the money raised by the various charities in the umbrella alliance of long-term conditions campaigns. I know, as I am sure other members will, of umpteen campaigning groups and charities that are forced to spend a disproportionate amount of their time and energy on fundraising. Although I am not advancing a case for throwing even more money at organisations such as the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland—because I am well aware that we are now spending twice what we were spending when the Parliament came into being—I urge the minister to get together now with the voluntary organisations that might be expected to underpin the collective care in the community of people with the sort of conditions that I have referred to and to deliver much of the information and education that will enable sufferers to manage their conditions and achieve their personal optimum level of good health. It is a waste of the expertise of sufferers, their carers and the volunteers who support them—to say nothing of the diminished quality of support for sufferers of long-term conditions—if too much time is spent on  trying to raise money. There is a balance to be struck and I do not think that we have got it quite right. In Edinburgh, there is a prototype of the sort of provision that utilises the energy and imagination of volunteers and appropriate services. The Minister for Health and Community Care has visited the Fala Court health initiative with me. I hope that Lewis Macdonald has heard of it, and he is welcome to visit it too. That sort of service points to the future of achieving what the Kerr report says we should be attempting to achieve for the NHS.

I note what you said about the shortage of time, Presiding Officer. I lodged and will move my amendment, but not to deny the good intentions of the Executive's motion. In the section of "Hidden Harm" on the strategy for tackling drugs, the Executive says: "There is no single treatment option that works better than others." I could not agree more and my amendment supports that approach. Indeed, our experience over the past 25 years of having roughly the same mix of policies for dealing with substance abuse has taught us that. We have also learned that the mix of measures falls far short of achieving the objective that is identified in the report of people having "wherever possible ... a drug-free life." A week or two ago, the minister spoke about the small reduction in the number of heroin abusers. I doubt whether that can be identified as a trend, however. Even if the decrease is not reversed, I think it is accepted that other drugs have filled the gap. The overall picture is that we continue to have a huge drug-abuse problem. As we have heard, tens of thousands of children live with parents who abuse substances. In, "Hidden Harm", the Executive says: "Across Scotland there are an estimated 40,000-60,000 children affected by parental drug use. An estimated 80,000-100,000 children are affected by parental alcohol misuse." That is why I always prefer to talk of substance abuse. By and large, we understand the use and abuse of alcohol much better than we understand the use and abuse of drugs. Although I would like integrated policies and service delivery for alcohol and drug abuse to be developed, particularly in relation to children who live with substance-abusing parents, I have concentrated on drugs in my amendment today because it is the area where we should have more evaluation of current practices and more investigation of alternatives. Because alcohol is legal, policies are easier to change than are those that apply to illegal drugs. We neither control the market in illegal drugs nor attempt to control attitudes—or, rather, we try to do so, knowing that we cannot. I will therefore concentrate on illegal drugs for the remainder of my contribution, as the issue is more difficult to resolve.  I suggest, as I have done before, that one of the things that we must do, if we are to think seriously about how to cope with the huge number of children whose lives are blighted here and now by drugs, is to admit that we do not have the facilities, services or service delivery mechanisms that those children require. Perhaps we can think about short circuiting. Could we return to the old system and have a pilot scheme in a suitable area to provide heroin users with legally prescribed heroin? I want such a scheme to be evaluated. No one can argue that the present system is any better than the old one of delivering measured amounts of heroin through a medical route. I wonder whether it can be proved that it is any worse for children to live with heroin-using parents when the heroin is prescribed and delivered by a doctor than it is for them to live with parents whose lives are made chaotic not only by their heroin abuse, but by what they have to do to get their heroin and by the consequences of using heroin that might be cut with heaven knows what. Annabel Goldie has spoken movingly in the Parliament about methadone, but I still feel that we have not worked out what methadone is for. Is it a palliative or a short-term treatment? Or, if we take into account the realities to which I referred, such as the shortage of services on the ground and the lack of delivery mechanisms for services, is it really a medicine that people take to keep going when they are desperate? For some people, we should face the unfaceable. At present, we do not offer anything other than methadone, so we must consider how we can make the system just a wee bit better. I agree with Rosemary Byrne that we must intervene and get to the mothers of the children as soon as they leave hospital. My amendment mentions kinship carers, whom we often think of as being grandparents, although sometimes they can be other members of the extended family. There are also community carers. Those people must be recompensed. It costs money to do normal activities with children, such as going to the swimming baths or taking them to sports activities. I am glad that Glasgow City Council has acknowledged that, but we do not have a national attitude or policy on recompensing kinship and community carers. I hope that members will support my amendment. I move amendment S2M-4370.3, to leave out from "; recognises" to end and insert: "and to that end guarantees to investigate properly alternative regimes that aim to reduce the harm done by drug abuse and stabilise the lifestyle of persistent drug abusers; acknowledges the important role of kinship carers in helping to safeguard and nurture children who have been affected by substance misuse and recognises this role by financially recompensing them to an agreed national standard, and supports the Executive's commitment to  further improvements in the way that agencies protect and support children in these circumstances."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Today's First Minister's question time did not conform to the objectives or standards that we can identify in our standing orders. I wish an assurance from you that you will speak to the First Minister and the deputy leader of the Scottish National Party and point out to them that many of us sit here with a serious intention. If we want to pull the wings off flies or have a stairheid rammie, we will stay at home.

I am 100 per cent supportive of amendment 16, but can the minister enlighten me as to whether it will have a knock-on effect on the contract of employment for head teachers? Has any thought been given to that?

Will the member give way?

I have a question for Lord James. I put the worst possible case to him: what if not enough parents take enough of an interest or participate enough? Amendment 30 appears to be prescriptive.

Although I have the greatest respect for Rosemary Byrne, I think that her good intentions have overtaken her good judgment on this. We should be trying to make any bills that the Parliament passes as simple to read as possible. They should be in very clear English. Well-intentioned though Fiona Hyslop's  amendments may be, they would not make anything in the bill clearer and certainly would not improve the role of parents in schools.

If the Executive's amendments are not agreed to, what sanctions will the Executive be able to deploy against parents who do not become involved when their children are at the pre-school stage?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I appreciate that the language may have been diplomatic, but I think that it was inspired not from heaven but from ministerial office. I think I speak for other members when I say that I would prefer to know that there is some method by which you can warn ministers yet again that Parliament must be given prior notice of such measures.

I apologise for being late in joining the debate—I had an appointment outside Parliament. I thank Donald Gorrie for bringing this matter to a members' business debate. This is the first layer of something important and I hope that there are main party debates on the subject. Karen Whitefield talked about community regeneration and where volunteering fits into that, and in the latter part of his speech Andrew Welsh talked about the importance of village halls. The motion goes right to the heart of the matter when it talks about core funding. I agree with Carolyn Leckie, who spoke about the effects of cuts, some of which may well be occasioned by the amount of money that is being diverted to the London Olympics. I, too, have been concerned that some of the smaller sports clubs and voluntary organisations—not just in Scotland but particularly here—might suffer as a result of money having to be found for the Olympic games and changes to lottery funding. It is quite ironic that I should appear to be carping about the Olympic games, because I want to speak up for sports club volunteers. The issue is fresh in my mind. At the weekend I was at a swim meet organised by City of Edinburgh Swimming. It was marvellous. About 800 swimmers were there, as were 60 volunteer officials and about 40 volunteer helpers. The event could not have taken place without those volunteers. All the young people who were there, and not hanging about aimlessly round street corners and getting up people's noses, were doing the best thing that they could do—they were getting fit and were channelling their energy into reaching targets and standards. They were absolutely terrific, and the amount of voluntary effort showed what the voluntary sector is all about. The voluntary sector is right at the core of community life. However, the scoreboard did not work and the heating was all to pot and could not be controlled. Those problems were to do not purely with voluntary sector funding but with the way in which many services that used to be provided by the leisure and recreation departments of councils are now provided by companies. In Edinburgh, that company is Edinburgh Leisure and it has to operate as a company and attempt to show a profit. Therefore, it cannot look on volunteering  more kindly than it looks on other, commercial enterprises. As a result, people who had come from all over Scotland, England, Wales, Ireland and the Isle of Man, at their own expense, were not treated as Jamie Stone suggested that volunteers should be treated—with great respect and with genuine community thanks for the way in which they had gone about their volunteering. I am sorry if I sound a little het up but I was very het up when I saw the amount of effort that went into the event and then saw that effort being undervalued. I would also like an extension of the idea that the grannies and grandpas whom I saw at that event can be chaperones, coaches and supporters for all the young swimmers. I would like the voluntary sector, or the voluntary sector in combination with a community regeneration drive, to offer training courses for grandparents so that we can get them involved in the supportive volunteering that I associate with swimming clubs, cycle clubs, boxing clubs and all sorts of sports clubs. We sometimes forget that the people who make all that effort often do not really have the money to do it. Therefore, their volunteering is undervalued and the potential for the development of young people in sport and other areas is diminished. I thank Donald Gorrie for bringing this debate to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment the Environment and Rural Affairs Department has made of the environmental impact of European directive 2002/91/EC. (S2O-9617)

Is the minister satisfied that, after three years' notice of the directive, we are still only at the consultation stage? Why is it that the Executive, having put so much energy into promoting energy saving, is failing to take the advantage that the Parliament has of displaying a certificate of energy efficiency? That would lead the way and perhaps show that the Parliament is fulfilling the European directive's intention of making a 25 per cent energy saving.

Will the member take an intervention?

In moving the amendment in my name, I associate myself with the motion's intention and with much of the commentary that it contains. I do not wholly approve of commentary in motions, but that is a matter for you, Presiding Officer. In calling for more resources for long-term residential rehabilitation centres for people who are addicted to hard drugs, for example, the mover of the motion has my total support. I have supported such provision for more than 20 years, but in all that time no Government has provided resources that are adequate to the task of turning heroin users away from their addiction. I heard what Hugh Henry had to say about statistics, but the hard core of hard users remains. That is not to say that Governments have not put money into what has always been referred to as the war against drugs. They have, but it has never been enough to combat the power of the suppliers who moved into the social gaps that developed as a result of deconstruction of the nuclear family and the long-term destabilising effects of underemployment and unemployment. Although I have specific criticisms of aspects of anti-drug policies that have been pursued by Governments—Labour, Tory and, in this Parliament, the coalition—I believe that all of them have pursued those policies with the best of intentions. However, all have failed to achieve their strategic objective, if we define that objective as being to rid society of the destructive power of drug abuse.  Governments, local councils and health boards have been fighting and losing the war against drugs since I chaired the Scottish Drugs Forum in the late 1980s. That is not intended as a criticism of their competence, but much the same mixture of policies has been pursued in other countries, with much the same outcome—an apparently inexorable rise in drug abuse. At this point, it is worth noting the difference in the statistics for drug abuse between the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. I am sure that Stewart Stevenson will agree that there is bound to be a big difference between the statistical use of cannabis in Amsterdam and its use throughout the whole of the Netherlands, because people go to Amsterdam specifically to smoke cannabis. However, the stats for cannabis use in the rest of the country are lower than ours.

I hope that Mr Stevenson accepts that I am simply trying to correct what I believe is a wrong picture of the situation. We should no longer continue to view and assess the effects of alcohol abuse separately from the effects of abuse of other mood or mind-altering substances. Ten to 15 years ago, dance drugs were all the rage for the bright young things out on the town or up for a rave. However, there has been a change in social attitudes and culture; although those drugs are still available, alcohol is now the substance of first choice and getting legless is now an accepted part of a good night out. Although alcohol abuse statistics show that the situation is worse in the UK than it is elsewhere, this new fashion in substance abuse is becoming common across Europe. Young people are simply ignoring the laws that govern alcohol, cannabis and cocaine and are mixing and matching those substances to the detriment of their health and of national health service budgets. The relevant laws and, indeed, our general approach to substance abuse are not working, which is why front-line police officers in Strathclyde have said loud and clear that a fundamental reassessment of attitude and policy is required. Those officers, who spoke as members of the Scottish Police Federation, have not—as some sections of the media have reported—advocated immediate and/or wholesale legalisation of drugs. Moreover, neither I nor my amendment seeks such a move. The policies that have been pursued for more than two decades are failing, so I—like those officers—want a wholesale investigation of the reasons for increased abuse of substances including alcohol, and an open-minded  approach to dealing with the situation in the interests of abusers and for the general good. Prohibition of potentially injurious substances does not have a very good track record. Before anyone refers to the very high rate of public compliance with the smoking ban, I point out that it is much too soon to draw conclusions not on how or where people smoke but on how many fewer people are doing so. As the police officers in Strathclyde have suggested, it is time to think the unthinkable and to probe the feasibility of, for example, supplying heroin legally and under medical supervision to registered addicts. After all, that is what happened not so long ago. The benefits to users' health are obvious. The reduction in the level of criminality that is associated with the illegal supply of drugs is a less predictable element, but we can be pretty sure that a reduction would happen. There is evidence that the likelihood is higher than was previously thought that heavy cannabis users can suffer permanent damage, but I wonder whether the figures are any worse than the figures for the harm that is done to the health of binge-drinkers and other alcohol abusers, and whether the statistics suggest that the two substances should be approached from the same legal and practical starting point. As for methadone, should it be viewed as a short or long-term palliative, as a substitute for heroin or as a cheap way of introducing some order into chaotic lives? Can we ever consider viewing crack cocaine and the newer derivative life-destroyers in the same light as legally controlled and supplied substances? I believe that we should not, but if police officers did not have so much work to do on heroin and cocaine, they might have more time and resources to combat the even more dangerous drugs that can be made in a back bedroom. Before anyone is moved to reply that a reclassification of and a fresh approach to drugs will send out confusing signals and encourage more drug abuse, I freely concede that the Home Office made a pig's ear of its new approach to cannabis. Its model is not the one that we should follow. Hugh Henry said that the Executive's policy objective was to give people drug-free lives. If that objective does not include alcohol, we will have to do a lot of explaining to the people who now use that substance in much the same way as their parents might have used cannabis. One reason for a fresh examination into attitudes and patterns is that the statistics that have been cited even in this short debate are very confusing, so I urge the Executive to carry out an investigation to clear up the matter. I have posed questions, but I do not  know all the answers. Perhaps we should think about finding them. I move amendment S2M-4252.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "regrets the continuing economic and social cost of alcohol and drug abuse across Scotland and calls on the Scottish Executive to establish a commission of investigation into such misuse."

My question relates specifically to what Stewart Stevenson has just said. In the study by Neil McKeganey, did addicts to hard drugs have a different attitude to abstention to that of perpetual users of soft drugs?

In no way do I wish to introduce a note of discord, but, although I acknowledge that increased resources have been allocated, I would like the minister to explain why some beds in detox centres—which are not exactly residential—are lying empty. Is that down to a shortage of resource in the local authority or the health authority?

The minister's report card to date would be that he works well and shows promise. As Frank McAveety said, there is still a gap between the intentions and the objectives that Peter Peacock has set out, which are being amplified through the curriculum review. I am old enough to remember a lot of fashions in education, some of which were positively destructive in that they destroyed the morale of teachers, which I will come to later. I applaud fully the approach of grouping subjects. I have been nipping the minister's ear about grouping physical education, home economics and health education and to think of them as a group of subjects that are taught holistically. I will stray into the territory of Robin Harper and others and say that history could be taught along with philosophy and perhaps economics. I would like philosophy to be introduced into the curriculum, given that we are talking about growing the whole child into the rounded, developed adult. The message is group them, but do not merge them. There is a big difference. If the minister indicates that he is not going to merge  history with other subjects, which is the example on everyone's lips, I will be a happy MSP. The nub of the matter is teacher training, which Robin Harper quite rightly mentioned. The teacher training colleges have courses that are not being introduced, tested or exploited. That should be happening at the same time that the curriculum review is being undertaken. A successful curriculum must be delivered by well-trained, confident teachers. I believe that we need specialists, because a teacher who knows that they are on top of their subject is a confident teacher and a confident teacher is more likely to be able to deal with the biggest problem in the profession at the moment, which is the poor discipline that is evident in far too many classrooms and takes up far too much teaching time. I make a plea for specialists to be held on to, because they are usually inspired by their specialism and can, in turn, inspire pupils. If pupils are inspired by their teacher, all the indications are that they are less likely to kick up a ruckus in the classroom. I make two pleas. One is for subjects not to be merged and the other is for the issue of teacher training to be examined at the same time as the curriculum is being examined. We must hold on to the best possible specialisms and specialist teachers. If we take appropriate action, we might not lose as many.

I well remember that cup win, Presiding Officer. [ Laughter. ] I expect it to be repeated with gusto. I am concerned about the number of people who will have to queue for tickets; not the assured tickets at Waverley station, but those that will be distributed on a first-come-first-served basis, the estimated amount of which is 1,500, but the special trains can carry only 1,700. Can the minister do anything, even at this late stage, to alleviate the considerable possibility for tension?

Will the member put on record his disagreement with Dave Collins, the performance director for UK Athletics, who said that athletes should concentrate only on the world championships and Olympic games and forget about the Commonwealth games?

Yesterday I disagreed with my good friend Donald Gorrie on trams, but today I want to support every syllable of what he said. He was absolutely right to refer to our lack of success in building on success such as we had at the Commonwealth games. I plead with the minister to take a personal interest in how sportscotland or whoever relates to the governing bodies of different sports. As Donald Gorrie said, some are fine, but some are not. That is important because when it comes to provision of facilities, I presume that we will prioritise the sports that will benefit most people. We need, therefore, to know what underpinnings for sports coaching  and administration are in place. People forget such important details—local authorities boast about the number of all-weather pitches they have, but the length of the artificial turf that is used dictates what sports can be played on it. I ask the minister to take a close and detailed interest in what is happening in governing bodies and local authorities. The SNP is absolutely right to describe the provision of facilities as a priority if we are to enhance sporting success in Scotland. Yesterday, I attended a swimming meet in Edinburgh, which was organised by the active sports programme. I go every year and it gets better every year. I congratulate the Executive for that initiative, which has allayed some of my fears that it might be trying to get PE teaching on the cheap. However, I am glad that Karen Gillon alluded to the fact that last year a 17 per cent decrease in the number of PE teachers in primary schools was recorded. Members may share my concern that the Executive will not meet its target for 2008 because the numbers of PE teachers that are required are not in training. The Minister for Education and Young People is aware of another initiative, which will be piloted in Edinburgh, I believe, and which will seek to make use of many of the students who are currently doing physical activity courses in our further education colleges. I will leave it to the minister to go into the detail of scheme, but it is another small triumph for team MacDonald. I turn to the issue of teams and what we call them. The SNP is right to say that there could be a Scottish team at the Olympics. However, internationalism is a different concept in today's sport. I hate to pour cold water on the SNP's proposal for a Scottish Olympic team, but I would do the same to the proponents of team GB. We should consider how many athletes choose to join another country and compete under its colours. In the winter Olympics, umpteen alpine skiers originate from places other than the Alps. Plenty of swimmers and track and field athletes join the countries that best specialise in their sports because that allows them access to specialised coaching. We are moving into a new era. I appeal to both sides to stop the silly argy-bargy about team GB and team Scotland. If we want to have a team Scotland at the Olympics, we can have one. We could do what New Zealand and Trinidad do and specialise in our strongest sports. We could also remain part of team GB. At the end of the day, the elite athletes will follow their nose and follow the coaches, because sport is now a professional business.

Will Jamie McGrigor give way?

Will the minister give way?

If it is found after the business case has been scrutinised as it should be that there is a shortfall on the council's part, could the Executive lend the council money to make sure that a link is established between Granton and Newhaven?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As a back bencher with an interest in transport in the city of Edinburgh and a local member, I have sat here patiently with a particular point to make about what the minister said. Is it possible for the time available for the debate to be extended? If it is not possible, how can we redress the imbalance between members who have spoken three or four times today and those of us who have not been able to speak at all?

I do not mean to be flippant, but people have been sleeping the length and breadth of Leith Walk for generations. What do we mean by the British standards members have mentioned? Do the same standards apply in Brussels or Oslo? If they do not, it would seem that no one in Oslo sleeps.

Is the First Minister aware of an injustice and inequity that is experienced by a small but significant group of pensioners when they enter council-owned residential care homes? Those pensioners are assessed on their ability to contribute to the cost of their care and, as part of that assessment, some councils place a notional value on property that those pensioners owned but might well have sold as much as a decade before they require residential care.

It might be better for the Executive to revisit the National Assistance (Sums for Personal Requirements) (Scotland) Regulations 2002, with a view to equalising the assessments nationally, rather than devolving the decision to councils on how far back the notional property value will apply in assessments. In one council that is known to the First Minister, 11 years has been the comparator. Perhaps the Executive could follow the guidelines that are used by the Inland Revenue when it pursues unpaid taxation. It feels that it needs to go back only six years.

Does Jeremy Purvis agree with Bill Aitken's description of the bill as an enabling measure? Moreover, given Mr Purvis's legal background, does he consider this to be a good way of legislating for what has been described as a strategic development for Scotland?

rose—

Does my colleague agree that the minister should tell us in his summing-up whether the money is on the table? If it is not, the business case will be not just weak, but non-existent. Does he also agree that we need a proper evaluation of the extent to which the waterfront expansion depends on a tram link?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I query the logic in the minister's argument for the two separate markets, which are to be served by the proposed tramway and rail link. However, people who are coming into  the airport are not likely to want to stop off along the route into Edinburgh and many of the people who work in the financial centre out west travel in from the west. It is therefore unlikely that they will use a tram that comes from the city centre.

I am extremely interested in Bill Aitken's last few remarks. May I take it that, at some future point—although we are not certain when—tramline 2 will be built, or should we consider that the bill is never likely to be used?

Does the member agree that one of the reasons why those two countries have a greater amount of cash flowing through the system, which can go to pensioners, is the fact that they do not spend around £20 billion a year on nuclear weapons?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With all due respect, if Parliament decides that it needs more discussion on the matter, someone would need to suggest that, using the procedures that are available. I do not suggest that that should be done at this precise moment in time. As the member of the bureau responsible for arguing that the appointment should be debated, I feel that we may not have investigated many issues that have been raised in the course of the debate. Members may want to pursue that further.

I simply want to ask Mike Rumbles whether he was suggesting that the appointment should not be confirmed until Parliament has discussed with the proposed appointee changes to the way in which the procedures and process work, given the dissatisfaction with them. Will he clarify that important issue?

Will the minister give way?

On the same point that my successor as convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee raised, although I warmly welcome the minister's endorsement of Sylvia Jackson's concern and interest in the subject, can I say that we made the same request as her of one of the minister's predecessors. I do not know that all that much has changed. Warm words are great, but can the Subordinate Legislation Committee have two or three extra days instead?

Will that be before stage 3 of the Bankruptcy and Diligence (Scotland) Bill?

Does the First Minister agree that we should build on the inquiry into methadone use and widen its work by establishing a standing commission on the misuse of substances, including alcohol? We cannot judge our policies on drugs and alcohol without seeing them in the same light. We need a genuinely radical approach, because we have tried the same mixture of policies for more than 20 years—since the time when I was chair of the Scottish Drugs Forum—but nothing has improved. Surely we can say that the policies have failed and that we need better alternative ones.

Will the member take an intervention?

Further to Mr Canavan's point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for making this point and I appreciate that you are not yet in any position to say how much all the disruption will cost or who will pay, if any greater cost is to be incurred. I simply ask you to assure us that the cost of everything will be much more transparent than the cost of the original construction of the Parliament building was.

I hope that the minister will forgive me if I do not enter into the unseemly squabble about who pays tolls and who does not. We all know why some folk are paying them and some folk are not. Let us consider the part of the minister's statement that leaves an unanswered question. He said that he did not know how the proposed new crossing would be funded. I can understand his not knowing what it would cost to build a replacement bridge, but I would like to find out how it would be funded, given what is happening to the Barnett formula. In addition, I want to know more about the timescale, given what we know will happen to the labour supply because of the London Olympics in 2012.

I pick up from where Duncan McNeil left off. He is right: many more members should have been here today. I congratulate the minister. He is on top of his brief and I have found him easy to approach. I will say this for him—he does listen. The fact that he cannot always deliver as quickly as I would like is the fault not just of the minister but of a great number of things that I do not have time to go into. Professor David Kerr's report stated: "We need a health care system with an emphasis on providing continuous preventative care for people with long term conditions to balance our ability to react quickly and safely to medical emergencies ... Long term conditions require ongoing care ... They are common in the Scottish population, more common in people living in deprived circumstances, more common in older people and, because Scotland's population is ageing, they will become even more prevalent in the future." Having talked to the minister, I know that work is being done to examine the situation in relation to long-term conditions. For example, work is already being done with people who approached the minister through the Public Petitions Committee, who have a condition that not many people know about—they are post-polio sufferers. I appreciate the fact that the minister took time to pay attention to a condition that has been neglected for a long time. Also, as a number of members said, Audit Scotland is studying the management of people with long-term conditions. However, for many people who live with chronic conditions, the reduction in waiting times means little. I do not mean to whine; I am just stating a fact. The report from the NHS Scotland long-term conditions action team states: "Our challenge is to provide the best quality of care within our finite resources for our citizens who may suffer from long term conditions now and in the future." Obviously, its aim is to keep people as well as possible for as long as possible. It continues: "Our staff will be well trained in patient centred approaches and will be working in strong multidisciplinary teams that span the current divides between primary and secondary care and health and social care." Members might note the link between that and my intervention on the member who opened for the Liberal Democrats, when I asked about physiotherapy. I turn the minister's attention to physiotherapy because it is an example of something that requires more of an emphasis now that he is getting on top of the surgery waiting times. We can  point to any number of individuals who do not receive on-going care and whose quality of life is much reduced as a result. For them, waiting lists mean little. My experience in Lothian is that, if someone's doctor recommends them for physiotherapy, they get a block of six sessions. Often, that is not enough to cope with their condition, but when they finish the block of six sessions the physiotherapist has no leeway to decide that they need another one or two treatments. The patient has to go back to their doctor and start again. Many people who live with chronic conditions have a number of needs that cross several medical disciplines. At present, they have to be referred to each one individually by their GP. That concerns me, particularly in relation to physiotherapy. If we are talking about preventive medicine and about helping people to help themselves, physiotherapy should play a large part in the provision of care. Is the minister aware that, in Scotland, 64 per cent of physiotherapy graduates cannot get posts? That figure is shocking and I do not completely understand it; perhaps it takes us back to the question of finite resources. We also do not compare well with the United Kingdom figure, which is 53 per cent. I have many examples to give to the minister later—I do not have time just now—to round out that bald figure and to show where paying more attention to physiotherapy and making better provision would help with hospital care and so on. I see that the minister is nodding. As I said, he is very approachable and I am happy to pay tribute to him for that, as long as he promises me that long-term conditions will not fall behind more dramatic illnesses in the priority scale.

The member mentioned two specialist physiotherapists and a multidisciplinary team. Does he know whether, when people are referred, they are given a block of physiotherapy appointments or they simply receive treatment for as long as they are under the multidisciplinary team's care?

Does the member agree that we should perhaps have more pity than scorn for Jim Murphy? I think that he suffers from a long-term chronic condition.

Will the First Minister assure me that precautionary forward planning is taking place on two issues? The first is the shortfall of specialist isolation units as a result of the development of our health services. That issue must be considered. For example, we no longer have a sufficient number of qualified specialist nurses. I do not mean to be  light about the issue, but my second point is that, because migratory wildfowl are found across the road from the Parliament in St Margaret's loch, we are within the 1-mile radius that Her Majesty's Government recommends for quarantine should any affected bird be found. Has anyone given any thought to what we would do if we were banged up with one another in this place for heaven knows how long?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. With the greatest respect, I believe that a number of matters were raised during this question session that were not necessarily addressed in the statements from the minister or the Lord Advocate. Fergus Ewing raised a number of those in the final question, in response to which the Lord Advocate said that he would reply in writing. Is it entirely appropriate that we should not all know what the Lord Advocate tells Fergus Ewing in writing? I wonder also about the process that we have just followed, whereby two ministers with completely different responsibilities answered questions at the same time, when it was not clear which minister should be expected to answer.

The minister is nice, but will he confirm that what was said was that specialist history teachers will continue to be trained, not that teachers will have to choose history as a specialism within their wider training? Will history teachers continue to be trained?

My remarks will be brief. I echo what James Douglas-Hamilton said and I thank Mary Mulligan for, and congratulate her on, securing the debate, which I have enjoyed listening to. I hope that the teachers  who are with the Linlithgow primary pupils will not be annoyed, but I must admit that I have other ideas about what they could do and how they could add value to the project. I was really taken by the idea of mothers, aunties and grannies making the costumes. I see it as a fruitful seam—forgive the awful pun—for volunteering. It would be a most natural way of getting people involved in community activities, which is what we want. I hope that the teachers will not damn me for suggesting that. Mary Mulligan said that parents do not object to children losing school time, but the children do not lose school time. Instead, they win educational time, which is the whole point. The children learn how to meet people from outside their own tight community. Linlithgow is a fairly small community; as Fiona Hyslop said, when she looks at the gallery, she is looking at people she knows. It can only be a good and educational experience to meet people from outwith one's own community and to find ways to communicate with them. That is another way in which the project is excellent. I got an A in higher history. That does not make me biased, but it does make me concerned about history as a school subject. Peter Peacock has assured me here in the chamber that history will continue to be taught as a school subject, but he said that different delivery mechanisms might be used. I do not think that the pupils in the gallery this evening could have delivered their service with such imagination and depth of knowledge had they not had good teachers. We have all congratulated the pupils, but we should not forget that they could not do what they do without teachers who are willing to go above and beyond the curriculum. Especially in primary schools, the curriculum contains so much that the staff deserve our congratulations on having developed and guided such a project. Every time the teaching of history is discussed in Parliament, we should hold up to Peter Peacock the example of Linlithgow primary school, which shows what we should do with history. History is not a dead subject and it is not just about the past; it allows pupils from Linlithgow to reach out to the future and to reach outside their community. That is all I have to say. I thank Mary Mulligan and the pupils of Linlithgow.

I must correct Derek Brownlee slightly. I was not asking for a commission to oversee the finances of individual councils. My suggestion was that, over the next year or two years, the delivery mechanism and the size of the councils should be examined independently, because a patchwork, rather than one simple solution, might be required.

Does John Swinney agree that, in order to take the heat out of a futile argument between central and local government in Scotland, it might be a good idea to have an independent standing commission to examine all the possibilities so that, on the other side of the election, when there is a better temper in the chamber, we can discuss the matter sensibly?

Although I appreciate that the minister has said he will look again at next year's settlement, I urge him to meet the City of Edinburgh Council's representatives to discuss capital city funding, not on a one-off basis, but as a continuing element of funding for the capital city.

I was interested in the minister's reference to restricting the sale of unhealthy fizzy drinks in the public sector. In local authorities—certainly in the City of Edinburgh Council—the health and leisure function is now contracted out to a private company. If members go to the royal commonwealth pool in Edinburgh, they will find a row of about six unhealthy vending machines. Such facilities appear to be public, but they are actually under private control. What do we do about that?

Like Elaine Smith, I start by thanking and congratulating the Executive on its efforts so far. However, I pose the same question that she did: is the Executive doing enough? And I give the same answer: no. I appreciate the difficulties involved in tackling childhood obesity and I know that ideas are being considered, but let us start with the PE promises that Euan Robson referred to. One in five children in Scotland receives the requisite amount of PE as defined by the Executive. That figure is abysmally low. The reasons for that low figure are in some cases complex, but easy to understand in others, particularly in the primary schools. The primary school timetable is cluttered, and it needs to be decluttered if we are serious about having fitter children. We also need to ensure that primary school teachers are either motivated or properly trained to fill in for PE classes, and I have discussed that matter with the Minister for Education and Young People. We should consider emergency measures, such as drafting in PE assistants. I can tell the minister where to get them, because I have been to see them and have talked to their curriculum organisers. It is possible to draft assistants in, and if we are serious about our children's health, we will do that. There is also a great need for home economics teachers. Few people are aware that so little home economics is taught. I am not talking about turning the heel in a sock; we do not need to do that. I know that Frances Curran does not turn the heels on her socks. However, we could do with the cookery and nutrition content of what used to be home economics in schools. Home economics should be aimed not just at pupils but at teachers, who, as Frances Curran says, do not have the time themselves to cook and who may actually have to learn to cook. A generation has missed the tradition of mothers passing on how to make a good pot of soup or mince. Is mince politically correct now? Emergency measures could also be taken to connect up the voluntary effort that Euan Robson referred to. On Monday, I took the Minister for Health and Community Care to visit Fala Court, which is a community health initiative in the south of Edinburgh. Fala Court invites local grannies to teach young mothers and others how to cook. We have to look at the community roots level to channel people's practical skills.

Not some of the young fathers that I know. I accept the general principle: of course we should. I did not want to give the impression that home economics or learning how to cook is only for women. However, the community flat in Fala Court also operates a breastfeeding initiative and a buddy support system. I agree with Frances Curran: there must be free school meals. That is not necessarily to redistribute income; it is to redistribute health. That argument has been made and the effects of that redistribution can be witnessed in action at Bathgate academy and, as Euan Robson said, at Leith primary school, where highly motivated women work in the kitchens. Jamie Oliver recognised that, first of all, he had to get to the people who were preparing and serving school meals. If we inspire them, we will inspire the children. I have seen that for myself—Bathgate academy is recommended. We need to look at private finance initiative schools, because they are being built without proper kitchens. How can such schools do proper cooking? We need to get school kitchens back. That is not just turning the clock back; it is not just nostalgia. We have to ban food and drink that we consider unhealthy. I mean that—ban it. That means that local authorities will need more money so that schools do not depend on vending machines for some of their spending money. If we are serious about tackling childhood obesity, we cannot dodge hard priority choices that have to be made. Television adverts could be banned—we have banned them for booze, so why cannot we ban them for bad food as well? That could certainly be done before what used to be called the watershed. I have news for all the members who are here. It is not just us who are falling down on the job. In all European countries—even in Spain, Portugal and Italy, where mamma's home cooking is a daily feature of the culture—children are overweight. I read that Spanish children are deemed to be fatter than ours. We are talking about an international problem in the developed world. Maybe we have found a use for the European Union—perhaps it could do something about banning television adverts for the products of the unsavoury side of the food industry. I take on board what Frances Curran said. Mea culpa—I went to the McDonald's event without realising that it was a McDonald's event; I thought that it was about sport, but it was about McDonald's. I end on that note.

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will clarify the procedure that is being considered for the appointment and reappointment of commissioners and the ombudsman. (S2O-8979)

I have looked at the correspondence between the Procedures Committee and the SPCB and yet I remain unconvinced that the procedures as recommended satisfy the Parliament's requirement for transparency. My reading of the situation is that the SPCB would hire, assess and recommend for reappointment a commissioner without any professional independent assessment of the quality of the work that the commissioner has done. That seems to me to be bad practice. Will the SPCB give its attention to the way in which an independent evaluation of a commissioner's work could be made available to members in advance of the chamber being asked to endorse the corporate body's recommendation to reappoint or, indeed, not to reappoint? That brings me to my second area of concern. No provision is made in our standing orders for the procedure that is to be followed if the services of a commissioner have to be terminated. The standing orders also make no reference to what would happen if Parliament decided not to accept an SPCB recommendation to reappoint. I would be grateful for the member's comments.

On a different point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, is it in order for you to take a motion without notice? I propose that all MSPs present in the chamber this afternoon should associate themselves with a motion to the effect that we are disappointed in our colleagues for their showing at question time.

In pursuance of my point of order, Presiding Officer, I do not want to deave you, but it is better if it comes from MSPs speaking of their peers than if it comes from the Presiding Officers.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether its strategy to improve Scotland's sporting achievements is directed towards achieving successful performances at the European championships rather than the Commonwealth games. (S2O-8759)

I support almost every syllable of the minister's reply. I ask the question because of my surprise and disappointment at, and disapproval of, the advice given to athletes by Dave Collins, the United Kingdom athletics performance director, that they should gear their training towards the European championships rather than the Commonwealth games. If the current performance director's views are supported by ministers with responsibility for sport, the implication for all athletes in Scotland who hope to compete internationally is that they may do what Andrew Lemoncello has done and  withdraw from the Commonwealth games. It should be remembered that the performance director decides which athletes should receive financial support. Will the minister disassociate herself from his remarks and assure me that she will apply whatever pressure she can to ensure that the application of such pressure on athletes does not become standard practice?

I raise my point of order with reference to rule 6.2.2(b) of standing orders. The rule refers to the responsibility of the committees of this Parliament. My point of order rests on whether the Health Committee was remiss in not anticipating, in the year during which it considered the Abolition of NHS Prescription Charges (Scotland) Bill and took evidence from expert witnesses, that the Government would not be able to produce its own consultation paper in time for the committee to consider it under rule 6.2.2(b). I concede that there may be a perfectly reasonable explanation for why the Government could only provide its consultation two weeks after the committee reported. I refer, of course, to the need to ensure that no Westminster minister makes a policy decision on free prescriptions for all. I seek guidance on whether the committee was remiss in not anticipating that the Executive was going to produce such a late consultation document when it had had a year in which to do so.

No.

I, too, support the Executive's intentions, which are excellent. The strategic objective is correct if it is  to promote the best interests of Scotland at home and abroad, which I think it is. Irene Oldfather echoed the Executive's motion. However, we then moved into a period of confusion, which ended with John Home Robertson talking about constitutional fetishism because of remarks that were made by SNP members, which one could infer suggested that we might act in a sovereign manner properly to promote the full range of Scotland's interests. I agree with that, too. In many respects, I wish that the SNP would talk of sovereignty, not independence—we would then have the idea of working in partnership with people in the United Kingdom. The strategic objective says that, although we will obviously co-operate with partners in the United Kingdom, Scotland will be promoted as a distinctive entity. Does it help that, in the same week that the Executive's motion appears in the Business Bulletin here, the Chancellor of the Exchequer suggests that we should be British and celebrate Britishness? I believe that we are British, but the objectives that the chancellor has staked out as being worthy of promotion—such as the belief in tolerance, fair play and so on—are shared by people in Ireland. I think of myself as British, but as a citizen of the British isles. That unit of international and interregional co-operation makes much more sense than the narrow United Kingdom to which, unfortunately, my friend Phil Gallie referred. Although one thing is written in the Business Bulletin , we have debated something quite different, and I wish that we would own up to that. If we are to promote Scotland as a distinctive identity in the 21 st century, we will have to get over that faultline and do away with the Geiger counter that is run over every discussion in the chamber to look for elements of nationalism. The fetishism can be found all over, because friends and colleagues in one part of the chamber are immediately suspicious of an idea coming from the other part. If we consider propositions on their merit and logic, I suggest that we will come to very different conclusions and agree to support the Executive's motion, if it means what it says.

Does the member consider that the people who have been attracted to live in Scotland came here because we were distinctively Scottish or British?

Does it help the overseas promotion of Scotland and knowledge of the country as a distinctive entity if we wrap ourselves in the union jack and promote all things British, as the Chancellor of the Exchequer has urged?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to recruit and train specialist nurses to work in the community with sufferers of chronic conditions, such as Parkinson's disease. (S2O-8610) I declare an interest: I have Parkinson's disease.

I pay tribute to the work that the Minister for Health and Community Care, Andy Kerr, has done on long-term conditions and draw to his attention the work of the expert group that is currently producing a Parkinson's disease plan for Lothian and the Borders, which may act as a prototype. The expert assessment is that six to eight nurses are required, but there is currently only one nurse. Therefore, there are obvious resource implications, as there are with lymphoedema nurses. I know from a successful meeting that I had with the minister that there is an on-going review and ask the Executive not to shy away from providing the additional resources that will be required, because the service will be much enhanced if the current plans are properly seen through.

Electing the Parliament's corporate body is a duty incumbent on the 129 MSPs who comprise the Parliament. The SPCB acts in the name of that electorate to preserve and promote the Parliament's good name and the ethos that is enshrined in our mace. The SPCB should be guided by those four principles in managing the Parliament's affairs—other than Executive business and the opposition to that from our other political parties and representatives—but it is not, nor should it be, one of the Parliament's party-political forums. When I expressed that view to colleagues in all parties and in none yesterday, the vast majority agreed with me—perhaps some were only being nice—but some people ventured the opinion that, as in the case of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, an SPCB member who is a willing volunteer will be better than one who is a pressed man or woman. However, a few colleagues thought that the SPCB should be comprised of members of the four biggest parties. I respect those colleagues as politicians and I even like them as people, but I fail to see why only their party's representatives can take decisions of a non-partisan nature on behalf of the whole Parliament. Most decisions and votes in the Parliament will be taken along party-political lines. Those will be based sometimes on ideology but more often on manifesto commitments. That is the nature of our parliamentary democracy and I take no issue with it. Business needs to be organised in an orderly manner and the electorate's wishes should be respected. However, the Parliament as an institution is not the preserve of whichever party wins the election; it has to be cherished, protected and allowed to evolve and develop in sympathy with the people who send us here and trust us to strive to organise  our business, unhindered—as far as possible—by the different priorities and concerns of competing political parties. We should take some decisions as parliamentarians rather than as MSPs who represent political parties, and this is one such decision. The Scotland Act 1998 currently binds us to having only four elected members of the SPCB. That is one of the matters that we might expect to be changed when the act is amended to meet more sensitively the needs of the Parliament. However, I do not consider that a priority because I believe that even within the current statutory framework there are ways open to us through which we could improve the level of ownership of the SPCB by all MSPs. The lines of communication between the SPCB and MSPs and, subsequently, the quality of the SPCB's stewardship of parliamentary affairs could be improved. At present, the only formal communication between the corporate body and the back benches occurs in infrequent question-and-answer sessions in the chamber. I propose a more continuous flow of information both ways—particularly when decisions have to be taken that will reverberate outside the Parliament and for which, theoretically and certainly in the eyes of the public, we are all responsible. The decision on the provision of a smoking facility is one example that springs to mind. If the SPCB had invited MSPs to attend its meetings on an observer or advisory basis, depending on the issues under discussion, perhaps there might have been more accurate and sensitive reporting of Scottish Green Party members' expenses. I have a number of other ideas for improving the transparency and communication of the work undertaken in our name by the SPCB. I will discuss those with colleagues if I am elected. However, I assure them that if I am elected, I will ask for a recount.

Will the member give way?

If the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform is talking about reconsidering grant aid to local authorities, I would like to impress upon him the need to give the City of Edinburgh Council capital status as regards its financing. Because of the  peculiar nature of the services that are provided by the City of Edinburgh Council, it would be only fair to put Edinburgh on a par with the City of Westminster and to allocate £6.5 million to service Edinburgh's particular role in promoting Scotland and in acting as a gateway to Scotland as well as being the capital city.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to review the operation of the memorandum of understanding and supplementary agreements. (S2O-8559)

I am disappointed by the minister's reply, because she knows as well as I do that she is one of the few ministers to have had a meeting under the concordats. I should explain to the chamber that the memorandum is meant to be the mechanism by which we ensure that there is joined-up government between the southern Parliament and the devolved Parliaments. I recently asked for a complete list of the meetings that have taken place—zilch, apart from meetings that were held to discuss Europe.

I ask the minister to think again and say why she thinks that the Home Office can with impunity make the sort of announcement that it did about 90-day detention without having a meeting under the memorandum.

Will the member give way?

I am pleased that Gordon Jackson is the next speaker because I want to seek his wise counsel on one of the matters that I would like to raise. In the Parliament, we have been claiming Scotland's place in the world. I thoroughly support the First Minister in his efforts to establish Scotland on the world stage and to accept the responsibilities that go with such a claim of nationhood, but if one accepts those  responsibilities, one must take the rough with the smooth. It is not just a case of promoting ourselves as a nice wee country—either we are a responsible country or we are not. Jim Wallace said that Scottish ministers did not have responsibility for Scottish airports, for example, and that because Westminster had that responsibility, Westminster must be accountable on the matter. I want to stand that on its head. What happens if one of the countries elsewhere in Europe that are to investigate the flights discovers the truth of the matter and finds that Scotland has been used in the way that has been suggested and that, as a nation, we are compliant, in that our facilities have helped to bring about people's torture? If it is found that such an offence has been committed, would the Lord Advocate not be responsible? If he were responsible in such circumstances, should we not seek to prevent those circumstances from arising?

I will give way briefly; I am willing to give up some time to Gordon Jackson because I want to hear the answers to some of the questions that I have asked.

I hope that the member will forgive me for not spending time on answering that question because I do not think that it is up to those people to make such reports. I have one further question for the Parliament. Does Colin Powell's admission that European Governments shared the American Government's acceptance of the practice that we are discussing carry no weight at all in the argument? That is not an allegation; it is a statement of fact. Does that not lend credibility to the allegations? I hope that our learned friend Gordon Jackson will tell us whether that means that a prima facie case can be made that such practice may be going on. As the matter is so serious, should we not investigate it?

I will give straight information. It is true that Mr Blair was re-elected, but it is also true that the Conservative party won more votes in England than the Labour Party did, so how massive was the endorsement of his Iraq policy?

Were it to be alleged that a consignment of drugs had been carried through Prestwick or Wick airports, the police would go on a fishing expedition to look for it.

I assure the minister that I love "cheap and cheerful" and I thank her for prior sight of her statement. I am interested in the timing of implementation. The way I read the situation, the UK would need to obtain a derogation to allow Scotland to do what Scotland plans to do, because I believe that we are the only country in Europe that is advocating a form of self-certification. The minister's department may have heard word to that effect from the EU energy performance of buildings directive implementation advisory group. From speaking to people south of the border, I know that they are rather concerned that we are completely out of step with the rest of Europe. In relation to the energy performance of new buildings, large buildings or buildings that are visited by a large number of people, can the minister give me any indication of what energy rating the Parliament building will score? Will we start on an AA rating or will we end up getting a G? We will have to display the relevant literature prominently in Parliament from 4 January.

I will confine my remarks to one aspect of violence against women. The expert report on prostitution has as a stated objective "To influence the attitudes which lead to the abuse of women sexually and physically through prostitution." I am happy that the Executive has taken that on board. It should be congratulated on adopting a sensible, caring approach to how best it can exert influence. The Deputy Minister for Justice has indicated that he sees no reason to distinguish violence against that group of women from violence against any other group of women and that he will expect local agencies to instigate local awareness-raising initiatives that mirror the Executive's guidance on managing prostitution and exercising a duty of care towards street prostitutes. It is proved beyond doubt that streets prostitutes are at greater risk of experiencing violent attack, although the experience of the managed or tolerance zones in Aberdeen and Edinburgh indicates that there is a higher level of protection from violence if women are working in an area that incorporates security measures such as suitable surveillance by police or security cameras and a closely sited drop-in centre. The statistics from Edinburgh appear to bear that out. In the last full year of the managed or tolerance zone, there were 11 reports of violence against prostitutes—less than one a month. In the first three months without a zone, there were exactly the same number of reports of violence as in the entire previous year. I think that, statistically, the increase in the number of violent attacks on women working as prostitutes in Edinburgh has been more than 1,000 per cent. The difference between the levels of violence experienced by indoor and outdoor sex workers shows the advisability of managing the business in order to reduce harm and the violence that people selling sex can experience. A study of indoor and outdoor workers in Leeds, Glasgow and Edinburgh has been carried out. Eighty-one per cent of street sex workers reported violence, as opposed to 48 per cent of indoor sex workers. Fifty per cent of street workers reported violence in the previous six months, as opposed to 26 per cent of indoor  workers. Forty-four per cent of street women who had experienced violence had reported the crimes, whereas only 18 per cent of indoor workers reported a crime. The case appears to have been made for a duty of care to be exercised towards prostitutes, if we mean to reduce the harm that is done to them while they are prostitutes. I have spoken only about harm reduction, but most people would like prostitutes to exit prostitution. Much of the Executive's plan is geared towards that. Attitudes towards violence against women must be changed, as many members have said. Although the Executive, like those who have spoken today, advocates local initiatives through schools and community education to educate people out of the attitude that violence against women is only to be expected, how can that possibly win the battle—I was going to say for hearts and minds, but I think that that is the wrong expression—to influence opinion in face of something such as the popular computer game "Grand Theft Auto: Vice City", which is sold over the counter and in which prostitutes are killed? I do not want to ban or proscribe anything, but if we can say that we will not sell fireworks to people under a certain age, surely we can say that we will not sell games that make fun out of killing prostitutes.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will provide, if necessary, funding to help local authorities to meet the possible costs of equal pay claims. (S2O-8246)

I would expect nothing less of the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform. However, I wonder whether he is aware that, if the recent judgment in favour of female council employees costs the City of Edinburgh Council the £25 million that it estimates, that will  entail a 12.5 per cent increase in council tax in Edinburgh. The only way to avoid that is for the council to empty its reserves, which it says it will have to do. Will he urgently consider putting Edinburgh council tax payers' minds at rest? They are already concerned about the implications for council tax of the fact that the Executive has not paid the extra £3 million in costs incurred by the council for services provided at the G8 demonstrations, never mind the other wee matter that I wrote to him about.

Will the minister give way?

Before I do my normal drum beating, I advise the minister that he should listen to the comments that the previous speaker made, some of which made sense. I share Rob Gibson's concern that although, according to Professor Devine, teacher training on Scottish literature and associated cultural aspects may have improved, it has not improved enough to make many teachers feel comfortable when teaching those subjects. The minister said that more time will be given to subjects such as PE and music, following the curriculum review. He knows that I greatly approve of that, but I wonder which subjects will have to give up time. Page 10 of "ambitious, excellent schools" states: "we know from the National Debate ... that parents and teachers worry about the volume and nature of assessment and about a cluttered curriculum".  I am a parent and a grandparent, and I worry about a cluttered curriculum, particularly in primary schools. Primary teachers are now asked to teach too many specific topics. I refer to Fiona Hyslop's comments on that—we have a common cause on that issue, although that is not the case for all her remarks. It is obvious when one talks to secondary teachers that children have to catch up in secondary school. However, it is not only secondary teachers who have to teach the subjects that are somewhat disparagingly referred to as the basics or the three Rs; universities have had to introduce catch-up courses in basic arithmetic for people who have ostensibly passed their highers and gained university entrance. We must consider how we deliver many of the objectives because, as members of all parties have said, some subjects that are now taught in primary school do not need to be taught there. Despite the attempts to reintroduce the teaching of grammar in schools, the subject is not given enough time in teacher training and teachers in schools do not have time to teach it. I know that, occasionally, ministers can be misquoted in newspapers, so I will not punch out the minister for this, but he is reputed to have said that we should not teach children subjects that bore them rigid or that they do not like. Of course we should, because they have to learn wisdom and how to cope with boredom. They have to learn how to do things that they do not like, because they will have to do that when they become adults and are in the workplace. That is part of growing up and part of children's wider education. When the Deputy Minister for Children and Young People sums up, I would like to hear what plans there are to improve the teaching of grammar in schools. Page 7 of "ambitious, excellent schools" discusses values and citizenship, which other members have mentioned. We need to take an almost collegiate approach to producing healthy and responsible citizens. The approach would encompass PE, aspects of home economics such as buying and preparing food and the social responsibility that must be imparted—I hesitate to say "morality", because that word has many interpretations. I know that the minister is considering such an approach. On world AIDS day, it is entirely relevant that we should accept that, as part of the health, physical and citizenship education that children receive almost by osmosis in school, we should include sex education. I do not see anything in the report on that. To achieve all the objectives, we need more teachers. Although I respect the Executive's attempts, not enough PE teachers are in training to meet the objectives on PE in a reasonable timeframe. It is not enough to say that we now have oodles of sports co-ordinators, because they can co-ordinate only if the subject has been taught  and understood. On a recent visit to some primary schools, I observed dangerous practices by teachers who were teaching a subject in which they were not specifically qualified. When I questioned them, they admitted that they were doing it because they felt they had to, not because they felt they could do it properly. I have concentrated on primary schools, but I have a quick comment on secondary schools. I am glad that many head teachers are now saying that they will place children according to their ability in specific subjects. We have known that we should stream for a long time; saying that we should not has simply confused the situation. Frank McAveety might be right that Scottish teachers are now more confident in teaching Scottish matters than they were in the past, but there are still areas of ignorance and confusion. Kenny MacAskill talked about the history of sectarianism. It is true that there was religious division in churches, but in Lanarkshire and the west of Scotland there was social division, which was imported by colliery owners, some of whom were called Hamilton. It was not only religion but social and economic divisions that set people against each other. We could do a bit more work on our Scottish history.

I agree with the notion of comprehensive education, but I had always seen its objective as being to break down social barriers. The member says that comprehensive education as it happened in Scotland was a proven success, but what are his measurements of success?

The member might have to return to teaching.

Does Iain Smith believe that those who undergo teacher training, particularly primary specialists, have a deep enough education themselves in the aspects of Scottish culture that he, and I, would like to see taught naturally through the other subjects?

I know that the minister has some extra time; therefore, I want to raise the issue that we discussed informally in another place—I will not say where. Will the minister bear in mind the suggestion that I made? It might meet the objections that Mary Scanlon raised this morning and address the concerns about the single seller survey that I have shared with the minister if houses were required to have logbooks, just as cars have logbooks to be passed on when they are bought and sold.

The Parliament knows that, yesterday, I asked the First Minister to restate the Executive's position on this matter. I believe that he has done so today. However, my question concerns the outcome of his failure to influence the Home Office minister who is here today. If nothing changes, does that prove that we need power, not merely influence?

I wonder whether the minister could also give me some information on this matter. I make no apologies for being Edinburgh-centric in this matter—I know that I am eccentric as well. If, as the pilot appears to indicate, the buyer is suspicious of the scheme 1 valuation, there is nothing to stop them carrying out their own survey. If that contradicts the seller's scheme 1 valuation, how is the matter resolved?

Will Mr Fox take an intervention?

Most members know that I was in favour of a quick resolution, if at all possible, of the dilemma that we are now in. However, does Colin Fox agree that this is merely another instance of what many of us expected, which is that the concordat that was supposed to guide the co-operative working between this Parliament and Westminster would not be worth the paper that it was written on? Does he agree that we therefore need a much wider examination of how it should work?

I apologise, particularly to the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform, but the matter has only just arisen. I hope, Presiding Officer, that you will look favourably on my request to move under rule 8.2.6 a motion without notice, which reads: "The Parliament requests that the First Minister should make a statement on the discussions that have taken place between himself and Home Office Ministers concerning the methods used to remove failed asylum seekers from Scotland in the light of his spokesman's statement at lunchtime today making plain that the FM had not reflected this Parliament's opposition to the "dawn raids" in his meetings with Home Office Ministers to date, and Parliament further believes that in advance of his meeting tomorrow with the Home Office Minister McNulty he must re-state the Scottish Executive's position on this matter." The two previous points of order covered most of the ground that I want to cover. I appeal to my fellow members of the Scottish Parliament, regardless of which part of the chamber they sit in, to take the matter seriously because, outside the chamber, there was an expectation and a clear understanding that this Parliament—in the person of the First Minister—would stand up for values that we hold dear. The motion is intended not to deny the right of the Home Office to make policy but to assert our right to do the correct thing and the moral thing—as a Parliament, we have a duty to do that. We also have a legal responsibility. We do not need to go into that too deeply today, but we must know what has been said, what has been left unsaid and what  should be said tomorrow in order to speak for this Parliament.

May I urge the First Minister to move on from the advice that has been given by the Nickys-come-lately to this issue and to remember that a number of us have raised with him our concerns about the choices that he spoke of when he talked about the allocation of police resources for operational purposes? Those resources are being stretched because of the heightened level of awareness of terrorism and the measures that must be taken to combat it. Local police have very little or no control over those measures. Does the First Minister agree that it makes sense to use what we can learn from this episode to determine how our police forces should be funded in future and to ensure that they do not have to choose between patrol cars on dangerous roads and resourcing the requirements that are connected with the heightened awareness of terrorism?

I refer to the matter that I raised last week about the accountability of this Parliament, which is impressed on us by the words on the mace and by our standing orders. We must achieve optimum accountability in the conduct of our business. I believe that to have been compromised yesterday with the Home Secretary's admission that he did not know the opinion of this Parliament, the Lord Advocate, the Solicitor General for Scotland or the Minister for Justice on the Terrorism Bill that is currently going through Westminster. We owe it to our standing orders to debate the matter in order to report our opinion to the Home Secretary, because we will have operational responsibility—direct responsibility and accountability—for acting on the decisions taken in Westminster on the matter. I urge the minister who is responsible to ensure that we have a debate as soon as possible.

Does the member remember, as I do, the prophecy that was made in the early 1980s that the right-to-buy policy would give us a huge housing problem 20 years down the line? I agree that much improvement has been made in much of the housing stock since I was the director of Shelter Scotland, but does the member also agree that there is a bigger division now between the housing stock that is considered desirable and the housing stock in which nobody wants to live?

rose—

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive will organise round-table discussions with all appropriate agencies in respect of the operational challenges faced by social work departments following the anticipated report into the death of Anne-Marie McGarrity. (S2F-1885)

Although I agree that it would be precipitate to take fundamental decisions on how the up to 50,000 children in Scotland with drug-abusing parents should be looked after and supported, in view of the criticisms that have been made, especially of the City of Edinburgh Council's social work department—which my investigations lead me to believe are unfounded in this instance—it might be a good idea if the minister and the Executive were to encourage local authorities to take the lead in organising such round-table discussions. That is what the Executive did when it responded to the report "Hidden Harm: Responding to the needs of children of problem drug users", which was produced by the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs. The ensuing discussions gave an idea of where co-operation might be possible and how seamless the support for children such as Michael McGarrity should be.

In raising this question, I have no wish to oppose the Government's programme for business next week or to wreck it. I have already cleared that with the minister and I think that she understands why I am doing this. I did not expect to hear from the senior policemen who gave evidence to the justice committees this morning that the measure that is being debated at Westminster as we speak—the Terrorism Bill—would have such an impact on the operational requirements of Scottish policing, an area for which the Scottish Parliament has complete, autonomous devolved responsibility. I therefore oppose the business motion simply because we do not appear to have any mechanism for debating that urgent and utterly relevant matter for which the Parliament is responsible. If the minister can assure me that she will find time for a debate on the matter in the Parliament—from our perspective not as the primary policy makers but as the body that is responsible for carrying out the policy in a practical sense—I will be happy not to push the motion to a vote. However, if she cannot give me such an assurance, I will push it to a vote.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on rule 8.11, about business motions. Evidence was led this morning at the meeting of the Justice 1 Committee and Justice 2 Committee that directly concerns the debate that is taking place at Westminster at the moment. That evidence could not have been referred to at yesterday's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. I ask the business managers to find time to allow us to debate the issue from the perspective of this Parliament, given that our operational responsibility for policing, for example, will be directly affected by the Terrorism Bill. Is it possible, under rule 8.11, for the Minister for Parliamentary Business to add to the proposals that she will put to the Parliament this afternoon, so that we might have a debate on the matter?

I certainly would have raised the matter yesterday had the evidence been given by the police yesterday, but the evidence was given to the justice committees only this morning. In the light of the fact that discussions taking place at Westminster today impact directly on the responsibility of this Parliament, without our having been consulted, it might be a good idea to discuss the matter.

Would the member care to comment on what the opinion outside the Parliament will be? How well will Scots understand the decision to dump the idea?

The member asked what has been placed on her shoulders; it is the shackles that have been placed around her ankles that she should be concerned about.

Does the minister agree that the second of his legislative criteria would indeed be met if the bill focused attention on St Andrew's day and on the identity and promotion of Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I would prefer it to be taken now.

I do not want to interrupt First Minister's question time, but members will notice that question 2, which was to be put by the leader of the second Opposition party, the Conservatives, has been withdrawn. Standing order 13.7.4 is inadequate for such contingencies. The question was not to be asked by an individual member; it was reserved for the leader of one of the Opposition parties. I understand that Mr McLetchie is, sadly, attending to a family matter. However, in this instance, I would like to claim the spot. As independents, we never get the chance.

I apologise for being late, Presiding Officer. As a point of information, in the Davis cup the GB team is now relegated to second or third ranking. I ask the member not to be a narrow nationalist when he talks about sport. He should talk about whether a Scottish team would engender a greater sporting performance in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to commence sections 25 to 29 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990 to allow rights of audience and rights to conduct litigation to be sought by suitably qualified persons. (S2O-7647)

I thank the minister for her answer, although I think that I have heard talk of that working group before. Will she assure me that the reason for sections 25 to 29 not being commenced is not that the Law Society of Scotland frowns on the idea of losing such a monopoly? She will be aware that, under article 86 of the Treaty establishing the European Community, such monopolies are frowned on. The United Kingdom Government signed the treaty on our behalf and we must comply with the requirement to prohibit monopolies and remove unnecessary restrictions. Regardless of the outcome of the working group, I remind the minister that her prerogative does not extend to wilful non-commencement. I therefore ask either that she commences sections 25 to 29 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990 or that she returns it to Westminster for repeal.

I wonder whether I could focus the First Minister's mind on the definition of "drug dealer". The figures that he gave in good faith mean very little. Many of the people who are convicted of dealing drugs are users, who are simply selling on drugs to feed their habits. Yesterday I chaired a conference on aspects of drugs policy. Many such aspects need to be considered afresh and we need new measurements of success—if we can classify it as that—and an assessment of which methods and policies have been failing. I speak as someone who was chairman of the Scottish Drugs Forum nearly 20 years ago and I can assure the First Minister that nothing has improved.

Given that the modelling exercise on the Scottish economy that was undertaken 30 years ago showed, as we now know from the report that Dr Gavin McCrone wrote for the Government of the day, that the potential windfall from taxes on petroleum revenue at about $20 a barrel was more or less eeksie-peeksie with or without independent sovereignty—and therefore taxation rights over oil—does the minister agree that it might make sense for a similar modelling exercise to be undertaken now, when the price is $67 a barrel, to show what options might be open to us?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, welcome the initiative that the Executive has taken in lodging its amendment. However, I plead for additional lobbying of the Home Secretary regarding the possibility that children of Iraqis are to be sent back with their families to Iraq at a time when the websites of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Home Office and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights say that Iraq is an unsafe country. Can we keep them here until the country has become safe?

Much as I acknowledge the Executive's good intentions and, indeed, the fact that it has had success in improving the professional status of teachers, I cannot help but think that a little modesty in the motion might have gone a long way towards more accurately reflecting where there is still work to be done. I am referring to the failure to achieve the Executive's stated target of having an additional 400 PE teachers in place by 2008-09. In contrast to the sometimes formulaic anger of the Opposition parties when the Executive misses its targets, I want to suggest alternative ways of achieving the desired outcome, which is a healthier and happier school population and not merely an increase in the number of people who teach PE. The Executive has said that it will fill the gap in PE teacher numbers by 2008-09 by training qualified teachers in PE. I caution the minister against trying to make good the shortfall in the number of PE teachers, which is 142, through that approach. PE is a specific discipline and most generalist classroom teachers have neither the aptitude nor the desire to teach PE. That is not just the opinion of an old PE teacher who is protective of the standards of a profession that is coming into its own. Just today, Pat O'Donnell, of the National Association of Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers, warned that increasing the number of PE teachers will not be as simple as asking other teachers to take on PE. Has the minister a recruitment drive to tempt back into their tracksuits PE teachers who took early-retirement packages? They could be recruited on short, fixed-term contracts and receive good money. They could have two responsibilities: they would not merely teach PE in the classroom but encourage volunteers among  parents, teachers and community activists who would be willing to do the sort of thing to which Donald Gorrie referred. I feel that a great deal of knowledge, talent and willingness remains untapped. To widen the approach to producing healthier children, I also urge the minister to reappraise the role of teachers of home economics, particularly with regard to the teaching of nutrition, in achieving the objective of a healthier school population. I was disappointed to learn that of the 23 secondary schools in Edinburgh, only 11 offer HE at higher level. That situation is mirrored across the country. Only 14 people qualified as HE teachers in 2002-03, which was a reduction of 9 from the previous year's figure. I suggest to the minister therefore that he must boost the number of HE teachers as soon as possible, or much of the work that he is doing to improve PE in schools will be wasted. I believe that we should teach holistically with the aim of having a healthy mind in a healthy body. I am sorry if that sounds hackneyed, but it is another of the good aspects of our traditional approach to education that we have forgotten. I recommend to the minister that he visits Bathgate Academy, where there is a superb physical activities co-ordinator, Roslyn Fraser, who, in conjunction with the canteen supervisor, Cathy Henderson, and an HE teacher, Pearl Scott, has contrived a programme that will, I think, outdo anything that comes from the hungry for success healthy eating standards that the minister wants to introduce. They have understood that to promote a healthy lifestyle it is much better to teach physical education, health education and moral education together. My knowledge of that approach was my reason for asking the minister whether there was room left in the curriculum to introduce new concepts. I genuinely believe that the Bathgate Academy model is the way to approach physical and health education. There are teachers who are capable of taking on that holistic approach, but as it is different from the traditional approach to teacher training in Scotland, it requires investigation by the Executive. I would welcome an assurance from the minister that he has an open mind about that. I will make one last plea. While ensuring that there is an adequate number of PE students in training, can the minister also ensure that they know how to fire a drive, whether that be in hockey, golf or any other sport that needs a stick and a ball, and that they are not all turned into sports scientists who have never hit a shuttlecock in anger?

Perhaps it was the person who introduced Cuisenaire rods to teach children how to count what red and green added up to.

What stage has the curriculum redevelopment plan reached? Is there still an opportunity to introduce new concepts?

Thank you, First Minister—sorry; I should say thank you to the Presiding Officer. The First Minister has not yet agreed with me. I welcome everything that the First Minister said and that Donald Gorrie introduced into the debate, but I urge the First Minister to use some of the extra money that is available to the chancellor—I realise that some negotiation could be involved—to underwrite travel to and from Scotland. As we discovered during the business in the Parliament conference, unless we have the air links and the travel links, all the good ideas will underperform their potential.

Now that we know that the cost to the City of Edinburgh Council of acting as Scotland's capital and hosting G8-associated events will be almost £3 million, will the First Minister say whether he is going to pay for that, rather than leave it to the council tax payers in Edinburgh?

Will the member give way?

The difficult question is how to involve parents and the wider family in those schools where there is no history of great parental support. As we know perfectly well, the pupils at those schools are often in most need of support. The Executive should give some thought to how to incorporate the role that grandparents can play. People are living longer and are active for longer and grandparents might be more willing to take on that role. After all, they understand what it used to be like in the good old days. I speak as a grandmother of 10.

Does the member agree that it is just as important that children should see a consistent approach to good nutrition in the home and at school? I am not sure that the Government has placed enough emphasis on that. Does she agree that we have to teach a generation of women who think that every recipe ends with a ping? That will need a concerted effort, but, with a bit of imagination and some help from the people whom John Swinburne represents, it might be done.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Our standing orders refer to the requirement for relevance in debate. I fail to see what is relevant about how good the Liberals have been at backing up the Labour Party. That has nothing to do with the programme for government.

He was saying that they are fantastic.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Although I accept that the Executive has general responsibility for the provision of health services, what we are hearing from the member is not a general critique of health service provision; it is a very specific critique of provision in a certain part of Ayrshire. That may or may not be valid, but I do not think that it is in order.

Does the member agree—honest, Presiding Officer, we have not discussed this idea—that the Minister for Education and Young People could consider increasing the number of home economics teachers who are recruited, particularly to teach alongside physical education teachers about fitness, health and nutrition as an holistic subject?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the fact that the recommendations of the Hood committee are to be adopted by the Executive. However, what is the timescale? Patterns of street prostitution are changing and the people who are adversely affected by it, such as our constituents who live in Leith Links, would like a speedy response.

I congratulate the First Minister on having ditched the puir-moothed talk of this place being about "Scottish solutions to Scottish problems", and on instead picking up the mantra of it being about Scottish success and ambition. That is a great improvement. Now, all he has to do is get rid of the "best wee country in the world" bit. On the proposed police, public order and criminal justice bill, I wonder whether the Executive has given any thought to the recommendations that were made by the committee that was set up under Sandra Hood to investigate the management of street prostitution. That committee suggested a change in the law—which might fit neatly into the proposed bill—to equalise the treatment of and attitudes towards offenders, in that the attempted procurer and attempted seller of sexual services would be treated in the same way under the law. Is that likely to be attended to?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I regret to have to make the point but, given that we are creating a precedent, perhaps we should consider whether  the Standards and Public Appointments Committee had the opportunity to hear from any of the people who were mentioned in the complaint. We should also discover whether the committee considered treating those people as individuals and not as a group, because they behaved differently, as far as I was aware. I would welcome your guidance.

I assure the minister that I thoroughly agreed with Tony Blair this morning—I hope that that does not cause him to pass out. The Prime Minister said that he thought that Europe had to modernise. I could not agree more, but I would welcome an explanation from the minister of what he means by "better regulation".

We have just heard the concerns about heating control. Knowing what we know now about the performance of the building, does the corporate body agree—retrospectively, of course—with what I said about it being a bit hasty to accept the building research establishment environmental assessment method, or BREEAM, rating, which is the industry-approved standard of environmental performance, when the building was under construction? Now that the building is constructed, we know better.

Will the First Minister inform us whether we will receive more than the £20 million that has been given by the Chancellor of the Exchequer to cover the extra policing costs? Is he now satisfied that the Foreign Office is picking up the tab as it should have done in the first place?

I thank Rob Gibson for bringing the matter to the Parliament's attention. I reassure Phil Gallie that far from being non-political, like the SNP, I still think that debates in the chamber are about scoring political points, so I advise members to listen to the politics. I refer to my good friend Donald Gorrie's comments. He said that we can learn a great deal from Norway and that the Parliament could put into effect many of the measures that we would hear about if we debated, for example, many of the aspects of the economy that we have in common. I wonder how we are going to do that without a single Labour member being present—not a single member of the Executive thinks that they can learn anything from Norway. Earlier, the chamber was packed with members who thought that they could learn something from countries in Africa. I wonder what is so different about a successful north European country that it does not interest Labour members at all. Rob Gibson said something interesting. He said that when the Storting moved towards independence, the Norwegians became independent of, equal to and still friendly with the Swedes. Unfortunately, in Scotland and in the Parliament, a fault line runs through politics, between those who believe in sovereignty and those who do not believe that the SNP is any good—I ask members to note that there is no equality on either side of the equation. That is something that the SNP has to work out for itself. It will be the Parliament that does the business as regards establishing sovereignty—that will no longer fall to only one party. That requires a leap of imagination on the part of the SNP. It would also require the Labour Party to get rid of its ultra-unionism and its Pavlovian response to any mention of nationalism. It is because of those  attitudes that no Labour members are here tonight. I believe that the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform is far too intelligent to believe the brief that he is ready to deliver, to tell us about the benefits of not being sovereign and to tell us—

Because the motion talks about the successful economy and nationhood of Norway, I decided to talk about the—by comparison—unsuccessful sovereignty and nationhood of Scotland.

I hope that you will bear with me, Presiding Officer. I am asking the minister simply to ditch the brief that he has been given. I do not believe that he believes a word of it, and it would be good to hear, for once, some innovative thinking.

I will not use all my time, so that the minister has more time in which to be innovative.

I apologise for my absence from the chamber during part of the debate. Can the minister assure us that he is utterly satisfied with the amount of money that will come north from the Treasury, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Home Office?

Will the minister give way?

I will be brief and concentrate on matters that are of concern to people in Edinburgh and the Lothians, and to me as one of their elected representatives. I will speak on the events related to the G8 summit that are due to take place in Edinburgh. I heard the minister flesh out some of the answers that I have been looking for. I also heard his answer to Roseanna Cunningham, but there are still some unanswered questions. For months, I have pursued the question of who will pay for what, as have the First Minister and Donald Anderson, the leader of the City of Edinburgh Council. If the summit was to be held in England, I fear that there would be a great difference in the attitudes of the Whitehall departments that would be responsible for picking up the bills for the extra policing and the extra local authority spending south of the border. Policing would be paid for by the Home Office, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office would foot the bill for expenditure on, for example, extra barriers for crowd control. Those two departments have refused requests from the authorities in Scotland for them to underwrite the costs to the City of Edinburgh Council and Lothian and Borders police. The departments say that policing is a matter for the Scottish Executive, but was the G8 summit at Gleneagles a known quantity when the block grant was totalled up according to the Barnett formula? Does the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform's budget heading for the police include an allowance for the biggest policing operation that Scotland will ever have seen? It is massively unfair that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office issued the invitations to Gleneagles and will call all the shots yet will leave the bills to be picked up by  the City of Edinburgh Council's council tax payers and the minister. I am aware of Chancellor Gordon Brown's Treasury contribution of £20 million to the kitty for the policing costs, but unfortunately that figure has probably been overtaken by Bob Geldof's enthusiasm. We have yet to hear from the chancellor—who has apparently supported Bob Geldof's analysis—whether the Treasury will pay for the increased policing costs that will flow from Sir Bob's invitation for people to stand and be counted in Edinburgh. The Parliament should demand that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office does not leave Edinburgh's council tax payers and the Parliament with a bill of, perhaps, more than £100 million. It adds insult to injury for anyone to say that the city will benefit from the purchasing power of the many people who will descend on it for the make poverty history march or the long walk to justice. I have no doubt that some businesses will benefit, but others will shut. While great uncertainties remain about which businesses and home owners will be given insurance cover for damage or loss of business, we have the right to demand a clearer answer from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. Having checked with bed-and-breakfast establishments in Edinburgh this morning, as far as I know no rise in business is discernible. In fact, some report that they have lost business leading up to the summit. One hotel chain will have more business, which I presume will come from the journalists to whom the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform referred, but it does not have bookings before that. Practical questions arise that do not militate against the city's support for the issues.

We must take the city and its citizens with us, so we need answers.

I thank John Swinburne for bringing this debate to the chamber and express my regret that every single Labour MSP is either washing their hair or walking their dog. I will put my cards on the table—I am not a unionist, although my colleague John Swinburne is. I consider myself a citizen of the British isles. I am Scottish and, as such, I have something in common with everyone in the British isles, including those who live in the Republic of Ireland, which is a separate country. When my daughter lived and worked in Ireland, I was no further removed from her than I was from my sister who lives in Yorkshire, who was in the same state as me but in a different country. I believe that all three of us are members of the same social union. There is such a thing as a social union, as distinct from a political union. I would like to see an end of the political union in which we are held and the development of our social union; however, I believe that devolution militates against that. The rumblings that we hear from the further reaches of the Tory party—and, it must be said, the Labour Party in England—about the embarrassment of the goings on in the Scottish Parliament are a product of devolution and are harming the social union that I happen to hold dear. Independence and a sovereign Parliament would be good for us—just ask the Irish and the  Norwegians about that—but we are addressing the Scotland Act 1998 and its result, which is this Parliament. As far as I am concerned, the major structural defect in that act is the fact that the organisation that it created is only a spending organisation. Theoretically, we have the power to levy an additional income tax, but it is unlikely ever to be used because it raises complicated questions about exactly who is a Scottish taxpayer. Never mind the political implications, it would present enormous logistical problems, even for the Inland Revenue's sophisticated computer system. The real powers that we do not have are easy to define, as they are listed in schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. It is a formidable list and it was calculated by its authors in Westminster to put the Parliament firmly inside a cage. We cannot decide on Scotland's constitutional relationship with the rest of the United Kingdom. If, for example, we had to choose the Liberal Democrat position of a federal relationship, we could not implement it even if the Scottish people had voted on it and it was their proven desire. We are also denied a say in the critical economic area of international trade policy although we know how essential such a say is for small nations. Think of the Windward islands and the banana republic there, which has direct access to the World Trade Organisation. We cannot have such access as a devolved Parliament. Incidentally, we cannot have that access without a foreign office of our own, which is where I disagree with John Swinburne again. We must have a foreign office if we are to operate the sort of foreign policy that Scots support and that is suited to our status as a small European country. Unfortunately, I do not have time to take fiscal autonomy to bits. Suffice it to say that it is an expression that covers a multitude of sins and I do not want to be associated in any way with sin. However, I agree with Donald Gorrie that the Parliament should set up a committee to examine the powers in schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 and identify which of them could be transferred to the Scottish Parliament in whole or in modified form. The rational way to proceed is through proper consideration with the assistance of experts, a dialogue with Scottish MPs—whose position in Westminster would obviously be further undermined by any further transfer of powers—and a discussion with the Government in London to determine how far we can develop devolution and how easily we can transfer to sovereignty.

I welcome the advent of newer technology and newer surfaces. The old ash pitches may have given people skinnt knees, but at least they could use them for a kick-about at any point. Well-maintained ash pitches had gamekeepers—[ Interruption. ] I meant to say park keepers, although some of them needed gamekeepers. Parkies were able to control playing areas and to keep up standards. I would like the minister to comment on those two issues.

I associate myself with much of Mike Watson's analysis. I will confine my remarks to Edinburgh, because I think  that quite a number of people want to speak in the debate. In the provision of formal pitches, Edinburgh is probably better catered for than many other local authority areas. However, when we consider the formal pitches that have been introduced during a time when the overall number of pitches has diminished, we still have to question whether or not we have struck the right balance between long pitches and short pitches. I am not talking about the length of the pitch, but about the length of the artificial grass. For example, a long length is suitable for football and a short length is suitable for hockey. An important element of the general pitches strategy that is, I believe, required of each authority is that the authority should have a balance between the two sorts of pitches to reflect the balance in sporting activity. I am not sure that the City of Edinburgh Council has that balance right. One reason why I say that is that, although an audit of Edinburgh's pitches has been completed, it has not been discussed by the council. That is worrying. One wonders why it was not discussed, but that might be something to do with the great pressures that the council faces. As Mike Watson described, the council faces competing pressures from the requirement for more housing in a burgeoning economy and the requirement to provide space in which people can exercise informally and formally. Edinburgh has a mixed record in catering for informal, spontaneous and unorganised recreation and sport, which is another issue that Mike Watson mentioned. For example, although the pitches at Meggetland have been modernised and are supposedly greatly improved, they are also greatly diminished in size, with the opportunity for informal exercise and recreation much diminished. However, the polo fields just further up the road in Colinton are to remain because the council—in what, as far as I am concerned, was an admirable decision—passed up the chance to make what one expects might have been a great deal of money in council tax when it insisted that the playing fields were sacrosanct. As the matter is due to come before the minister, I look to him for a result on that appeal, which I do not believe should be upheld. However, I mention that just in passing. Another important aspect that interests me is the need for public access to any new pitches that are provided. On that issue, we need to recognise the need to have a parkie who will look after the facility. Local authorities have got out of the habit of employing groundsmen and park-keepers to control and manage their facilities. I am sure that that is what Mike Watson meant when he talked about the need for a system of management. If local authorities are prevented from employing the  necessary parkies mainly by a shortage of cash, I hope that the Executive will see them all right.

Although I support the sentiments outlined by Des McNulty, the First Minister will be aware that I wrote to him a fortnight ago to say that although there is terrific support in Edinburgh for bringing the G8 here—for which I give my congratulations all round—there is a residual and legitimate concern, as voiced last night by Donald Anderson, the leader of the City of Edinburgh Council, that Edinburgh might have unfairly to pick up the tab. The council leader has said that the cost of barriers and of any clean-up— which we hope will not be excessive, although that might occur—is not negotiable and he would like to know who is going to pay for it. Can the First Minister enlighten us?

Susan Deacon was the nice cop from Lothian and Borders police; I am the nasty cop, because I am quite willing to say that Edinburgh is the main gateway into Scotland because at least 50 per cent of visitors to Scotland spend one night of their stays in Edinburgh. I am happy to see that Mr McCabe is sitting on the front bench because, as he knows, I would like Edinburgh to be acknowledged with capital city status, which would mean that the additional responsibility that the city bears—magnificently, I think—is recognised in the Executive's spending programme. I will say no more about that at the moment, but he knows what I am talking about and I will come to talk to him more about it. Jamie McGrigor mentioned high-end tourism. I am not up with the jargon, but I think that "high end" means expensive and luxurious. I am all for that, because it means lots of folk with lots of money coming to spend it in Scotland. However, Chris Ballance, who agreed with Jamie McGrigor, talked about short breaks from the north of  England. I ask members to correct me if I am wrong, but I am sure that the bulk of the folk who come to holiday in Scotland from the north of England are not the sort who go for luxurious, expensive accommodation; they are looking for a more modest holiday. I say that not to disparage in any way the people who come from the north of England, but rather because I wonder what the strategy is for development of tourism in Scotland. Alasdair Morgan got close to questioning that. Is it to focus on short stays, second or third breaks or the main, luxurious and expensive high-end holiday? I will wait to hear the minister's closing speech before I make up my mind.

I have one local question. I have been contacted, as I am sure Susan Deacon and other members have, by bed-and-breakfast owners who complain not about the grand plan, but about their particular and personal access to the VisitScotland website. It costs one lady, whose letter I have in front of me, less to be on four or five other websites than it costs her per annum to be on the VisitScotland website. She knows from where she gets most of her business. I realise that that is a detail, but it is an important one. Who is responsible for ensuring that bed-and-breakfast owners, who are the backbone of the tourism industry in many areas of Scotland, are pulled into the planning process? I feel that they might not have been until now.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I should live so long.

If I wanted to go to a  pantomime, I would book in at the King's. I think that we might have transgressed our own rules in the previous question. As I recall, the question referred to the Barnett formula. By the time we got to Mr Mather, even though what he contributed might have been interesting, it was not relevant.

Before the member develops his point further, will he say whether he thinks that the Hannah's current funding deficit and the lack of co-ordination in its strategic development will have any implications for Roslin?

I thank everyone who has taken part in the debate. John Farquhar Munro got the idea of stepping back in the middle of an election campaign to try to look at the big picture. He did that, and he produced what I must call joined-up thinking, because he placed people's needs in the context of the policies that we can produce in the Parliament. I thank him for doing that, but others did it too. When Jean Turner spoke, it was obvious that she did so out of expertise, but her speech had added value because she discussed international engagement and exercising responsibility to the rest of the world on the Scottish community's behalf. That is something to which the Parliament aspires and to which people in Scotland aspire, to judge by the response to the recent tsunami appeal, but, for a long time, perhaps we did not do it as much as we might have done. Jean Turner took our immediate needs and her knowledge and added them to what we might do internationally, so she got the idea as well and I give her three gold stars. I wished that I could have got into the open debate on education, because I wanted to talk about the purpose of education and whether we are certificating ourselves out of it. I hope that Robin Harper has given some Executive members ideas about the holistic approach to education that we need. We know perfectly well that we have to prime our young people for an international—indeed, global—marketplace, but, for goodness' sake, we have to educate them to be citizens as well. The Parliament could spend more time considering that. Karen Gillon touched on education and school sport—an area that I am particularly interested in. I did not intervene, even though she said that she would let me in if I wanted to speak. The debate went rather well, and when information was needed, it was given unsparingly. I thank  members for their co-operation in ensuring that. Campbell Martin raised the issue of playing fields. He referred to a local issue, but all members recognised it as something that we have to deal with—it is happening in Edinburgh, too. He has obviously built up knowledge of the subject from listening to people, and he knew exactly how many parents had been on the march. That is important, and it is important that the Parliament relays to people the message that we are doing that sort of thing. We have not done a great deal of such public relations work at ground level. Helen Eadie, Rosie Kane and Karen Whitefield spoke passionately, but they spoke well and knew what they were talking about. We cannot ask anything more of members of the Parliament. I think that Tavish Scott came prepared for something less than the debate turned out to be. Just when he needed them, he had the brief and the notes to rebut something that David Davidson had said. I congratulate the minister on rising above the normal hurly-burly of party-political, internecine strife. He showed that he had extracted from the debate some of the ideas and blue-skies thinking, which he has promised he will feed back into the Executive's thinking. That was all that we independents wanted from the debate. We just wanted to provide the opportunity for that to happen, and we thought that now was a good time to do that. Nobody mentioned the black hole in the Tories' spending plans and in Labour's spending plans. We have had a full debate and that has not even been mentioned. Perhaps we are all too sensible and know that whoever gets in will raise taxes eventually. A bit of honesty could be read into what was not said in the debate as much as into what was said. I regret the fact that the opening speaker for the SNP poured scorn on what we were trying to do, although I congratulate his colleagues on taking advantage of the opportunity that was afforded them. Some members will disagree with me, but I believe that we heard a fine speech from Stewart Maxwell. It seemed entirely relevant that we should talk about independence in the context of talking about the hopes and aspirations of people in Scotland. I have good political friends who share much the same philosophical outlook as Labour members although we disagree, for the moment, on the constitutional question. Just as they opened their minds to changing their party's philosophy and policies because they accepted that the world had changed, I ask them to consider changing their view on the constitutional question if it can be proved that we live in a changing world and that our present constitutional arrangement does not  best serve the needs and aspirations of the people of Scotland. I am asking only for an open mind on the subject. It is great to sit on the independent benches, as we are allowed to have open minds and we do not need to have any set responses: we can go with the flow. I sincerely hope that, in providing the opportunity for a debate such as we have had today, we have given members on the other benches the idea that going with the flow is a good thing. Members do not always need to stand on the principle on which they were elected to the Parliament if things have changed around them. It is not so much the principle. We talk about principles, but we do not mean principles: we mean policies. Principles can stand, but policies can change. I hope that we can help that to happen as and when it is in keeping with the needs and aspirations of the people of Scotland.

I do not agree with that point entirely. It is true that the popular newspapers have dropped their average reading age. They know their readers' abilities.

When I worked as a reporter years ago, I reported on the sad, sorry state of service provision and sunbeds. Is the member aware of whether there has been any improvement in the regulations on when the bulbs and tubes and so on need to be changed? They were absolutely lethal.

I would have liked to answer some of the charges that Mr MacAskill made, but we have tried to give all members an opportunity to speak on subjects on which they might seldom or never get the opportunity to do so, so I will concentrate on prostitution. Prostitution must be attended to as quickly as possible. If the Parliament does that, it will meet a need in Scotland and will answer the requests that have been made of a number of members to tackle prostitution quickly. I recommend that the Executive put into effect the recommendations of the group of interested people and experts that, under the chairmanship of former assistant chief constable Sandra Hood, it appointed to investigate prostitution in Scotland. Members might recall the bill that I introduced in the first session of the Parliament. It was called the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill, which was a bit of a misnomer, but we all make mistakes. After that bill fell, it was felt that, in the course of its progress through the parliamentary system, we had uncovered a neglected area. Therefore, the Executive—to its credit—set up the expert group, which has taken a year to investigate in depth how prostitution is practised and how it is changing as a result of all sorts of social and economic changes. The group impressed me with how it tackled its work, in that it was not content merely to consider the scene in Scotland, but travelled outside Scotland to learn from others. However, the group found that much of the work that is being done to tackle prostitution in cities in England derives from the information and expertise that have been built up in Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen, because Scotland has been ahead of the field in its local attempts to manage an enduring problem for many citizens who are unconnected with prostitution. I commend the group's report, "Being Outside: Constructing a Response to Street Prostitution", which recommends that the law on prostitution should be changed. The present law potentially criminalises only the seller of sex—that is, the woman—because, although it should not be, our law is gender specific. In the first year of its work, the expert group did not consider male prostitution, which it intends to consider in another tranche of work, so I am referring to women for the moment. The group recommended that the buyer and the seller of sex or sexual services should both be viewed in the same light and that, if they offended any member of the public or any group in society or caused such people alarm by their actions, they could be prosecuted for doing so. That is of interest to those in Glasgow who have called for  the introduction of a law to deter kerb crawlers. If the offence was the creation of nuisance, alarm or annoyance, the kerb crawler would be caught by the same legislation as the prostitute who solicits in a way that causes offence or alarm. That proposal would equalise the law and would be a great improvement on the current law, which criminalises only the woman. The expert group recommended that, even before we get to changing the law, a national strategic approach should be taken to this—not that we should have a huge policy and reams of well-meaning written work, but that the matter should be considered seriously. The group recommended that an overall approach should be taken to achieving the objectives of reducing the number of women who work as prostitutes; helping those who do so to exit that work; minimising the exploitation that—there is no doubt about it—goes along with prostitution; and minimising the potential for physical harm that is done to prostitutes. Those are all laudable objectives. The expert group also got it absolutely right in saying that, although the responsibility for drawing up a framework for achieving those objectives should lie with the Parliament, the implementation should be left to the local authorities through a local implementation plan, which would be subject to scrutiny by the Executive minister with responsibility, and so on. We are not talking in a vacuum; this is not theory. We are talking about Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow—not even about Dundee, as there are so few women working as prostitutes in Dundee that we do not need a big policy there. The Dundee authorities say, "It ain't broke, so we're not going to fix it at the moment." They manage prostitution in their area and, although they had a problem with it a year or so ago, they have managed it. However, the City of Edinburgh Council has responded to Hugh Henry by saying that it welcomes the expert group's report, supports the comments of the officers groups and supports the proposed legislative changes, particularly the creation of a new offence that would penalise the purchaser of sexual services. The council executive also notes that the new offence is a replacement for soliciting and that it could help to manage the problem of street prostitution in more effective ways. The City of Edinburgh Council also welcomes the recommendation of the establishment of a national strategic framework as well as the proposals for local authorities to formulate local plans. That is important. The pattern of prostitution is different in all the cities that I have mentioned, and the local people know best how to cope with it. That does not preclude delivery of the services that might be recommended under the national strategic plan—services for counselling, health  support, and so on—being delivered via a local agency, such as there is in Glasgow and Edinburgh. Therefore, there might still be a red-light area in which it is known that prostitution will be encountered; however, it will be much better managed. I commend to Parliament the recommendations of the expert group and I sincerely ask the minister to put those recommendations into effect as quickly as possible. If the Executive is prepared to introduce a bill, I will willingly withdraw my bill. If it is not, because it is short of time, I am willing to introduce another member's bill.

Will Bill Aitken give way?

I hate to be a party pooper; that was an impressive list of objectives and perhaps even half-achievements. However, why does the Executive think so many young Scots want to leave Scotland?

I have to say that my best idea was not to have this debate—although that was not a bad one—but to invite the Rev Bob Brown to lead time for reflection. I and, I think, most members in the chamber thoroughly appreciated it. I thank the Presiding Officer, his staff, the business team and the business managers, who have all helped the independent members to organise this debate. As everyone knows, we are attempting to introduce an experimental style of debate; I hope that everyone will find it to be something of a respite from the politicking that is going on outside these walls. We have tried to structure this morning's proceedings to enable more free-flowing debate, in which all members will have the same amount of time for their speeches and are encouraged to speak on issues of their own choosing. Although Tavish Scott is on the front bench in his ministerial capacity—and will no doubt do whatever ministers do with the information that they glean from debates—I hope that he, too, will be able to participate actively, should he be moved to do so, even if the subject matter is not part of his portfolio. I also hope that other ministers—such as Margaret Curran, who has joined him on the front bench—will be able to make it into the chamber for the segment of this morning's proceedings that covers their particular areas of responsibility or interest, should those two aspects not coincide. I hope that although ministers will not be expected to give Executive statements, they might be able to participate in the debate. Of course, I am in your hands, Presiding Officer, because you will decide which members will be called, when they will be called and for how long they will be able to speak. We hope that everyone will be able to speak for an equal length of time. I certainly do  not intend to take up the usual time in my opening speech; I would prefer it by far that that time be left for the exchange of information in the debate. I assume that the Presiding Officer will inform members of the approximate timings that have been allocated to each subject. That is all that I want to say in opening the debate. I move, That the Parliament agrees that its members' primary function is to reflect and address the needs and aspirations of people in Scotland.

I was referring to yesterday's debate in particular, in which the words "co-operation" and "co-operative business" never occurred once. I listened to the debate and was tempted to mention co-operatives in Portugal, which are modern and entrepreneurial, as examples, but that would have been so much out of kilter with everything else that was being said that I did not mention them.

I apologise for intervening at this point in the member's speech. How would he explain to young people in school about the choice that they will have to make if they discover that they can produce their product more cheaply than a poorer society elsewhere in the world could?

My heart is cheering at what Bill Butler is saying, but I wonder whether he finds the same dichotomy in what he is talking about as there was in what was discussed in the chamber yesterday, in the debate on growing an enterprise culture. There seem to be two philosophies at work but, if we have to choose, I will choose his.

I thought for a minute that the First Minister was suggesting pieces all round. Will the First Minister examine the parallel between the situation that led to the Executive's policy change on the recruitment of specialist physical education teachers—a gap had arisen—and the situation in relation to home economics teachers? Is he aware that, in 2003, only 14 home economics teachers graduated and, I think, only 1.1 per cent of highers applicants took home economics? We should follow the same path as we took with the recruitment of physical education teachers. The whole subject must be considered, but specialist home economics teachers are needed in schools now.

Such as?

I seek information. I am interested in what part of the curriculum has to be forfeited. If we introduce a topic such as business and enterprise into schools, what part of the traditional curriculum has to give way?

I do not mean to patronise the member in any way—I have thoroughly enjoyed his speech and have agreed with everything that he has said. However, on growing a generation of engineers, I point out that, if the situation remains as it is at present, we will educate them and then they will leave. That is the gap that has to be explained.

On measures that are more likely than is high personal taxation to drive entrepreneurs out of Scotland, how many entrepreneurs have fled Sweden, Norway or Iceland?

I thank the minister for giving way so early in his speech. I appreciate the strategy and its objectives, but I would like him to come up with examples from our competitor economies and nations that would put flesh on the bones for us.

Although I am extremely glad to hear those figures, I point out that in Edinburgh in particular there has been a tendency for people who opt for a PE degree to go into sports science rather than into teaching PE. The big requirement is to get people who can demonstrate sports and be active in schools, not sports scientists.

I want to ensure that members know that the BAA games that are based at Meadowbank in Edinburgh offer the sort of event that the motion proposes, so a prototype exists. What is interesting is the number of local authorities that do not enter a team. The games combine mass participation with genuine competition. They are a good prototype that I urge members to examine.

I have to say that I was quite good at school sports. Indeed, I got my colours in three different sports—although I cannot remember now what they were. Robert Brown is right to say that sportspeople can be role models. For example, I am absolutely certain that I would not be standing here today or have stayed on the straight path had it not been for Eleanor Gordon, who won a bronze medal for swimming at the 1952 Helsinki Olympics. Although I was a very wee girl at the time, I was a member of the same swimming club and have admired what she did all my life. I was a swimmer when I was young and, as swimming has kept me going through physical difficulties in my later life, I most certainly advocate sport for all and activity at a level that suits everyone. I must take issue with Mark Ballard. It is not true to say that general activity is just as good as organised sport; they are two different concepts and the same people can take part in a wide range of physical activities. Nonetheless, I will address myself to the motion and not give him a lecture on  that now, although I am an old PE teacher. I have great sympathy with what Robert Brown intends and congratulate him on securing the debate, but I take issue with some of the details of his proposal, just as Mark Ballard did. The motion puts the cart before the horse. Elsewhere, Robert Brown has referred to the fact that the number of PE teachers in Scotland will be increased by 400. I sincerely hope that that will happen, but if he can show me where those teachers are being trained right now I will be a bit more hopeful that his plan could be put into effect before today's schoolchildren are the age that I am now and are looking back fondly on the 2004 Olympics. The Executive has recognised that extra PE teachers are needed, but PE must become central to the curriculum; it must not be a fringe or a frill. The Executive will not achieve its desired levels of health improvement without PE—encompassing health education—being at the core of the timetable and infused throughout the school curriculum. Without that happening, the Executive will simply not hit its health targets. We cannot glibly say that we will have mini-Olympics because we will have 400 more PE teachers, as we do not know for certain that we will have extra PE teachers. Robert Brown suggested bringing retired PE teachers out of retirement to coach. I advocated that for some time until a lot of them got in touch with me and said, "Right, you can do it, china." PE teachers have often—certainly in the past 10 years—been glad to retire because of discipline problems in school, so we cannot glibly accept that bringing them out of retirement is a good idea. It is a good idea, but a lot of work would have to go into working out how it could come about. The mini-Olympics would depend on competition, as Mark Ballard pointed out. Competition in schools is patchy, because there is still a generation of teachers who think that competition is bad for the pupils. I happen not to share that belief. Part of school education should be about learning to win and lose with equal grace, but that idea has not been fashionable until very recently. We need a programme to change attitudes among classroom teachers and enable them to learn how to coach and train PE. The mini-Olympics proposal could reinvent the wheel. We could use existing local authority structures and have the old type of county sports competition, for example. That is the way that I would start, because a mini-Olympics would create the wrong idea. It is a wee bit patronising and we need to have serious competition so that the kids feel that it is worth while. I suggest that Robert Brown talk to me afterwards about the OneCity Trust in Edinburgh and its work in bringing business and local sports  clubs together. I also suggest that he examine what James Gillespie's High School in Edinburgh is doing with pupil and teacher exchanges. The particular exchange that I am thinking of is with South Africa. To tell children that they are going somewhere nice and warm with the school if they reach a certain standard in athletics is a better carrot to get them out training on a cold winter night than a mini-Olympics would be. I am sorry that I cannot go on and on, because sport is my passion, but I thank Robert Brown for bringing the idea of a mini-Olympics to the Parliament's attention.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer, I seek your guidance on the length of amendments. I refer to amendment S2M-2554.2, in Brian Monteith's name, which reads like "War and Peace" and not like an amendment. Do the standing orders offer guidance on how to frame amendments and motions? A lot of motions and amendments are getting far too long.

I am playing devil's advocate. There seems to be a parallel between the benefit that definitely accrues to children who attend a school of their parents' choosing, even if they pay fees to do so, and who are therefore a minority in the community, and the benefit that accrues to the minority of people who might benefit from, say, a Muslim charity.

Is the First Minister content to accept the findings of the civil service commissioner in relation to the conduct of senior civil servants working on the Holyrood project in the light of the information contained in the report—which is now public—that was commissioned from Gardiner & Theobald by the Auditor General for Scotland? The report states unequivocally that "guidelines, rules and procedures set by the Scottish Executive, the Treasury and the European Commission have been blatantly" "broken" and "ignored".

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I hesitate to take the chamber's time, but has the matter not already been recorded through the two members' points of order?

I seek two points of clarification. The first concerns section 14 of the Inquiries Bill, which relates to the "Power to convert other inquiry into inquiry under this Act". I refer of course to the question—on which the minister has already given an opinion to Bill Butler—whether the Fraser inquiry could be converted. Will he confirm that his opinion remains as it did at committee? Secondly, I wonder whether the minister could give us any hint as to the possible enactment date of the bill, since the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body is now in court defending itself and may wish to seek access to tapes for the record.

In her excellent speech, Wendy Alexander stressed the importance of the management at St Mirren having taken a lead. I may be wrong in this, but most of the attention of various campaigns to get rid of sectarianism and racism in sport have been directed at the sportsmen themselves because of the example that they set people in the crowd. Perhaps we should think more about  management; perhaps we should consider running seminars for the management of clubs, who might think that they have more to do with their time. What does the member think of that idea?

To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it will request BBC Scotland to make the material gathered on videotape for "The Gathering Place" regarding the decision-making process on the Holyrood project available to the Parliament. (S2O-5046) It is great to break new ground.

May I remind the SPCB of the powers of this Parliament in a situation in which it is felt necessary to require the attendance of witnesses or the submission of material? I put it to the SPCB that the situation has changed since the views to which Mr Brown referred were given, in that the television programme is unlikely to be shown before autumn because of the pending general election, during which time Lord Fraser's investigation will be kept open—quite artificially—and the SPCB will have to go to court to defend its decision making, a record of which can probably be accessed only on those dates.

I have asked the SPCB whether it will invoke the powers of the Parliament. That was my question.

May I ask on a point of order then—

I am very sorry, Presiding Officer, but I say, with respect, that this is important. In what way will the corporate body accept an expression of the Parliament's opinion on the matter?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

You do not regret that as much as I do, Presiding Officer. I prefer to ask questions, rather than make a long speech. On Bill Butler's second-last point, I want to ask him whether he agrees with Lord Cullen's view that, despite the amendment, the arrangement would not be satisfactory to the practitioners of English law, so it should not be satisfactory to the practitioners of Scots law. Nobody argues that separating the judiciary and the legislature is anything other than absolutely the right thing to do. Therefore, why has the Government baulked at doing so? In spite of the brave words about the independence of the judges who will be attached to the supreme court, the court will remain the responsibility of the Department for Constitutional Affairs and a minister who will be answerable to the House of Commons. That is not independence. Did that happen because the Government made a hash of that part of constitutional reform, in line with its efforts at reforming the Lords, or is this simply another example of Blairism and its known fondness for controlling everyone who might think differently from the great man himself? I am aware that some lawyers think that the proposals might constitute a breach of article 19 of the act of union 1707. I will not even bother to ask the minister to give me the Executive's view on that question, because I doubt very much if it gave even a passing thought to the importance of keeping faith with the people who enshrined the independence of Scots law in the new political partnership that they forged with England. All I ask is that the minister should quietly examine the rationale for having a legislature that represents and reflects the distinctiveness of the Scottish nation. Without a history that lives on in our contemporary assumptions about and expectations of social order, custom and practice and justice, how can this place be anything other than a regional assembly as opposed to a national Parliament? Why a Sewel motion? There have been umpteen changes since the idea of the supreme court was first mooted, so we could have done with a full debate. We will grow as a Parliament and as a body of people if we debate the hard  questions. Why not repatriate civil appeals to Scotland? It makes more sense than taking criminal appeals to England. There is an illogicality at the very heart of the proposition and, if there is time, I ask the minister to answer my questions.

The member has said absolutely nothing that breaks the consensus in the chamber. Therefore, I appeal to him to say that the SNP will not press the motion.

First, I apologise for not being here for the opening speeches, but I had a hospital appointment this morning. However, the speeches that I heard impressed me with their sincerity and content. The independent group decided not to lodge amendment S2M-2240.3 until we saw whether it would be possible for all groups represented on the Parliamentary Bureau to agree to a single motion that all members of the Parliament—whatever minor differences of emphasis and  nuance there might be—could support as a unanimous expression of Scottish sympathy for all those millions of our fellow beings who have been affected by the tsunami and as an expression of our undivided opinion on the magnitude of the disaster in the Indian ocean region and therefore its effect on the priorities of those who decide the policies of international aid. The disaster has made an examination of aid policies inescapable. We hoped that the scale of poverty reduction that we must aspire to would find common agreement across the Parliament. We lodged our amendment because, unfortunately, those aims were not met, although members might feel that we have achieved them in this live debate, rather than in the printed pages of the Business Bulletin .

I did not in any way mean any member in the chamber to take our reasons for lodging an amendment as condemnation of the way in which any party acted. We tried to produce an amendment that would find agreement throughout the Parliament. On the diminution of poverty, which was the last point to which I referred, we concede that there might be a difference of opinion, but even then that difference would not be about the strategic objective, as everybody wants to diminish poverty as quickly as possible. Any differences of opinion would concern the detailed policies for achieving that shared objective. Although Stewart Stevenson's contribution was excellent and extremely well informed and researched, this is not really the debate to concentrate on the details of future operational policy. We cannot today pass on to the G8, the EU, the World Bank, the IMF or the Westminster Government—which has an active role in the G8—the considered suggestions or recommendations of the Scottish Parliament on how, for example, international aid should be directed at, and received by, appropriate individuals and organisations in countries in receipt of aid. However, we can agree to stress to all those bodies our unanimous belief that a much-improved monitoring system must accompany all aid packages and that the system—like the aid-and-trade packages—must reflect the differing realities of institutional development, for example, in the different countries that receive aid. That point was, I think, referred to by Phil Gallie. Regrettably, however, no single motion or  amendment emerged that met the criteria that I have outlined. Dennis Canavan's amendment seeks to fulfil the functions of such a motion, as we have tried to draw in the essential elements of the Scottish National Party, Executive and Green expressions of opinion in the Business Bulletin . Leaving the mechanics aside, however, I wish to concentrate on the issue of recovery in those Asian countries that were affected by the recent consequences of an earthquake and the poverty that stalks millions of our fellow human beings. The devastation in Asia is primarily a human catastrophe. We have heard of the effects of the tsunami on local economies, but little attention has been paid to the overarching economic consequences. For example, while we were sitting stunned in our living rooms as we saw people swept to their deaths in their thousands, the stock markets of Asia did not sink and the international insurance industry did not cry about its potential losses—it did not blink. The insurance industry reckons that its bill will be far lower than that for the hurricanes in Florida in 2004. The infrastructure outside the coastal areas of those of the affected countries that have a large land mass was not damaged, while most of the people killed were poor and had no insurance, either personal or for their small boats and other businesses. Those areas have been devastated not only by loss of life but by loss of economic structures. Coastal farming is badly affected by the incursion of seawater into what was previously a freshwater irrigation system, so it is essential that any aid is directed at the reconstitution of the economies of the poor in the coastal regions. Enough money may well have been committed, along with debt suspension, to achieve that, provided that the money boasted of by the rich countries is actually paid over. I regret that I will have to curtail my words of wisdom because I took an intervention earlier. However, the motion and the amendments refer to the linkage of aid, debt and fair trade, the indivisibility of which cannot be overemphasised. Unfortunately, I have not had time to dwell on the latter two elements of that equation. In the interests of justice and the most effective management of the globe's resources, those elements must be resolved. One factor must be borne in mind: there is no common blueprint that can be applied to every country whose people are suffering the ravages of poverty and the lack of the most basic resources. Our amendment, in Dennis Canavan's name, encapsulates the best common elements of the different expressions of opinion on matters affecting international aid. There is much more that unites than divides all sides in the Scottish Parliament on how the world's poor can be helped  and how they can be supported in helping themselves. If the SNP—

Will the member give way?

Will the member ask the Presiding Officer whether it is in order for a party not to press its motion or amendment?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise if I did not make my intention clear. I wanted to ascertain whether the same rule applies to a motion. I understood the position on amendments, but I was not sure about the position on motions.

Thank you.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive plans to take on the findings and recommendations of the expert group on prostitution's stage 1 report. (S2F-1308)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and comment on its wisdom. I also commend to him the expert group's findings because, as the Executive will find when it studies it, it manages to reconcile two conflicting duties of care. I ask the First Minister to consider seriously what the report says; we have managed to bridge the gap between the cities in Scotland.

The minister started by giving an impressive list of targets, which were welcomed by my colleague Jean Turner and me. However, Mary Scanlon asked about the other waiting lists—she instanced the waiting list for podiatrists. In my view, that is one of the keys to achieving the objectives that the minister set out. I urge him to consider the less sexy side of what goes on inside our hospitals and clinics. Very often, that is the biggest part of prevention. As we know, prevention is better than cure. Basically, we have a shortage of beds. That has been obvious in the Lothian NHS Board area over the past few months, even to members from the further reaches of the west coast. I am so sorry that Duncan McNeil, the bum, has left the chamber—that is an in-joke, but I am assured that it is okay to use that word.

I think that it is always discourteous to use that word.

I am happy to have that ruling and I promise that I will not use the word again. That was a diversion from my argument. In Lothian, the number of beds in the new royal infirmary has been reduced by a third. I can quite understand the reasoning, which was that we would have state-of-the-art theatres and all the rest of it and many more people would be put through much more quickly and would not need to stay in hospital. The truth of the matter is that many older people, who have more complex conditions, are going into hospital. Instead of going into hospital and neatly having just one condition seen to, they need to have a number of things seen to. That clogs up the system. That is a  simple exemplification of how the bed shortage impacts on the quality of the service.

We have more people who are sick. We know what the health stats are—

That is not the issue. The issue is that, because we have many older people, who have more complex conditions, beds are used for longer periods of time, which means that we need more beds. That factor was not taken into account in the calculations that were used when the RIE was planned as a seamless whole of services and equipment. I mention the point in the hope that the minister might reflect on it. The need for more beds must be seen in conjunction with the revolving-door syndrome that sees approximately 5 per cent of patients taking up 20 per cent of bed space. Those are the patients who are either chronically sick or who have a number of things wrong with them. The introduction of PFI and the way in which resources are allocated in the system together with the recurring feature of the same people requiring more complex care—albeit that it is more sophisticated treatment—contributes to the shortage of beds. I hope that when the Executive plans new hospital buildings in future, it does not look simply at the raw data. It should do things differently and not rely on data that seem to show that more effective surgical procedures mean the need for fewer hospital beds. General practitioners have told me that when a patient is referred to a particular consultant for, say, a cardiac consultation and the consultant says that the patient is okay, they go out of the system at that point. Instead of that happening, they should be seen by other consultants in other disciplines so that time is not lost and patients do not become more frustrated. The minister could look at the referral system, which needs to be made more sensible. At the moment, staff time is used inefficiently and patients become frustrated because of the long waits between referrals. I am happy to see that the minister is nodding. With the objective in mind that if we treat the whole person, not only can all of their ailments be taken into account but a more efficient and effective use can be made of resources, I suggest that the minister looks at the multidisciplinary centre that I discussed with him in our meeting earlier this week. I thank the minister for that meeting, as it was most productive. We discussed  the case of a patient who has post-polio syndrome. The best way in which to treat that person would be in a multidisciplinary clinic that was specially geared to the needs of such patients. Indeed, a number of different conditions would be best served by that treatment approach. Before I conclude, I wonder whether I might be able to answer some of the questions that were posed earlier in the debate. A member on the Labour benches posed the question why the SNP are such ideologues that they object to the use of private medicine. I would have thought that the SNP health spokesperson—her louche language aside—might have explained that the SNP has no objection to taxation, if it can be used to further enhance the health service. We will be using health service money to pay into private practice. If patients were given a choice on the subject, the minister might find that taxation for health is not all that unpopular. I see that he is shaking his head at the suggestion—indeed, I understand why—but he should reflect on it. The Executive document's intentions are excellent. That said, I fear that the minister has set the same bear trap for himself as his predecessors did of setting so many targets that he now has to hit. What the minister needs is satisfied patients and not targets hit.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do we have a code of practice as regards what language it is acceptable to use in the chamber?

Will the minister give way?

Does the member agree that we could resolve the inherent contradiction if we agreed in principle that there should be a holiday to celebrate our national day?

Here's tae us—wha's like us? Damn few. As Tricia Marwick has pointed out, what other country in the world would say no to a national holiday and to an honest affirmation of its identity, beliefs and international responsibilities? A holiday on St Andrew's day might well do that for Scotland. However, Cardinal Keith O'Brien probably over-egged the pudding when he said that, on St Andrew's day, it would be a good thing for us to consider Scotland and nationhood. Whoops—we must not mention that word. Let us be honest: business has put up spurious arguments against this proposal. Does the American economy go into a nosedive after thanksgiving day? Moreover, does the French economy get extremely ill and the franc have to be rescued on 15 July? We know perfectly well that countries all over the world use their national days to accommodate their nationhood and market their economies. Dennis Canavan's motion gives us the opportunity to start doing that. I find it disgraceful that such a far-sighted and well-travelled man as Ted Brocklebank should think that having a national day will have a detrimental effect on Scottish business and the Scottish economy. He should think about the cottage industries that would be built on such a  day. For example, there would have to be loads of flags for flying or for adorning underpants and other items of clothing. Shop assistants would spend at least a month selling all the artefacts that are now associated with more commercial occasions. I admit that a St Andrew's day celebration will probably be taken over by the same folk who make a mint out of mothers day, Christmas, Easter and any other secular or religious celebration. That said, a St Andrew's day holiday could also be used to announce the winners of prizes that our nation had decided to award for scholarship and artistic achievement. People should be encouraged to go outwards from Scotland, learn from the rest of the world and bring their knowledge back to Scotland to make it a better place. Children should know Scotland, their roots, their future and their potential, in the way that American children learn through taking part in thanksgiving day pageants. It is a grand idea all round, and I urge everyone to support it.

I speak for the independents to record our appreciation of the quality and sensitivity of the First Minister's remarks. I take some hope from his concluding sentence, which contained a pledge to continue to support the victims of abuse. I take it that that includes people who are now outwith the care system, but still feel the effects of abuse.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Will you revisit the decision that you made when you informed me that you had considered whether there should be changes to the standing orders on how we conduct First Minister's question time? You said that you had considered the matter seriously and that on only two occasions since had something of a diversion been created instead of our having questions and answers. Will you revisit that decision in light of what happened today? All members will agree that today we had two question times: one that was relevant and in which we were all interested because there was an exchange of information and the First Minister was held to account, and one that served no useful purpose in the chamber. Will you revisit your decision to rejig First Minister's question time?

I am extremely interested in what the member has just said. I ran the national AIDS helpline and introduced Smokeline and I am not at all sure that the reasons she instanced for the reduction in smoking are the correct ones. She might find that shock tactics worked, particularly in the case of AIDS.

I do not want to interrupt Alasdair Morrison's flow, but he should stick to the subject of the debate and not go into the realms of fantasy about two hours of physical education for every child. It is not happening.

Does the member agree that we will tackle such apparent inconsistencies more successfully if we decide fundamentally why we are adopting the measure? Are we doing so to protect people from smokers or to persuade smokers not to smoke? The two approaches are different and involve two campaigns.

My question relates to the member's last point. This morning I heard a spokesman say that people had every right to do what they wanted in their homes, and on the face of it that seems to be true. However, that may mean that they breathe smoke all over their children, and I do not think that they have the right to do that. I am interested to know whether, like me, the member wants to hear from the minister what he is going to do about that.

rose—

On what we are competent to talk about and what we are not competent to expedite, do I take it that Labour members will not talk or listen to the next group of pensioners that arrives at the Parliament to discuss its concerns?

Having spent almost seven hours as a patient in Edinburgh royal infirmary yesterday, I echo Ms Sturgeon's comments and ask the First Minister to listen to the voices of patients. My experience was very different from that of the patient quoted by Ms Sturgeon, but I caution the First Minister against condemning or congratulating an entire system on the experience of one patient, even if, as was the case, I experienced the care of the same nursing staff and the same consultant physicians and surgeons as Mrs Kyle. I ask him to ensure that, in future, the staff of the Edinburgh royal understand the difference between politics and the genuine and excellent work that they do.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for raising the same point of order that I have raised for the past two weeks. As members will see, we have lost a question and First Minister's question time has run four minutes over the half an hour that is allotted to it. Do we accept that we are continually going to break our standing orders or do we update our standing orders? I would prefer to do the latter. Will the Presiding Officer give us some suggestions on how we might make sense of this item of business?

Could Robert Brown give us some examples of other countries that have that clear image that he describes? Is it not true that we are far too concerned with our image and less concerned with the facts, as outlined by Christine May? Indeed, I think that we still think of Switzerland as somewhere that makes cuckoo clocks.

Does the member equate that success with the success of Malta—unequivocally a country, rather than a region—in helping to renegotiate the fisheries policy, which will benefit Scotland more directly?

George Lyon seems to be echoing something that Carolyn Leckie said most concisely about there not being published data. We do not want a witch hunt of consultants, so we should have the figures published but not the names. If the names were published, that could lead to consultants being judged by the public in the way that judges will be, as we saw in a paper today.

I hesitate to intervene on a professional, and I hear what Eleanor Scott has to say about the possibilities for general surgeons and about the job satisfaction that that would carry, but is she aware of how difficult it is for Edinburgh, which is supposed to be the most attractive place to live in Scotland, to attract generalist surgeons, never mind specialists?

I hesitate to raise this point of order, but I think that most members who have been in the chamber all afternoon attempting to concentrate on the debate have, like me, found themselves shivering. I have a wee excuse, but other members have commented that they, too, are extremely cold. Will you investigate whether the chamber could be heated to a level that the Health and Safety Executive might find acceptable?

I was particularly interested in the minister's reference to the place of physical education in schools and I welcome the Executive's conversion to having more PE teachers. Therefore, I draw the Executive's attention to a scheme that was launched only six weeks ago in Clackmannan and which is the only such scheme that is running in Scotland. As far as I can work out and have learned from teachers and officials from the county, the scheme is proving successful. It is a template for getting more PE teachers into schools when we need them. Can the minister find enough money in the spending at his disposal to mount an evaluation exercise, which would kill around three birds with one stone? We can work out what quality PE is; prove that there must be trained specialists in primary schools; and work out how to recruit teachers on a shorter training scheme than the current one. An evaluation exercise should be mounted, and I have been assured that the University of Edinburgh could undertake such a scheme. Of course, I am not being partisan. I thank the Presiding Officer for giving me the opportunity to put my proposal to the minister.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point of order, which concerns rule 13.7 of our standing orders, refers to the length of time that has been taken for this question session. Do you consider it in order that 60 per cent of the time that was available today was given over to the party leaders? That meant that you had to run over time to ensure that the last question—that of Mr Pringle—was taken. Last week, Mr Mundell lost his question. I ask you for a statement on whether we might better organise how questions are put to the First Minister.

Does the member agree that the talent-spotting scheme that is operated by sportscotland is not hitting the mark because it is not developed enough where children are at the age when their talent can be judged? Because the scheme focuses on children at too young an age, we are losing potentially talented athletes.

The motion is full of warm words and great intentions, so I will certainly vote for it—I am part of the independent group so I cannot speak for everybody else—but I take issue with it all the same. It states: "That the Parliament recognises the significant progress made since devolution in increasing participation in sport." I am sure that the minister has access to the same figures as me, which show that since 1999 there has been a 2 per cent decrease in participation in sport. I do not blame the minister for that, but it would be better to acknowledge reality before we judge whether the policies that have been outlined are meeting the challenges. Almost every member this morning has referred to the lack of resources, therefore our amendment  is relevant, because we propose ways in which resources can be channelled into community sport and elite sport, but particularly into community sport. Let us start with local authorities. I return to a familiar theme that members have heard me expound before. Having more physical education teachers in schools is a necessity. While I appreciate that the motion refers to that and that there is a target for more PE teachers to be in place by 2007, I am interested in how that will be achieved. The University of Edinburgh is the only place that trains PE teachers. I know that there is a postgraduate course at the University of Strathclyde, but I will not refer to that at the moment, as I am talking about people who are at school and who want to be PE teachers, who will likely go to Edinburgh in the first instance. The numbers in training at the University of Edinburgh are going to be down—not by much, but they will still be down—from 101 or 102 to 99, so the trend does not favour the Executive's good intentions. There is no way round the issue: education authorities must have the resources to employ more teachers. Balerno High School has an inspirational head of PE called Jennifer Grassick. The community development of sporting activity in that area has come from the school and is feeding into local sporting clubs. Not only has the school taken responsibility for its pupils, but it is helping them to learn about organising sporting clubs. Whether she has twisted the arms of her fellow teachers or inspired them, Jennifer Grassick has persuaded them to help her to coach sports. Someone referred to the fact that teachers no longer do that on a voluntary basis. I believe that if teachers in the independent sector take sports, they get a 5 or 10 per cent addition to their salaries. I am not proposing that, but I am suggesting that without inspirational PE teachers such as Jennifer Grassick, other teachers will not be roped in. Members have referred to the Government target of having two hours of PE a week, but that is not enough. If we seriously want people to think about sporting activity and exercise as part of their lives and as being as essential as taking in food, they have to participate in it every day. Some form of physical exercise has to be built into the school curriculum. My colleague Dennis Canavan referred to the McCrone settlement, which suggested replacing principal PE teachers with faculty heads. That is a backward step that is at variance with the Government's intentions. Could we examine that again? The other aspect of having PE teachers in schools is that they carry sport into the community. We have to sort out how sportscotland can help. Until now, sportscotland has prioritised directing  cash into sports clubs and communities, but I have queried that on more than one occasion, and I was interested to hear one or two members query it as well. Margaret Jamieson aptly mentioned a martial arts club that encourages kids in her area to take part and become active, but which is denied the funding that it needs for expansion and promotion because it does not meet the priorities of sportscotland. There has been much discussion of that in the cross-party group on sport, and I pray that it will continue. We must be careful that we do not appear to be narrow nationalists or, on the other hand, super internationalists, saying, "It's okay, we totally support the London Olympic bid." Look at what that will do to funding for the community development of sport. I, too, would like the Olympics to be held in London, but not at the expense of money that should be spent on encouraging mass participation in community sports. The priority should be to get more people into sports, which would give a bigger skills pool and so greater success at elite level. While we are talking about elite athletes, I must say that I was not joking when I suggested that Colin Montgomerie should be invited to join us for the Parliament building opening ceremony. He has done more to boost Scottish self-confidence than anyone has recently. We need to get all the role models who have won medals, whether in the Olympics or the paralympics, into schools. After a Scot, Steven Frew, won the rings competition in gymnastics in the Commonwealth games in Manchester, I asked him whether he would be willing to visit Scottish schools. He said, "Of course. I already visit schools in London," but somehow we could not get organised to get him or other medal winners at the Commonwealth games into schools. For goodness' sake, we need to ensure that we get successful Olympians, including disabled Olympians, into schools now, because they are the sort of role models that we need.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The minister has spoken about the link between sport for children in schools and sport in sports clubs. Will he confirm that the role of establishing that link—which was previously given to sports co-ordinators—has fallen by the wayside? Sports co-ordinators are concentrating more on interschool competitions, rather than investigating routes into post-school participation.

I wonder whether Colin Montgomerie's achievement could be recognised by inviting him to join us in the opening of the Parliament. The minister might have some influence on that.

Can the minister assure me that Mr Dunion will be able to call for the publication of the Gardiner & Theobald report to which I referred in my speech? The Auditor  General decided that he would not publish that report although he was asked for it in the run-up to the Fraser inquiry and during the inquiry.

Does the member accept that it was the duty of the corporate body to carry out a full review and to make a full statement on the state of the project? Does he agree that that did not happen due to negligence on the part of the corporate body?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will John Home Robertson give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Robin Harper referred to the question-and-answer sessions held by the progress group. I have been very critical of that group, as has he. However, I listened carefully and I heard the progress group commit itself to bringing in the project on time and on budget. As Robin has just outlined, that was impossible. However, the group was in an impossible position, as it did not have the power to do what a client would normally do. Does Robin agree that what that points to is not a raking over of the coals but a change in the Scotland Act 1998?

rose  —

Does the minister think it democratic or right that the only report on Lord Fraser should be by people who have been commented on by him in his inquiry? The minister referred to democratic practices. Is not it more democratic for other people, who have not been involved, to carry out that investigation? Who is to know when ministers are deprived of information if experts are to take the same attitude as the Auditor General for Scotland did when he said that he published only conclusions that he agreed with?

Although it is true, allowing for the poetic licence that is accorded to newspaper headline writers, that "a big civil servant did it and ran away", this debate on Lord Fraser's report should ensure that although the civil servants, politicians and contractors who are responsible for bringing Parliament into disrepute can run, they cannot hide. Before I turn to what Parliament may learn from the evidence to, and report of, the Fraser inquiry, I pay tribute to the team that conducted the inquiry, which was agreed to by the First Minister and instigated jointly by the First Minister and the Presiding Officer. The team set standards of productivity and commitment to the job that should serve as a benchmark for any such future inquiries. Fortunately, the Fraser inquiry will probably be unique. We are most unlikely to build another Parliament building, but should any successor Parliament require to do so, the results of Fraser and our deliberations here today should provide our successors with a template of what not to do, as well as make some positive suggestions. Following the evidence that was given to the inquiry, it is now irrefutable that the Holyrood project got off to what proved to be a disastrous start when Donald Dewar made fundamental decisions about when to start and where to site our new Parliament. I do not believe that he did so for vainglorious reasons—if he was guilty of anything, it was of paternalism, as suggested by Sam Galbraith's evidence to the inquiry. The late First Minister would probably have escaped all criticism had he left the matter to the elected members of Parliament. That he misjudged the best way to proceed should be admitted; his reputation is big enough to withstand the charge  that—perhaps for admirable motives—he made the wrong decision. It should also be noted that his was not the only misjudgment. As John Campbell's questioning made clear, civil servants Muir Russell, Robert Gordon, John Gibbons, Barbara Doig and Paul Grice made mistakes of omission and commission. Evidence to the inquiry also exposes the gaps in communication, project planning and management among contractors and consultants during the lifetime of the project. It is quite wrong to believe that the only important mistakes were made by Donald Dewar. A sizeable group of people had some responsibility for building this Parliament and, unfortunately, amateurism and lack of managerial rigour characterise much of the decision making. For example, following the death of Enric Miralles, mistakes were made by the politicians who were supposedly in charge of the project on our behalf. David Steel failed to examine the terms of the design contract after the chief architect died and when I wrote to him to suggest that he do so, he discussed my request with the big brains of the Holyrood progress group and then wrote to tell me that I was an insensitive harpy and that they were not going to answer any of the questions that I had put to them about how they had handled the loss of the chief designer before the completion of stage D in the planning process. As members will recall, Parliament was assured that stage D had been reached but, as the Fraser inquiry uncovered, it had not. Instead of—even without going into detail that might have upset the Miralles family, which I can appreciate—admitting that Senor Miralles' death had consequences for the project, the project team's spin doctors, together with David Steel, the HPG and some MSPs spun the line that Senor Miralles would have been taking a back seat by that time anyway. We are talking about the chief designer taking a back seat before we reached stage D. Who told MSPs that, and what was the process that resulted in Parliament's being misinformed about the possibilities that were open to it after Enric Miralles died? At that stage, the constrictions of the site and the difficulties of incorporating Queensberry House were inescapable, yet there was still time to walk away without losing money. Indeed, it is now acknowledged by independent assessors that a modest profit might have accrued to Parliament. Apart from the first floor of the MSP office block, nothing had been built above ground; let us not forget that. However, as old embers are being raked over and the building is now a reality, it is tempting for us to say what the SPCB's motion urges, which is: "Well, we're here now, so let's forget what might  have been". The purpose of my amendment is not to dwell on the past; rather, it is to learn from the short history of the decision-making processes that have damaged Parliament's standing, so that the long-term future might be characterised by better governance arising from improvements to the ways in which politicians, civil servants, parliamentary officials and other public servants, such as the Auditor General, discharge their duties. For example, do we need to revisit the guidelines and practices that govern how, and how much, information is imparted to ministers by civil servants such as the former project sponsor, parliamentary officials and public appointees such as the Auditor General? As a Parliament, do we think that it is right for a doubtless dedicated—but nonetheless generalist—middle-ranking civil servant to edit out specific advice that was obtained from an expert consultant on the finances of an Administration or Parliament project, thus depriving ministers of information that they needed to make valued judgments, the consequence of which was that they misled Parliament? Might we establish a general principle about when expert advice might be taken before ministers or committees reach conclusions, and about how adequate in meeting Parliament's transparency and accountability criteria is our present rule of thumb that governs which expert advice passes into the public domain? There is general agreement in the chamber about the need to learn from experience in order that we can enhance the good governance of Scotland and enhance how we go about our business in the chamber. If colleagues will bear with me for a moment, I will try to put some flesh on the bare bones of that statement of good intentions. My example is drawn from the Auditor General's first report to the Audit Committee. To help compile his report, which was published in September 2000, he commissioned an expert report from international project and cost management consultants Gardiner & Theobald. Their report states: "It appears the over-riding influence of one Scottish Office member based on the comfort factor of a previous working relationship ... has over ridden the attempt, albeit flawed, to procure the best construction management candidate for the project". The Gardiner & Theobald report adds that "The failure of Scottish Office personnel to adhere in any way to standard procedures, treasury guidance or EU provisions raises questions on procedure." The Auditor General appears to have ignored those conclusions in his report to MSPs. I asked him to publish them, but he refused and told me:  "We will publish only material that reflects our considered conclusions on any matter." MSPs might feel that such filtering of information deprives them of the ability to exercise the judgment that they were elected to exercise on behalf of the people who pay our wages and in whose name we serve. To expand the point, Gardiner & Theobald, consultants who were contracted for their specialist expertise by the generalist Auditor General, reported to him: "There are advantages through the proper use of a risk management process, unfortunately a full risk management has not been completed ... this is a serious and fundamental omission which must have contributed to the cost escalation." However, the distillation of that expert opinion as reported by the Auditor General to MSPs was: "In some areas project management processes such as risk analysis and cost reporting did not fully match established good practice for major contracts." Gardiner & Theobald also report that unsuccessful candidates for the construction management contract might have a legal case against the Scottish Executive. However, the Auditor General's report stated to the Audit Committee of Parliament, which was taking important decisions based on the Auditor General's report, that "In general terms the appointment of consultants was properly undertaken." When we consider how to prevent the withholding of information from politicians by civil servants, we must also consider whether the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Act 2000 is effective in relation to the Auditor General's objectivity and transparency. Politicians also screened out information that should have been available to MSPs; the SPCB even produced two sets of minutes of its decisions on Holyrood. David Steel was as guilty as the Auditor General of filtering out information about the project—just as officials were and as the progress group was. It has yet to explain to MSPs why Alan Ezzi was shown the door after only seven months as project manager. I have referred to changes that might be required to the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Act 2000, but such a committee as I propose in my amendment might also conclude that the Scotland Act 1998 requires amendment to allow the corporate body legally to delegate powers so that future groups—like the Holyrood progress group—can be properly held to account by Parliament. A committee such as I propose might also conclude that our standing orders assist that process of information filtration and that they require some amendment.  My amendment seeks to maximise the good that might yet come from a bad job: I urge MSPs to support it. I move amendment S2M-1727.2, to leave out from "invites" to end and insert: "calls on the political parties and groups represented on the Parliamentary Bureau to nominate one person from each of their respective political parties or groups, other than those members who served on the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body or were members of the Scottish Executive at the time covered by the report, to form a special committee of the Parliament to consider the report and make recommendations as to the future conduct of the civil service, the Corporate Body, the Chief Executive of the Parliament and the Executive in discharging their public duties."

Will the member take an intervention?

It wisnae me. I want to return to what should be concerning us: the working relationship between the Executive  and civil servants, which the Fraser report illuminated. I fully accept that the First Minister has agreed that that relationship should be changed and modernised. Does he worry, as I do, that worthwhile reforms are not in his gift, given that they require the consent of Whitehall because civil servants here are home civil servants? What assurances can the First Minister give that his best intentions will not be bogged down in the corridors of power, which I think are still in Victoria Quay, not St Andrew's House?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My point of order concerns a matter of which I have given notice. For the benefit of members who wish to understand Parliament's procedures better, will you say under which rule of standing orders you closed this morning's session without hearing the substance of Mr Sheridan's point of order? In replying to Ms Leckie and Mr Sheridan, you informed Parliament that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has consulted on charging for tours of the new Parliament building. My point of order does not address the substance of that decision or the debate that may surround it; rather, it questions whether the consultation procedures that were followed were compatible with the standards of accessibility and accountability that are at the core of the Parliament's ethos. In your capacity as convener of the corporate body, by describing the consultation process that was followed, will you assure Parliament that the founding principles of the Scottish Parliament have not been breached by decisions that the corporate body made in private?

On a point of order.

With all due respect, the only detailed reference in the point of order was to standing orders.

To ask the First Minister whether any additional emergency measures are planned to combat the advance of obesity among the general population and, in particular, children. (S2F-918)

I thank the First Minister for his reply and congratulate the Executive on the measures that he outlined. However, there is a need for more drastic action to be taken quickly. The University of Edinburgh's school of physical education has a one-year postgraduate course ready and waiting to go, which would allow the recruitment of more gym teachers from primary schools, but it lacks the funds to put it into effect. I suggest that that additional measure might be welcome.

Will the member give way?

We have just heard one of the best speeches so far in this Parliament. I would like to associate myself with Elaine Smith's peroration, in particular what she said about few of the words in today's motion and amendments providing a satisfactory solution to the problem. I will come back to that later. The mess that is British policy on Iraq and the wider middle east was predictable. Before the war, al-Qa'ida was a small organisation that was based mainly in the border area between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Now, it is estimated to number about 18,000 people and its offshoots are to be found in countries as widespread as Indonesia, Australia, the United Kingdom, Tunisia, Morocco, the United States, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Turkey. That probably answers the only weak point in Michael McMahon's otherwise admirable speech. When we consider the list of countries that now harbour al-Qa'ida members, there can be no justification for our going into one country with whose regime we disagreed. Bush and Blair lied—they lied about weapons of mass destruction and Blair either lied or showed incredible incompetence in claiming not to know that the rocket-delivery system that was supposed to threaten us here in Europe was, in fact, a battlefield weapon system and not an intercontinental one. That fact alone means that our credibility has been gravely damaged in the middle east. The political incompetence of Bush and Blair is staggering. They support a double standard in international law, and the actions of the Americans in their treatment of prisoners and their methods of policing Iraq—with tanks and random fire killing thousands of Iraqis—border on the insane. While the Arab world watches on Aljazeera television as Americans shoot up a wedding party, it also sees Israeli bulldozers smash the houses and farms of  Palestinians. While the Iraqis pay the price of occupation, Israel is rewarded—with American backing and weasel words from Tony Blair—for its brutal occupation of Arab land. If Bush and Blair had set out deliberately to stimulate al-Qa'ida, they could not have done it better than by using the policies that they have pursued. They have stoked fires of hatred that will take generations to cool even if, as we all must hope, the United Nations provides an alternative security force to the US and British forces that are in Iraq now. I want now to turn to the motion and the amendments, which Elaine Smith said were unsatisfactory. I agree with her. First of all, it is right that the SNP motion has been debated. I will be frank: in this context, I do not care whether there is a European election or not, and neither do other Scots—especially the 75 per cent of those who answered the BBC poll that was published today. Those people expressed their disapproval of what is being done in their name. The SNP motion is superficial in its analysis and in its remedy. As we have already heard, blithely to suggest a Muslim-only armed force is infantile. The Tories' amendment is out of touch with Scottish opinion. I do not think that Phil Gallie speaks for Scotland when he appears to support ever more engagement in Iraq. However, I believe that the Tories could and should vote according to what they believe and according to their conscience. They were bounced into supporting Blair in his adventure because Iain Duncan Smith made a poor decision, which I glimpsed in some of Phil Gallie's remarks. If his decision was wrong then, it is wrong now. I do not think that the Tories should give any succour to the Labour Party's amendment, which says all the right things, except that the policy that it advocates is more of the same. That policy has failed to enthuse the other countries in the region, on whom the amendment says Iraq's security depends. None of the countries that border Iraq supports the policy. I think that there is also a small mistake in the Labour Party's amendment—it says that the UN should take "a leading role"; it does not say "the leading role". I wonder whether that is a mistake. Perhaps we will find out during the winding-up speeches. The Liberal Democrats' amendment is consistent, but it fails to make a link to the Israeli Government's outrageous treatment of the Palestinians. That link cannot be ignored. In that respect, the SSP's amendment is superior but—unfortunately—it also calls for withdrawal "immediately" of British troops. If that is meant literally, I think that it would be impossible to achieve. If it means that it should be done as soon as possible, I might find it possible to vote for the  SSP amendment. Perhaps we can have clarification on that, as well. One thing that I refuse to do is to endorse the Labour amendment and have this Parliament cravenly and obscenely vote for something that most of us do not believe in.

With regret, I ask the member to agree that we should not accept that Saddam Hussein's standards provide any guidance for our troops.

Further to this point of order, Presiding Officer. If the rule of the Parliament is that motions should be lodged two clear days beforehand to allow for reflection on the part of backbenchers and others, was today's motion in order and was it in order for you to accept it?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. I draw your attention to the motion on the consultative steering group's key principles, which was moved by Mr Henry McLeish. It stated that "the spirit of the CSG key principles" should be incorporated into the understanding and standing orders of this Parliament. The principles are sharing power, accountability, accessibility and equal opportunities. The person who was asked to report for the leading building magazine in this country is an accredited journalist by any other name, in that he has written serious articles for serious journals. He was denied and censured—

He was denied and censured by architects employed by this Parliament. Who is the master in this house: the architect or the Parliament?

Further to—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is an emergency.

It concerns the trip around the new Holyrood Parliament building tomorrow that has been arranged for the press. It has come to my notice only in the past quarter of an hour that a bona fide person commissioned to report on it for the leading professional magazine Building   Design has been banned from taking part by the Parliament's press office.

Does the minister have any indication of the number of prosecutions that might be expected under the proposed new legislation, or of the amount of resource, roughly speaking, that would need to be committed to implementing it?

I accept the member's explanation of why the bill allows for a form of snaring and I support that. However, she talked about the need for enforcement. Is the implication that much more resource will have to be committed to implement the proposals?

I agree with Rosemary Byrne that landowners should be held legally responsible, but what if the snare was set by a poacher?

I congratulate the SNP on the motion for debate that it has lodged, which represents a great improvement on last week's motion. It should be acknowledged that the SNP is attempting to debate the constitution and the future development of Europe in a serious manner. However, I thought that Nicola Sturgeon rather over-egged the pudding when she argued sincerely but erroneously that fishing was a big enough issue to allow us to barter at European level; in the context of European power politics, it is not. The SNP might have been wiser to approach the Labour Party in Scotland before John Swinney made his speech. If John Swinney had said to Jack McConnell, "Jack, we've got to work together on fishing," that might have cut out some of the rubbish that we have heard.

There are wheels within wheels, as they say. There are back channels and there is First Minister's question time. FMQT is not the forum in which to attempt to build consensus. Having congratulated the SNP and tempered my congratulations, I want to castigate the members who sit on Labour's front bench. Their display has  been like that of Pavlov's dog. In snapping at the SNP for party-political reasons, they have sold Scotland short. We have not been particularly well served by the diplomatic abilities of the members on the Labour and SNP front benches. Andy Kerr moved on from fishing to discuss the economy and the importance to it of the expanded European market. I draw his attention to article 11.3 of the draft constitution, which is on the economy; I think that it might have been mentioned already. It states: "The Union shall have competence to promote and coordinate the economic and employment policies of the Member States." That cannot be done without impinging on taxation. I suggest that that is one of the reasons why Gordon Brown is not among the leading supporters of the draft constitution. I imagine that he has a great interest in how that statement of intent impacts on his clear idea of how the economy should be managed. To be fair to Gordon Brown, it appears that the benchmarks that he established have been met more successfully than have those that were established in Europe. It is important to examine what the draft treaty says—like it or lump it—because it seeks to create a new legal entity. Although I appreciate what Irene Oldfather said about the need for transparency in relation to Council decisions and so on, the new legal entity will have sovereignty that is comparable with that of other legal national Governments. That means that it will be a different animal to the body that preceded the treaty.

I do. The debate is improving as it goes on. It will be a rolling debate, which we will continue to get better at as we go on. I want briefly to mention subsidiarity, the principle of which is very important to a Parliament such as ours. The draft treaty says: "Under the principle of subsidiarity, in areas which do not fall within its exclusive competence the Union shall act only if and insofar as the objectives of the intended action cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States". We know about Sewel motions and I suggest to members that that statement represents the EU version of Sewel motions. Even though it expresses the warm, cuddly, pink-fluffy-cloud intention of subsidiarity, it puts in writing—in a  legal document—the fact that, when the politics dictate it, the EU can override member states. At this point, I should direct the Parliament to the excellent publication, "Scottish Independence in Europe—A Policy Revisited", which was written by Jim Sillars—who is still a member of the SNP—in October 2000, which was after the Berlin wall had come down. That was when one could begin to think seriously about the hugely extended Europe that we have now. That event changed the ground rules, but I suggest that the intentions behind the draft treaty refer to the ground rules that were established before that event. That is why people such as Laurent Fabius, who was the French finance minister at about the time that Jim Sillars was writing his report, said: "In the next six months, we will talk a lot about political union, and rightly so. Political union is inseparable from economic union." Today we will only scratch the surface of the debate on the European constitution, but the SNP is to be congratulated on bringing the issue to our attention. That said, I will vote for Tommy Sheridan's amendment.

Will the member give way?

It is generous of the member to give way in his final minute. I wanted to provide the bridge between Mr Gallie and Mr Sheridan. The big business interests that are now saying that the EU is not such a good idea are saying so because they see that the economies of the EU countries are on the way down.

I will press my amendment, which I believe would provide a more constructive approach to the next 18 months' activity on the European political front. I never suggested that we should have one snapshot in time. We should  have a process, for which the Executive should take responsibility.

Does the member agree that there is no contradiction between the effects of globalisation on the economy, particularly manufacturing industries, and the new countries' move into the European Union because they will be helped by regional grants for the first few years, as Portugal was. Companies are leaving Portugal to go to the newer member states in Europe and when they lose the benefit of the initial grant system there, they will move to Bangalore.

Will the member take an intervention?

I will do my best. I will start by commenting on Gordon Jackson's final remarks. He is absolutely right, and particularly so at this time. Only with a minister who is focused on Europe—its benefits, challenges, opportunities and whatever—will we get through the period leading up to the referendum on the constitution. I heartily applaud his suggestion that there should be a Scottish minister with responsibility for Europe. I said earlier that there were four good reasons for backing my amendment, and it seems that nobody has said that there is a good reason for not backing it. I have listened carefully to all the speeches, but nobody has mentioned it—maybe it is not worth mentioning. I finished my opening speech by saying that the motion appears to make assumptions that disregard any linkage between the disquiet across Europe about the proposed constitution's centralising tendency and the transfer of sovereign powers from national Parliaments. Some members addressed that point, but the motion does not and that is what is on the record. Even if we consider public reaction only in this country, France and Italy to the question of border security and immigration policies being decided by a Commission and Council of Ministers that will incorporate the 10 new members, it is not hard to imagine how that particular effect of enlargement  will influence how people vote in the referendum on the EU constitution. There is a definite linkage in that policy area. Now that we know that there is to be a referendum on the EU constitution, the motion is inadequate. That brings me to the third reason for using my amendment to try to make the best of a bad job, which is the impossibility of absorbing the 10 new EU countries effortlessly into the euro zone. The single currency and enlargement are indivisible from the powers that the planned EU constitution would transfer to Brussels. Some members hinted at that during the debate. Let us suppose that the euro does not strengthen against the pound after enlargement—which seems likely. What implication would that have for regional funds in Scotland? Further, what if Prime Minister Brown continues to prefer the Bank of England's management of interest rates to that of the European Central Bank? Is there no linkage, therefore, between enlargement, EU regional policy, the economic performance of countries in the euro zone and a new EU constitution? The fourth reason against passing the motion unamended is its inadequacy. It fails to address the consequences of enlargement and to relate those to the realpolitik of the UK referendum on the EU constitution or the effect of enlargement on the euro and the consequent potential effects on the Scottish economy. The amendment would at least provide the Executive with the opportunity to produce information that would better inform Scots of the issues surrounding enlargement and the questions that must now be addressed on its effect on the referendum on the EU constitution, the euro and perhaps even the EU itself, as was reported on "Newsnight" last night. I have a few seconds left in which to address other remarks that were made during the debate. I was glad to hear Mike Pringle and Gordon Jackson introducing a note of common sense into the analysis of how others see us. People from other countries do not say, "You are wonderful, Scotland. We want to do business with you immediately." They say, "Scotland—is that the same as England?" When it is pointed out that we are not the same as England and that we are the ones who make the whisky, they say, "Ah! We like the whisky." We have a huge job of work to do in that area and I hope that the minister takes that on board. I know that the Executive is trying, but it should not underestimate the size of the job that it must do. I, too, was in Poland just after that country freed itself from the Soviet yoke. At that time, only five companies were listed on the Polish stock exchange. I know how far Poland has travelled since then and I know how far it still must travel in order to regard Scotland as a partner. Poland  must go for the big stakes and that is not Scotland. We should not get our own importance in the new Europe out of proportion. It was stated during the debate that we had very successful trade missions. However, how do we measure their success? Do we assess the number of companies that agree to go abroad and set up in partnerships or joint ventures? How do we evaluate trade missions? What is their priority and strategic thrust? We discussed briefly in the debate the potential tyranny of the small states. Ireland was mentioned in that respect. However, that notion is absolute rubbish. Chirac and Fischler will have much more clout than will Barosso from Portugal, the Irish Prime Minister or any of the other small states. The big states will rule and that is what the EU constitution is about. That is why Parliament must consider enlargement and its effect on what the constitution will do. I am sorry that I cannot go on, but I thank you for bearing with me, Presiding Officer. I urge all members to support the amendment.

The member has just mentioned how a proud country such as Scotland—in this case, as represented by the SNP—would not stand by while her national interests were overrun. Is the SNP proposing to do anything different from what it has done with respect to the fishing industry?

Will the member give way?

The intention behind my amendment is not merely to remove some shockingly poor syntax from the motion that Richard Lochhead presumably either wrote or approved. There are at least four substantive reasons why his anodyne motion should be amended. First, a motion should encapsulate a proposal that is either accepted or rejected by Parliament, but it should also be understandable by the people in whose interests it is debated. The motion asserts that enlargement of the EU "provides both challenges and opportunities to Scotland"— the preposition is the motion's, not mine—  "and encourages the Scottish Executive to promote actively the benefits of enlargement across Scotland." I think that the latter reference is to a vigorous information campaign that would promote only the benefits of enlargement. However, if enlargement presents challenges that we could fail to meet, enlargement could presumably result in Scotland experiencing disbenefit. The motion implies that that possible outcome should either be ignored or covered up by the Executive. Should not Scots be informed about the possible pitfalls of enlargement, so that defences can be planned and put in place now by Scottish Enterprise, local authorities and the private sector to combat the migration of jobs from Scotland to new member states that have lower-waged but skilled work forces? The accession countries may have lower GDPs than Scotland has, but some of them have pretty skilled work forces. Before coming to the opportunities that are presented by enlargement, let us probe the possibility that enlargement will pose a threat to what is left of Scottish manufacturing industry. That such a calamity might befall Scotland does not come simply from the feverish fears of Eurosceptics—although I am sure that we have none of them in this Parliament. Volvo has already left Irvine for Poland. Polestar printing company considered going to Hungary as well as to the north of England. No doubt members will be aware of similar movements and discussions among manufacturing and service industries in their areas. We are not the only peripheral maritime region to be at some economic risk from EU enlargement. Last week in Portugal, my friends were telling me about the companies that had transferred their operations to the new EU area that was formerly part of the Soviet bloc. The same fears are being voiced in Ireland, Spain and Greece. Without a report from the European and External Relations Committee on the predicted consequences for Scotland of EU enlargement, the motion amounts to mere rhetoric. We should consider the conclusions that can be drawn from the pattern of employment migration that is emerging in Scotland and elsewhere. The amendment provides the opportunity for a serious analysis to be done on the effects of enlargement on employment. If the EU fans who produced the motion are correct in their guess that the benefits of enlargement will outweigh the pitfalls, my amendment would provide the Executive with an opportunity to identify which sectors of our manufacturing and service industries are best  placed to expand into the 10 new markets. When Richard Lochhead spoke to the motion, he referred to business in general, but he did not specify which manufacturing and services sectors would benefit. If the Executive were to undertake the analysis that I propose, it might be able to assist the companies that are best placed to take advantage of enlargement—provided, of course, that the EU rules would allow that. I am not sure that they would, but the issue is worth thinking about. My amendment refers to the social as well as the economic consequences of enlargement. The motion does not indicate whether enlargement enables or impedes the Executive's strategy of growing Scotland's population, which the First Minister has described as essential. Has the European and External Relations Committee considered the possibility that the sort of skilled young people whom the Executive would like to attract to Scotland will prefer to stay in their countries, to which jobs are migrating from Scotland and elsewhere? Richard Lochhead mentioned that the groundless fears of being overrun by Romanians and so on are proving just that—such people need only stay where they are, as industry will move to them. Has the committee considered the morality and the consequences for new EU members of causing an exodus of trained, poorly paid, medically qualified workers from countries where they are needed even more than they are needed here? At the moment, health appears to be the only sector in which we are confident that people will be attracted to Scotland, because there are plenty of jobs over here for them to do and they will receive higher wages than they receive in their own countries. Should not Scots be given the opportunity to state their opinions on such a development? What do we bring to the new Europe if we ignore the effect of our comparative wealth on even poorer countries? Under the United Kingdom constitution, we cannot as a nation determine or act on decisions that are reached in such matters, even though the Parliament is supposed to determine policy and priorities for health and economic development in Scotland. That brings me to the second reason for amending the motion: the proposed new EU constitution. How can we assume benefits for Scotland from enlargement separately from the proposed new structures and powers that are planned for the Commission, the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, which will result in Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania having more direct power over EU energy or fishing policy than Scotland has? Enlargement will impact on the referendum on the EU constitution, but this mouse of a motion makes assumptions that appear to  disregard any linkage between the disquiet that is felt across Europe about the proposed constitution's centralising tendency and the transfer of sovereign powers from national Parliaments.

I have not finished making all four of the points that I intended to make. I assume that I will have time later to summarise.

I will make the other two points then. I move amendment S2M-1098.1, to leave out from "encourages" to end and insert: "calls on the Scottish Executive to produce a balanced assessment of the economic and social impact of enlargement."

Does the minister want the answer? I suspect that the ice dancers were inspired by hearing "Bolero" and seeing the excellence of two English skaters at the Olympics a long time ago. Those skaters did not have to be in London or next door to motivate and raise standards. That is my point.

It is absolutely true that money is not everything where sport is concerned—but it sure says a lot for people who are trying to keep together a wee cycling team that operates out of a shed somewhere in the back of beyond in central Scotland; for someone who is trying to pay to take young swimmers to interclub galas; or even for the people from Livingston who happen to be the British ice dance champions and who are now making it into the top 10 in world ice dancing. They find that money helps a great deal, because it allows them to seek out the best possible coaching and residential courses. Money is important. We should think about that if money is going to be taken from sports in Scotland that, in line with Executive policy, are trying to increase their rates of participation and to improve performance. The bedrock is to get more people participating and money is required to do that. Young athletes, who are often from deprived areas, frequently need help to buy the kit. Do members know how much it costs to buy ice hockey kit—for those who happen to live around Ayr or Kirkcaldy? It is a lot of money. The clubs need money if young people are going to take part. By denying them it, we are selling Scottish sportspeople short. We also need coaches. It is not enough just to pay for the kit so that the kid can go and play ice hockey or whatever other sport; they have to be  properly coached. Coaches, who are not usually from the most salubrious backgrounds, have to be sent to training camps. It all takes money, which is why the community sports clubs need it. I understand that sportscotland is concerned because it expects funding of only £18 million next year compared with £32.5 million in 1998, which was before the necessity was recognised of getting people to have an active lifestyle and of getting more people teaching physical education in schools—Jamie McGrigor is quite right about that. However, believe it or not, even that has an impact on the amount of money that sportscotland has at its disposal. We have to utilise properly a higher number of PE teachers, who can be used in the community to coach and stimulate interest in sports, because that is much more likely to get people participating in sport than are television pictures of an international-class athlete. It does not matter whether those pictures are being beamed from London or Rio de Janeiro. If the kids are going to be motivated by world-class athletes, it will not matter what the colour of their skin is or where they are performing their athletic skills. Hosting the Olympic games would have to be a huge motivating factor to overcome the downside of the loss of money to sport.

That was my point. The reason why we do not see shinty at the Olympics is that it cannot expand from its base, which has a lot to do with financial constraints. What would the London Olympics do for Scottish sport? If the Olympics were taking place in London, there could be a bigger British team and we might get more Scots into it, who would just get under the wire of the qualifying time for the Olympic events and who would be losers. I doubt that that would be a great big motivator for more kids to take part in Scottish sport. I speak as someone who dreamed of going to the Olympics and trailed over to Coatbridge baths every Sunday morning to dive off the 5m board. I never got to the Olympics and I got a burst eardrum, but that is another story. I do not wish to sound dog-in-the-mangerish about London having the Olympics, but I honestly think that from our point of view—we must evaluate the matter from our point of view, as did the House of Commons select committee—the case has not been proved that there will be such a huge benefit to what we are trying to do on  participative sport and on raising standards in this country. We should not upset that programme in order to bid for the 2012 Olympics. I will be long gone, but if we considered a longer timescale, we might manage to combine the two objectives. By going for the London Olympics in 2012 and depriving sport of its essential funding to do so, we are doing a great disservice to all the young athletes who might get to the Olympics in London or elsewhere in 2016 or 2020.

I wonder if the member is aware that the producer of "The Gathering Place", Stuart Greig, said on "Newsnight Scotland" last night that there was some very interesting material on the tapes and suggested that Benedetta Tagliabue might have forgotten what she had said. The whole purpose of the Fraser inquiry getting access to the tapes is so that Lord Fraser can compare what was said then in the light of what we know now.

I regret that my amendment to the Conservative motion was not accepted. My amendment sought to clarify that the Fraser inquiry has intimated that the continued withholding of the information could impair its ability to report in the summer as it said that it would. I will develop that point later. I also regret that the Presiding Officer did not accept my emergency question today, which would have disposed of the matter once and for  all. I wanted to ask the Scottish Executive whether it was aware of the Fraser inquiry's concern that the continued withholding of the material is a possible impediment to the ability of the inquiry to report.

Let me get started before I take any interventions. The member has been dying to intervene since I spoke earlier. My emergency motion and my amendment would have highlighted the superiority of the public interest over what the BBC perceives as the corporation's interest. For those who have questioned whether Lord Fraser has asked the Parliament to get the tapes, let me quote from a letter that the inquiry sent to Dennis Canavan and me on 25 March: "The continued withholding of this material is a potential impediment to Lord Fraser's ability to submit a final report this summer ... I am copying this letter to the Presiding Officer." Therefore, the Presiding Officer is aware of Lord Fraser's concern that the inquiry does not have access to the tapes.

Now I have two members asking to intervene. I will give way to the best looking one.

I have to sook up to Mike Rumbles.

I did not want to use my time to explain all this, but the letter states that Lord Fraser "has expressed some surprise that the powers of the Scottish Parliament are as circumscribed as they appear to be even when the Parliament seeks to exercise a power solely and exclusively for its own purposes." That reference is to the fact that the Parliament might seek to hand on the tapes. However, that is not being sought; the motion does not suggest that it is, either. We will indulge the BBC's sense—which is misguided in this instance—of its journalistic integrity if we vote for Robert Brown's amendment, because it would give the BBC carte blanche to  cause the Fraser inquiry to spend more public money. That is against the public interest, and it is therefore not bullying for the Parliament to use its power under section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998 to protect the public interest. Two ministers in the Executive have a "general responsibility", to quote section 23, for the Fraser inquiry: the First Minister, who set it up and defined the expectation of what it might achieve as regards illuminating the process that has led to such an overspend on the Holyrood project; and the Minister for Finance and Public Services, who must be judged to have a general responsibility, as he must find the money to pay for the Fraser inquiry and try to ensure best value for public money. The Executive has made strenuous efforts to persuade the BBC to allow the Fraser inquiry access to the material in the tapes in the interests of its public duty, as that material has the potential to help or hinder the inquiry to report this summer. We would all prefer to win arguments by persuasion, but if we fail to do so and the public interest is at stake, we must not be afraid to use the power that is legally vested in the Parliament, and that is what I ask members to consider doing today. Public opinion is behind us in seeking to obtain access to the tapes to assist the Fraser inquiry, but what opinion of us will the public form if, by voting for Robert Brown's amendment, we concede that the BBC is in a better position than the Parliament to decide what is in the public's best interest and whether more money should be spent on prolonging the Fraser inquiry? Robin Harper said that he cannot support the motion because he is concerned about the BBC's integrity, but the motion has nothing to do with that; it has to do with the Parliament's responsibility to protect the public interest. How many of us, including Robin Harper, are prepared to justify spending more than necessary on the Fraser inquiry when nothing that Peter Fraser is likely to do will spoil the BBC's reputation—the Hutton inquiry excepted, of course—for protecting its sources? I ask members not to vote for the soft option; people will ask why they need us if we balk at taking the hard choice.

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I regret to have to say this, but there might well be a reason for ministers to be present, which is that Scottish ministers have a general responsibility for the Fraser inquiry.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I raise my point of order under rule 8.5.6 of standing orders, which concerns the notice of amendments and gives the Presiding Officer discretion to examine which amendments shall be called. Implicit in that is an assumption of fairness and even-handedness on the part of the Presiding Officer. I believe that that has not happened on this occasion, and that the Presiding Officer has discriminated in favour of the larger parties against an independent such as me and against the smaller parties that are not present in the chamber—no, I see that one of those parties is present—in selecting their amendments, rather than mine, for debate. In doing so, the Presiding Officer has also displayed incompetence, in that he has narrowed—[MEMBERS: "Oh."] He has narrowed the range of options that are open to the members of the Parliament in disposing of one of the most important questions of principle to come before us as a Parliament.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. I give notice that I will consult colleagues and friends on the matter. Regretfully, I might find reason to move a vote of no confidence in the Presiding Officer.

I think that Paul Martin has made the point that there is no guarantee that the delivery or the quality of services will be improved by the introduction of proportionality in local government, but is there any proof that services will be worsened by it?

The member referred to the "overwhelming" support for a fair system of STV. Is it possible to have a fair system of STV with such a small number of councillors per ward?

So it is less fair.

Will the member give way?

With reference to Farouk Haidari, Farnborz Gravindk and Mokhtar Haydary—the three men who are currently on hunger strike in Glasgow—I appreciate that there is a grave difference between their situation and the question of security, but I am sure that members of this Parliament will agree with me—

I am on the question.

Should anything horrendous happen in Glasgow, we will become more of a target for the twisted minds who wrought havoc in Madrid. I would welcome the First Minister's comments on what we can do in Scotland to promote it as a welcoming place.

Will the minister give way?

I am partial to a wee bit of shortbread, Presiding Officer. The minister has outlined the contradiction at the heart of things, which I discussed. There is no proper appreciation of what it is to be Scottish and there is a lack of confidence in what we sometimes feel we are. The minister has pointed out the value in marketing terms of our icons, such as shortbread tins. If we had a committee such as Donald Gorrie mentioned, an investigation of the whole issue should start from a much more practical and less esoteric point of view than that which some academics who have probed the matter have had. We must get our act together so that we are not ashamed of the fact that we make the best sweet biscuits in the world.

I congratulate Donald Gorrie and thank him for lodging the motion for debate. I apologise for not  having made it to the chamber for the start of his speech. From the speeches that I have heard, I conclude that Donald Gorrie is quite right to say that the Parliament's role is to act as a catalyst to pull together the many organisations to which Margaret Ewing referred. If it is true—I believe that it is—that most Scots have only a hazy idea of their national saint and when his saint's day is, those Caledonian societies cannot have been very successful in promoting St Andrew. The activities of such societies might have a defined focus, so the Parliament should take the lead in doing something to boost the confidence of Scots and to make them better informed about Scottishness. We have a role in that. I agree with Margaret Ewing's comments: this is not just a marketing tool and our aim is not just to sell ourselves to all the newly emerging economies of the world. We have a great deal to do to persuade our own people that this is a country that is worth staying in. The Executive has policies to try to keep them here and to welcome other folk. We must re-examine what Scottishness means. Does it mean "One Scotland. Many Cultures"? Do we have a diluted culture or do people buy into an existing one? We need to plumb a huge amount of self-knowledge. We should do so in the way in which the Americans approach both thanksgiving day and independence day. Often the school calendar is geared towards those two days in terms of class projects. There would be nothing wrong with our having two national days in Scotland—we might choose Victoria day. Donald Gorrie and I are not quite old enough to remember Victoria and when that day was relevant, but other members will realise that somewhere it is still celebrated. Why does that happen?

We get things right in Edinburgh. There is nothing wrong with our having two national days, as the Americans have. I hope that the minister will concentrate on what we can get out of St Andrew's day as a community, rather than on using it as a marketing tool for Scotland the brand or Scotland the venue. It is much more than that. Inevitably, if we are successful in promoting Scotland, things Scottish and Scottish history and culture in the way that has been described, we will attract more visitors, but in my book that is not the reason for celebrating St Andrew's day. I refer to the new Scots who went through a parody of a ceremony in Glasgow, at which they learned to be British and self-consciously Scottish at the edges. I would prefer that we had the confidence to say to those people that they are Scots who are equal partners  with folk who are English, Welsh, Irish and so on. We have a great deal of fundamental thinking to do. Now that we have a Scottish Parliament, folks should relax a wee bit in their Scottishness. They should not always seek to put a political dimension on Scottishness or to use it as a marketing tool. I thank Donald Gorrie for bringing the issue to our attention. If he cares to lodge a motion suggesting that there should be a committee of the Parliament that pulls together all the strands that would enable us to meet the objectives that are set out in his motion, I will sign up to that.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. If they are so minded, members can sign the motion that has been lodged, which would commit them to nothing other than having a debate. Will you rule whether, in your estimation, section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998 empowers the Scottish Parliament to compel witnesses and the production of documents? Section 23 appears on page 10 and is entitled "Power to call for witnesses and documents". If you do not feel happy giving me a ruling now, will you tell me whether the Executive or the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body has sought legal advice on the interpretation of what appears to be a fairly straightforward provision?

Further to that point of order. with respect, the act does not refer to the proceedings of the Parliament but to the general responsibility that is exercised by a minister. In this case, the general responsibility is exercised by the Minister for Finance and Public Services, who has to sign the cheques to pay for the project whose costs are the subject of the inquiry. I suggest that there is perhaps a small link there. Nothing in the motion and nothing in what Mr Canavan and I have said would allow Parliament to dispose of the tapes to a third party. Parliament would be given temporary ownership of the material on the tapes, but it would be up to Parliament to decide how it wanted to dispose of the information.

Will the member give way?

I am cheered by what the minister has said, but I am more cheered by the fact that he did not dismiss the matter as the nice minister before him used to do. I am glad that he has seen the light and has decided that there will be more PE in primary schools. As the minister said, Karen Gillon has pursued the matter, but I do not think that he answered her question. She asked whether the minister will ensure that more time is devoted to PE in the primary school curriculum. May I add to that by saying that PE should be provided in primary schools every day? I like to get my retaliation in first. The minister will discover that there has been some difficulty in recruiting PE teachers. He should turn his attention to that problem as quickly as possible. He should ensure that schools provide physical education and not theoretical physical education.

Yes.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not seek to challenge the chair—

Well, not today. However, in relation to the rules in standing orders on your right to select questions, I would welcome guidance on the criteria that apply. Although I understand why you would want to give full range to all the members who have lodged questions for the First Minister, it seems to me that you must make a judgment about the seriousness of the different questions that are lodged. Today, Bill Butler's question referred to an issue that I do not think can be separated from events in Glasgow, where three Kurdish men are nearing death. I suggest that the number of members who wanted to ask a supplementary question to that question indicated the urgency of that situation and that you might have accorded time more generously for those questions.

What was their starter for 10?

I will set the context for the debate—we are the Scottish Parliament in lobbying mode. We cannot do anything about getting fair pensions because we do not have that power, but I suspect that we will hear less about our lack of power in that respect than we heard yesterday about our shameful lack of power as regards the three men who are dying in Glasgow. In exercising Parliament's power as a lobbyist, we have to persuade Gordon Brown that he is taking the wrong tack. I say that regretfully because I accept much of what the minister said about the improvements to the lives of perhaps 50 per cent of UK pensioners since the Government changed. However, that is not enough—what about the other 50 per cent? Let us not forget the figures that John Swinburne produced—50 per  cent of pensioners' income is below the level that we consider to be reasonable and acceptable in this day and age, and 25 per cent live in real poverty. The minister cannot defend the current system: she can defend what the devolved Scottish Executive has tried to do to ameliorate the shortcomings of the present system, but it is not enough. Until the Scottish Parliament exercises sovereignty over a combined tax and monetary policy, we will not get things right. We must harmonise our tax system with our benefits and if we do not, we will only ever be putting a sticking plaster over the wounds that John Swinburne's speech exposed. We should accept that pension levels are not an argument in favour of fiscal and monetary union with England. As well as lobbying for the pensioners who are suffering today—in particular the 25 per cent of them who concern Mary Mulligan as much as they concern me—we should also be looking wider, longer and broader. We should look to see how we can harmonise our tax system with our benefits system. I commend to the minister the Pensions Policy Institute report that was published only yesterday. It draws on experience from New Zealand, where there is no attempt to target, or to differentiate between, pensioners. Every pensioner in New Zealand, depending simply on their age, is paid the set, basic state pension. It is obvious that some people make private arrangements and will therefore have an income that might comprise the state pension plus their private pension, on which they will be taxed. Therefore, rich pensioners pay more and poor pensioners who either do not have private savings or who have much smaller private savings pay less in tax. That seems to be a much more equitable system. I say with all due respect that if the Tories were able to forget the idea of trying to induce people to save, they could adopt the New Zealand policy, too. It would be much simpler to administer and would not involve the 39 pages of form filling that is currently required if people want to claim their entitlements. What can we do to improve the quality of Scottish pensioners' lives? We know that we cannot do much about their basic pension at the moment. We have tried and I commend the Executive for that, but we could do more. To do more, we must ensure that local authorities are given more money than they have at present to operate, for example, free exercise schemes. Now that I have won my campaign to get physical education teachers into schools, I warn the minister that I am going for the golden oldies. I want proper exercise facilities and regimes in place at local level—depending on local facilities— and I want them to be funded and free for pensioners. Television is an absolute requirement for providing information and advice in today's world. When one gets to be over 75—a lot older than I am, anyway—one can have a free television licence. For goodness' sake, why cannot people get a free television licence when they stop working? I do not see why there should not be free licences for those who are not working because that aspect should also be brought to bear on the judgment. The Government's policy of targeting the poorest people is not working. If it were, we would not be having the debate today. The Executive has to be much more universal in its approach to benefits and it must use the time-honoured system of clawing back through the taxation system from people who can afford to pay their way. All sorts of notional payments can be levied from local and national services, but I will not go into that now. I would like to bang the drum for local authorities to be given much more freedom to ensure that older people make full use of existing services. I assure the minister that, if she went right now to the Edinburgh royal Commonwealth pool—where I should be instead of here—she would meet many ladies of my age, all of whom exercise two or three times a week in the pool. The pool is open to swimmers anyway, so it would not lose out on the paltry sum that we pay because we are not paying an economically viable sum anyway. I want free exercise to be available.

I agree totally. Local authorities should have that freedom, but they also need the money. Although you could not get me out of Edinburgh with a knife and fork, Presiding Officer, I pay tribute to West Lothian and what it has tried to do. However, because of the financial structures of leisure services here, the City of Edinburgh Council cannot do the same at present, although I want it to be able to do so. We also have to consider the part that health boards play in enhancing or diminishing the quality of life for older people. Mary Scanlon's story about chiropody in the Highlands was absolutely scandalous. I realise that we in the Scottish Parliament do not give order to such matters according to budget alone, but elderly people should not pay for chiropody—it is part and parcel of keeping them up and going and ensuring that they contribute to the economy so that they are not a drain on health services. I ask the minister to take seriously what Mary Scanlon said.  I conclusion, I ask the minister to use her influence—I realise that she does not have the power—to open a debate with the chancellor and the Government at Westminster on a flat-rate pension that would allow every old person to retire in dignity and comfort.

Thank you for that response, Presiding Officer. I greatly appreciate the time that has been given to this extremely important question. There is a possible question about whether members voted to support an Executive amendment on the basis that they believed that the position that they were supporting was legal. If it is shown at a later date that the course of action did not follow either legal precedent or legal advice, we will have a moral responsibility, and probably a responsibility under the "Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament", to correct any decisions that we took that were not based on correct, sound legal opinion.

I agree with everything that I have heard so far from Stewart Maxwell. Will he explain why his party is not opposing the motion?

I had no intention of taking part in this debate, but it occurs to me that we should not see ourselves either as the United Kingdom, or even as Scotland, but as part of the British isles, if we are thinking strategically about the defence of these islands, whether against terrorist attack or natural phenomena. Was any consideration given in the committee to any protocol that might be required with the Government of the Republic of Ireland?

I am intrigued as to why Mr Gallie believes that we should devolve the matter to Westminster and let it take the decision on our behalf because that seems to be a tidier arrangement. Does he agree that the same argument could be made for investing power in European institutions so that, for example, we could all have commonality in our approach to terrorism?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This point of order is further to the one that I raised with you a fortnight ago. I promised then that I would revisit the matter. With reference to the relevant parts of the Parliament's standing orders, will you rule on whether it is competent for an MSP to lodge a parliamentary question to the Executive on a decision that was taken by MSPs following a debate in which this Parliament might have been misled about the legality of the action that was proposed by the Executive and subsequently supported by the majority of MSPs? The parliamentary question that I had ruled out by the chamber desk this week did not imply that the First Minister had responsibility or should be accountable for a reserved policy area. However, in light of the doubt that eminent lawyers in the UK are now casting on the legality of the war with Iraq, is the First Minister not enabled by this Parliament's principles of accountability and transparency to confirm or correct his assurance to MSPs in the debate on Iraq last March that, even without a specific United Nations resolution, war with Iraq was legal? Surely the First Minister has a general responsibility under rule 13.3.3 of the standing orders to ensure that statements that he makes and that Parliament votes on are founded on legality and, if doubt is cast on that, to investigate the matter so that it might be corrected if necessary.

That certainly satisfies me, Presiding Officer. However, I give notice that I will continue to raise the point of order that you did not look on so kindly this morning.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I wish to raise two points of order. I apologise for having a second point. I had given notice of one point in relation to rule 13.3, but the point or order that I will raise first is of a more current nature and is in relation to rule 3.10, which is headed "Removal of members of the Parliamentary corporation". As I hesitate to move immediately to the nuclear option, I would welcome a statement from you, Presiding Officer, saying that you will investigate, and look kindly on the publication of, all the minutes—both the discrete minutes and the minutes for public consumption—that were issued  by the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body in the latter half of last year. The matter was referred to yesterday in Lord Fraser's inquiry. I think that most members will share my concern that there should have been an admission of there being two sets of minutes, not all of which were available to those of us who had to vote on the matter. That is my first point of order.

Thank you. My second point of order relates to rule 13.3.3. The standing orders state: "Any member may put a question to the Scottish Executive", which should "relate to a matter for which the First Minister, the Scottish Ministers or the Scottish Law Officers have general responsibility". One aspect of the First Minister's general responsibility has been demonstrated here again today, when members from all parts of the chamber urge the First Minister to impress a particular point of view, as expressed in the chamber, or a particular course of action on the Government—usually through the person of the Prime Minister, when the First Minister meets him. This week, the chamber office refused to allow me to follow that procedure and precedent by refusing a question of mine for answer by the First Minister, which requested that he press for a particular course of action with the Prime Minister, relating to the current debate surrounding the two official inquiries by Lord Hutton and Lord Butler into matters concerning the Government's decision to go to war in Iraq. The reason that was given for the refusal was that this Parliament and the First Minister have no responsibility devolved to them for foreign or defence policies. While I might regret that, I accept that statement, and I accept the legality of the status quo. However, in the debate on Iraq on 13 March last year, your predecessor accepted as falling within the terms of the Scotland Act 1998 an amendment from Mr Gallie, urging a particular course of action on Her Majesty's Government in an area of policy in which this Parliament has no legislative competence. Your predecessor was correct, Presiding Officer. As the First Minister said in that debate, "Our job in the Parliament is to listen, to reflect, to speak from principle and to contribute to the representation and development of public opinion in our land." The First Minister surely cannot have contravened the standing orders of the Parliament when he said:  The mark of leadership in Scotland is to speak on the big issues of the day, but to do so honestly and consistently."— [ Official Report , 13 March 2003; c 19436-37.]  In raising this point of order, I seek only consistency and to establish how MSPs might reflect their own opinions and public opinion on issues that fall outwith our legislative competence.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No. In fact, the guidance that I sought was whether the point of order would be more convenient now or at the end.

Can the First Minister say which public and voluntary organisations or bodies were consulted by the Home Office before the decision to reclassify cannabis was taken? Further, can he explain to members the argument, which proved persuasive to the Executive, that police operation in Scotland should have less discretion in dealing with the effects of reclassification than do their counterparts in England and Wales? Finally, will the First Minister add his weight and influence to the call for a proper royal commission into the use of drugs? If he cares to read the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs's report—which went to the Home Office and produced the result that has been produced—he will find that there are a great many questions on which the council says much more research is needed.

Dennis Canavan has demonstrated why it is absolutely relevant that this Parliament should make heard its point of view on top-up tuition fees. We have a lobbying function because we are a devolved Parliament and we occasionally have to go cap in hand to our Westminster colleagues. If I was a Westminster MP, I would vote alongside Tam Dalyell, against the Government's proposal. I would do so first, for the same reason as Tam Dalyell: he will break his principled self-denying ordinance, which prevents him from voting on measures that apply only to parts of the UK other than Scotland, because he believes that it is more important to prevent the introduction of a policy that will militate against the best interests of Scottish universities. He is as correct about that as he was when he pointed out the flaws and idiosyncrasies in the Scotland Act 1998, which placed us in the position that we are now in—although many members of the unionist parties in the Scottish Parliament sincerely believe that it is possible for us to produce and carry through a distinctively Scottish agenda, as the Deputy First Minister suggested. The other reason why I oppose the Government's proposal is, of course, that the ethos of the Scottish Parliament has been to build a sense of community in Scotland. Although I can make plenty of detailed criticisms of the Executive's programme, I believe that the Executive's intention is to try to bridge the gaps in opportunity that exist between different groups of people and different regions in Scotland. I hope that I will not be proved wrong, but I do not expect to hear a defence of the policy on top-up tuition fees that is constructed along the lines of the patronising, selfish, stupid and divisive defence that has been offered by Tony Blair and some of his supporters. Dustbin men, hospital cleaners and porters have the same interest as doctors, lawyers or MSPs in ensuring that all parts of our education system are as good as possible and that entry to higher education depends on the ability to learn, rather than on the ability to pay. The people who benefit financially from having obtained a university degree should pay their dues through income tax, when they are earning the big bucks. No one will be deterred from going to university by the knowledge that they will pay the top rate of tax when they earn more than £100,000  per year. However, people will, by the knowledge that they could choose a cheaper degree and pay £20,000, be deterred from attending a university at which they would pile up a debt of £30,000. I was that student—that answers Gordon Jackson's point. It is not just the fact that someone gets a degree that matters; the sort of degree that they get and what they can do with it matters, too. The credo that is being introduced in England will leach over the border. Every member of this Parliament has a duty to oppose such a distortion in the balances of responsibility among all sections of society.

The Executive might feel that it might get an under-the-counter payment through the Barnett formula if it does not present too much opposition, but it is highly unlikely that that will happen. How can the Executive expect to be treated with respect if it is prepared to risk our educational heritage?

I am certain that the minister is aware of the section in the Scotland Act 1998 that allows Westminster legally to override any decision of this Parliament.

Name them! [ Laughter. ]

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

It is related to the same issue. Presiding Officer, can you give me guidance on the exact status of the Holyrood progress group? Does the group, either collectively or as individuals, represent the Parliament or the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body?

Further to my point of order, if the progress group represents the Parliament, I presume that its members can represent the views of the Parliament and reflect what the Parliament considers to be debate in the public interest. Is it in order for a member of the Parliament's press office to instruct a back-bench member of the Parliament not to take part in a public discussion on radio on the Fraser inquiry?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to advance healthy eating in light of the recent reported issues with its healthy eating advice line. (S2O-662)

I agree with what the minister has outlined, but I wonder whether he might comment on a couple of ideas. Could he undertake to instigate discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities as to how it might use the new well-being measures in local government legislation to dissuade people from selling food that is frankly antisocial, and which has a very high fat content? Secondly, will he take the initiative in convening a European conference on the issue, which must be tackled throughout Europe? The conference should be charged with finding areas of common interest and ways in which European Governments and Administrations such as ours might dissuade the manufacturers and advertisers of junk food from getting at children through children's media.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No the noo.

Does the First Minister recall that, in offering my total support for his choice of this form of inquiry under Lord Fraser in preference to a full-blown and very expensive judicial inquiry, I reminded him that, should some people prove shameless when named by Lord Fraser, this Parliament has the ability under section 23 of the Scotland Act 1998 to convene a special committee of the Parliament to ensure that tapes are made available to Lord Fraser? The justification for that is that the First Minister and the Scottish Executive will pay for the inquiry. As they have the duty of disbursing public funds as efficiently as possible, if it can be shown that Lord Fraser will expedite his inquiry more efficiently by having access to the tapes, I suggest that that is justification enough under the Scotland Act 1998 to make it plain to the BBC that the Parliament does have the power to compel the production of that evidence.

I nearly asked the First Minister when he next planned to meet Brian Wilson. Instead, I ask him whether he will remind local authorities that, under the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003, they have the power to advance the well-being of people in their areas. In doing so, they might be well advised to refuse planning permission to people who want to sell to young people food that is officially described as nutritionally void. When he next meets the Chancellor of the Exchequer, will he impress on him the desirability of taxing foods with a high fat, high sugar or high salt content appropriately, in much the same way as alcohol is taxed, which is according to its ability to injure health?

It is a pleasure to follow the new libertarian Duncan McNeil, although I take issue with some of his remarks. I am living proof to the chamber of the superior benefits of the public baths instead of the public bar.  I apologise to members in case I am not in the chamber this afternoon. I must attend to a very sad personal arrangement. I wanted to take part in this debate because policy making in the area of health and fitness is central to the aspirations for our fellow Scots that we all have, regardless of our party-political or philosophical starting points. As a result, I will be only too pleased if the minister does what was suggested on Radio Scotland this morning and pinches some of my ideas. I will not be as suggestive as Christine Grahame was in her speech—I will not refer to hockey shorts, nor even to the dance leotard that I wore when I was a physical education student. However, I will draw on the experience that I have gained. No matter whether we are on one side or the other of the great constitutional divide—or, indeed, whether we have a marked backside from sitting on the fence—we would all like Scots to be healthy, wealthy and wise. The starting point for our common ambition is a healthy Scotland. The Executive shows commendable intent in attempting to improve the quality of the NHS, although it is for others in the chamber and elsewhere to deal with the question whether a cost-benefit analysis will vindicate its policies. I will not dwell on that question today. Instead, I will confine myself to awarding some roses and raspberries to the Executive's attempts to create a healthier nation. Just as neither the Scottish Executive nor Scottish Enterprise can produce manufactured goods for export but must instead create the conditions that encourage and support industrialists to expand their markets, so the Executive is responsible for creating the conditions that encourage Scots to make healthy lifestyle choices. Of course, it is also the responsibility of those who would rule over us to get to grips with the health problems that poverty creates. The Parliament cannot eliminate poverty; instead, it can try only to ameliorate some of its worst effects. Duncan McNeil was absolutely right to point out that the Executive cannot force individual adults to get healthy—after all, look at him. [ Laughter. ] Apart from anything else, we all go through phases in our lives. Sometimes we make sensible choices, sometimes we do not. However, just as public attitudes to drinking and driving and the infliction of passive smoking have changed—and have been changed—so we can and must change attitudes towards fitness and health. We need to realise that the responsibility for fitness and health lies in our own hands and that all of us, regardless of income, have access to the means of getting fit and staying healthy.

I agree absolutely with Christine May's points. I think that Stewart Stevenson, in an intervention, touched on the question whether local authorities would continue to receive funding to keep up travel initiatives and programmes such as free fruit in schools. That issue must be addressed and I hope that someone will do so. As I was saying before I was so helpfully interrupted, we should have access to the means of staying fit and healthy. On the Executive's policy of providing new schools through public-private partnerships, it has been discovered that access to the sometimes good, sometimes cramped facilities—I will not go into that particular matter at the moment—is very often constrained by commercial demands. That problem must be admitted and tackled. Although it might have been an unforeseen circumstance of levering money into education in such a way, it means that access to facilities that should be public is being restricted. In that respect, I hope that I am present this afternoon to hear the minister's summing-up speech. Glasgow City Council has worked out that if it could increase its use of schools' sport facilities from the present 18 hours to 25 hours a week, it could also increase satisfied demand for sport from 53 to 81 per cent. We are beginning to find out how newer policies are working and are discovering that they must be tweaked. That is why blue-sky thinking is such a good idea. The Executive has competition for the hearts, minds, stomachs and livers of Scots. The food and drinks industries spend squillions on making a mockery of what we have been saying this morning and of what the Executive's various health and fitness initiatives are trying to achieve. Money talks, and the Big Macs and the Colonel can drown out any message that the Executive tries to put across in its television advertising. I said that I would make some suggestions—I will try to outline five of them. First, it has been proved that Gary Lineker can sell crisps and make Walkers crisps the brand leader. As a result, we need someone like Henrik Larsson to make fruit the brand leader; we need to get him into the schools and the places where the kids are. Style icons and sports idols must promote this policy. I  once persuaded Billy Connolly to promote the NHS patients helpline at no cost and he did a brilliant series of radio adverts for nothing. Public figures will do that sort of thing. My second suggestion—[ Interruption. ] Please bear with me, Presiding Officer. I have a couple of suggestions and I just want to outline them. My second suggestion is that we should tax the baddies. After all, the Westminster Government started to tax the tobacco companies. I know that we in the Scottish Parliament cannot tax these industries, but we could send a wee letter to Westminster saying that we think that it would be a good idea to tax foods that are injurious to health. Thirdly, free school meals are nothing to do with equity and everything to do with the fact that we would be able to send children to school without money in their pockets and know that they would be fed the correct stuff. Finally, we need prescription exercise on the NHS for all people, particularly elderly people. That would save a bob or two.

Is the member aware that although it is reported that more than £2 billion of lottery funding has been spent in Britain, the decline in the uptake of sport has continued? We must question whether we are getting the two factors in synch.

Too true. Quite right, too.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way now?

I thank the member for his courtesy. On the greatly expanded recruitment of health professionals, does he set any restrictions on the areas from which such people might be recruited? Would any such restrictions cover developing countries?

Does Shona Robison agree with the idea of taxing companies that produce food that is injurious to the health of young people in particular? If we can tax cigarette manufacturers for that reason, why cannot we do the same to fizzy drinks manufacturers?

I hear what Jamie Stone says about antipathy towards physical exercise, and I agree with him. Among young teenage girls, it is all to do with looking good and not getting their hair messed up. However, we must be serious about persuading people of the health benefits of  exercise. I am sure that children do not like doing two periods of maths either, but if they are going to get a job, they are going to have to get through their maths higher. If they are going to stay healthy, they are going to have to take exercise.

I thank Elaine Smith for the opportunity to debate obesity. WeightWatchers thanks her as well. I reckon that I am about the best qualified in the chamber to talk about obesity. A long time ago, when I qualified as a physical education teacher, I did not have the problems with my weight that I now have. That was because I was so active. I did not know it then, but I was a fat person waiting to get outside a thin athlete. However, because I was so active my weight was kept down. My weight started to go up only after a period of illness and it took me a long time afterwards to get back into the habit of regular exercise. It does not say much for my priorities when the choice tonight was between going to the golf course with my husband and two granddaughters and coming here to sit and talk about exercise. However, I continue to do it because old habits die hard. I inform the minister that I have seen a huge change in attitudes towards exercise and physical education. In Scottish education, PE was always regarded as a frill. A terrible snobbery surrounded PE; people regarded it as just drill and thought that all that was needed for it were gym shoes or sannies. PE was not taken seriously. However, I think that not only health economists, but real economists are beginning to realise that an unfit population means a poorer population. Therefore, PE should by now have become central to policy making and all cross-cutting measures. If that is not the case, I sincerely hope that it will be. Physical education should be central to how we think now and should not be used just to alleviate  poverty, make for a better quality of lifestyle, keep kids occupied and out of trouble, or keep people thin. I appreciate the moves that have been made to reclassify physical education as a degree subject in universities and to bump it up the academic ladder. However, that is not enough if we want to get teachers into schools quickly enough to meet what is now an epidemic. Extraordinary measures must be taken—for example, measures to get more PE teachers into schools and to provide more coaches at community level to get kids out exercising. For the older age group to which David Davidson referred, prescription exercise could be a possibility. That would cost much less than lots of the pills and potions that are prescribed for women of my age. It would be better, for example, if older women were given a free ticket for an aquafitness session at the local baths, or were allowed to try out a pulse centre. I believe that prescription exercise is a practical solution that could happen right now. Tommy Sheridan is right about free school meals. The reason for suggesting the provision of universal free school meals was not to prevent poor children from feeling stigma for getting free school meals, but to ensure that what children ate at school could be controlled. We could tell parents that they did not need to give their children lunch money because they would get a free school meal. That was the rationale behind the proposal to provide universal free school meals and that is why I continue to support that proposal. I also support the free fruit in schools scheme, even though some kids throw away the fruit. We must persist with that scheme and extend it to all schools. We must get role models and sporting icons into schools to say, "Look at me munching an apple. This is what it does for you—you can sign for Man United and get paid a fortune." We must meet the advertising giants on their own ground. The scale of the advertising to which Tommy Sheridan referred is undermining all the sensible foodstuffs and eating plans that we are discussing. The issue affects not only poor wee Scotland with its bad dietary habits; it is an international problem. Just a few months ago in Portugal, I saw evidence of that. Portuguese kids, too, are getting fatter because they are watching the same advertising on television and eating the same gloop as our kids are. Similarly, their mothers are out working and do not have time to cook, so they use microwaves as well. In closing, therefore, I suggest that, as well as tackling advertising, the Government takes action that would hurt the companies and puts tax on foods that have high salt and fat contents. Think about it: if we can tax  cigarettes because they are bad for people, we can do the same thing with food.

In chapter 7 of the draft budget, on enterprise and lifelong learning, objective 1, target 2 is to "Improve productivity levels in Scottish industry compared to OECD competitors." I would like to add my tuppenceworth to that. The minister will be relieved to hear that it is only small change that I will be talking about. I would like something to be spent on meeting that objective by ensuring that the Scottish workforce is physically and mentally fit to meet it. I would like some of the small change from the £394 million end-year flexibility to go to that. I understand what the minister said about the allocation of priorities by ministers with specific portfolios. However, perhaps the Minister for Finance and Public Services is in the best position to recognise that a year-end fund of small spending money might be established. There is something of a parallel with small businesses that cannot get a small loan from the bank or from any lender. If they want millions they can quite often argue a good case and get it, but the person who wants a small loan just cannot get it. Much the same could be said of the organisations in which I am interested in relation to promoting fitness in the general population. I met representatives of sportscotland last week. Ian Robson and Allan Miller both told me of their great concern that in the community clubs to which Frank McAveety referred—the sports clubs that are the bedrock of sporting activity and fitness in the community—coaches are in short supply. There needs to be a fund—a relatively small amount of money that might not even need to be recurring money—to provide for the training of coaches, or else many such small community clubs will go to the wall. The same is true of training administrators to administer local funds and so on. I am asking for a small-change fund, which might act as a stop-gap fund for sponsorships that may go out of fashion or simply come to an end. The BAA games in Edinburgh were very successful and were absolutely terrific. Schoolchildren from all over Scotland took part. However, the sponsorship deal has now come to an end. We therefore need a small amount of money to bridge the gap between the ending of that sponsorship and the beginning of a new one. I concur with Brian Monteith: it is a good idea to have end-year flexibility. EYF could provide a  small-change kitty for the essential items of expenditure that can be forgotten because they are so small. I appreciate that the Minister for Finance and Public Services will not do that by himself, but he could kick-start the idea.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether there will be an increase from last year in the number of students accepted for physical education degrees and diplomas in universities and colleges. (S2O-370)

We can trade information on the matter, because I checked some facts before I came to the chamber. The University of Edinburgh, which is one of two degree-awarding institutions in Scotland for the subject, has accepted 100 students this year, which is exactly the same as last year. Given that the very nice minister who is sitting next to Mr Wallace—Nicol Stephen—promised me in the previous session of Parliament that the number of PE teachers in primary schools would increase, will Mr Wallace say how he intends to achieve that without there being more students in colleges and universities?

As members know, I seek only to spread sweetness and light on the matter. As a result, I do not think that Lord Fraser will object to my sharing with members the letter that I had from him a couple of days ago: "There is little or no difficulty over the early policy decision to locate at Holyrood rather than Calton hill or over the control and direction of the project while still in the hands of the Scottish Office and subsequently the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. On these matters, I aim to report about the middle of next year, not 2005, as the media have erroneously reported." Is the First Minister aware, as every member should be, of the legal implications of Lord Fraser rushing to comment on design and construction matters before we know the project's completion date? I assure the First Minister that some of us have looked into the matter. Does he agree that it would not be clever for us to end up in the European courts under the European convention on human rights if we were to move too quickly? I am assured—and I hope that the First Minister agrees—that Lord Fraser is tackling the matter methodically. We should put our trust in him.

The member has widened the debate. I take him back to the position of the UK Government on what constitutes a fair, equitable and reasonable immigration and asylum policy. Does he agree that the Labour party in Scotland might have a different interpretation from that of the Labour party in England of what would be a suitable degree of attraction for economic migrants into Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

I inform the minister that Jim Sillars is fine, thanks. Does the minister accept that we have reached one of the core elements of the devolution settlement as it affects the Parliament? No one is trying to sneak under the wire. Does she accept that we must be up front in saying that part of the price of devolution is not having a say in what happens in a part of Scotland?

In the normal flow of meetings between the minister and the council, will he look in particular at the effects on special needs schools that are replaced in the larger education campus, such as that in Midlothian? Parents in Dalkeith who had anticipated a better deal for their special needs children when their school was closed and incorporated in the big new campus have told me that they are beginning to find that their children and the facilities of the special needs school are being squeezed. As one of the schools in Edinburgh—Graysmill School—is to experience the same renovation, I am concerned that it too will find itself squeezed as part of the PPP.

On the question of premises, Somerset House is being mooted as a possible home for a supreme court. However, should a supreme court for the whole United Kingdom be agreed, is there any reason why such a court should not meet in Edinburgh?

I congratulate the Executive on the priority that it has given to the reform of the justice system, although I find myself in agreement with much of what Donald Gorrie and Colin Fox said. I commend to the minister Stewart Stevenson's analysis of the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats—a SWOT analysis—of the 110-day rule. I will introduce another element into the debate—our appeals procedure. I do not claim to have all the answers, but many questions arise about the implications for Scots law of the Prime Minister's announcement of fundamental constitutional changes, including his commitment to establish a supreme court. It is not clear whether the proposed supreme court is to be a court of final appeal or a court whose jurisdiction is largely confined to cases that raise questions of constitutional law or issues under the Human Rights Act 1998. Obviously, the character of the court and its relationship to the different legal systems in the United Kingdom are dependent on the answers to those questions. The issue is one on which, no matter how unionist individual members or parties in this Parliament may be, we require an independent Scottish approach. This Parliament is responsible for the Scottish legal system and it must exercise that responsibility, free from any influence exerted by the party system in Westminster. That does not mean that we cannot take good ideas from whatever source, but they should not be party-politically motivated and we should not feel constrained by party politics. The Prime Minister's idea of a supreme court raises profound issues for Scotland and for this Parliament. The Scottish Parliament should open a dialogue with the Scottish judiciary, organisations that come into contact with the system and the public before we come to any certain conclusions about our view. Lord Hope—by general agreement one of Scotland's best judges and now a law lord in the House of Lords—has pointed out that, because of the provisions of Treaty of Union, any supreme court that is part of the English royal courts of justice cannot be the supreme court of Scotland. As a treat, I will read from article 19 of the Act of Union 1707. It states: "And that no Causes in Scotland be cognoscible by the Courts of Chancery, Queens-Bench, Common-Pleas, or any other Court in Westminster-hall; And that the said  Courts, or any other of the like nature after the Union, shall have no power to Cognosce, Review, or Alter the Acts or Sentences of the Judicatures within Scotland, or stop the Execution of the same". The immediate question, to which we have not heard an answer from either Prime Minister Blair or Lord Falconer, is whether the supreme court is to be separate from and above the Scottish and English legal systems. If it is, there is another question: are we to change the practice whereby, although Scottish civil cases can be appealed to the House of Lords, Scottish criminal cases stop at the appeal stage in the High Court in Edinburgh? Why, after centuries, should criminal appeals leave the Scottish judicial system? That system works and, if it ain't broke, why fix it? The basic question is whether we in Scotland require a supreme court. Could not we repatriate the power of the House of Lords on civil cases, which was not given to it by statute but arrogated by it through a judicial decision? If anyone is interested, the Earl of Rosebery raised the matter in 1707 and 1708 and the House of Lords heard it—I thought that members would be interested in that. Another interesting question is raised. This Parliament has the power to legislate over the Scottish legal system, so why do not we pass an act to cut out the House of Lords from Scottish civil cases? Our act, given that it would be a statute, would have greater authority than a judicial decision that was made around 1708 in Lord Rosebery's favour. I remind members of another quirky feature of the present set-up. The Parliament is governed by its own supreme court, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, whose power over our acts is written into our constitution—the Scotland Act 1998. If we believe that the ability to appeal beyond the inner house of the Court of Session is necessary in Scottish civil cases, why do not we send appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council rather than to the House of Lords? I know that last year's Justice report on the subject was not enamoured of that idea and I can understand that in the future there might not be a Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, but the issue is worth considering. Why do we need a supreme court in Scotland? If we decide that we need one, why do not we have our own supreme court, which would hear both civil and criminal appeals in Scotland, with the most eminent Scottish judges applying Scots law? There would be symmetry to the system and it would be consistent. That idea raises another pertinent question about the Prime Minister's idea. Who is to appoint the supreme court judges? We already have the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland, but  England does not have a similar board, although I believe that one is promised. Is there to be a joint appointments board or a new board to appoint judges to the supreme court of the United Kingdom? If there is to be a new board, what will the Scottish contingent be? I have discussed some propositions, but I will draw only two conclusions. One is that the issue is complex and that any decisions that are taken will probably affect our legal system for centuries to come. The second is that, given the complexities of the issue, it seems clear that Prime Minister Blair announced the idea of a supreme court before he had thought it through. It falls to this Parliament to think through the idea from the perspective of maintaining the wholeness of Scottish justice.

I will pick up from where Iain Smith left off because, just as he never thought that he would agree with Kenny MacAskill, I never thought that I would agree with him. We have been talking about two airports, but we should be talking about three airports—three airports, one hub. We should be thinking about fast rail links from Glasgow Prestwick right through to Edinburgh, up the east coast and to London. I will not develop that point, because Iain Smith finished off on that, but he is absolutely right. If we are talking about a sensible airport policy in Scotland, it should start with the sensible use of our existing resources and the development of our rail services. I agreed with much of what Robert Brown said, so I will not go over it again. We can start levelling the playing field between internal UK flights and rail travel. The fares could be examined to try to change the pattern of how we travel inside the UK. We can certainly change the pattern of how we transfer from transatlantic flights on to Europe. We could do that if we had a Scottish hub running from Prestwick through to Glasgow and Edinburgh. We have to start getting the pricing policy right for rail travel. We should try to reduce the growth in air travel of anything between 4 and 5 per cent. We are being less ambitious than we might be if we just say that that is what the growth is and do not attempt to reduce it. We know perfectly well that it is desirable on environmental grounds to try to reduce that growth. I think that 10 per cent of CO 2 emissions are from air transport. We are spending so much time discussing pan-European environmental concerns that, surely to goodness,  reducing those emissions is something on which we can all agree. If we do, we have to start reducing the growth in air travel. That does not mean to say that we will have a smaller market for tourism or leisure in Scotland. It simply means that we might not need longer runways to accommodate the people whom we would like to come to visit Scotland, whether on business or on holiday. Perhaps what we need is much better organisation and use of the resources that we already have, starting with rail.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to widen access to minority sports. (S2O-222)

I thank the minister and congratulate him on getting the job; I think that he will do a good job. I am delighted for the Scottish Volleyball Association, but are sportscotland's strategy and the sport 21 targets correct? Although volleyball  has benefited, Scottish cricket—which is burgeoning and which we should encourage—has been refused funding on the spurious grounds that it cannot guarantee that it will get to the super sixes at the 2007 world cup in the West Indies. That will appear to members to be nonsense and I am sure that the new minister will have a sensible answer for me, and money for Scottish cricket.

I am glad to hear the First Minister say that Lord Fraser will have the power to name and shame. The problem is that some of the folk that he might name have no shame, as we saw during the Finance Committee meeting yesterday when we asked to see minutes that should properly be the Parliament's property. According to the First Minister, all property of the Parliament will be available to Lord Fraser. Should not the property of the Parliament—namely, minutes that were taken at a meeting of the Holyrood progress group—be the property of the whole Parliament? I have three further, brief questions. What happens if some people who might fall into the category of being named and shamed say, "No. We'll stick with the shame. It might cost us less money"? What happens if the same sort of attitude pertains with regard to private information such as that which John Home Robertson was unable to share with us at the Finance Committee yesterday? That was supposedly down to commercial confidentiality, although the information is contained in the property of the Parliament. I do not mean to be difficult over this, but I foresee some of the headlines that we will get if the inquiry—properly—incurs expenditure. Who will watch how much is spent on it?

I thank the First Minister for copying me in on the letter that he wrote to the Presiding Officer, giving me sight of it before question time today. I seek two points of clarification, the first of which relates to a paragraph in the letter to which the First Minister referred in reply to an earlier question about the committees to which he would make a full report after the meeting that he is to hold with Lord Fraser of Carmyllie and the Presiding Officer. The paragraph says: "I envisage that the report ... would be submitted to the appropriate Parliament Committee to allow further additional scrutiny at that stage." I ask the First Minister not to close his mind to establishing a separate, specialised parliamentary committee. Further scrutiny might well be needed and, under the terms of the Scotland Act 1998, such a committee would be able to command evidence. I think that that was the point that was worrying Mr McLetchie.  Secondly, I seek clarification on the position of people who find themselves unable to say all that they know of the project. I refer in particular to past construction managers and project managers such as Bill Armstrong and Alan Ezzi. We need to know that people can blow the whistle on decisions that were taken in the past. We also need to know that people will have an amnesty and that they will be released from some of the promises that they had to make not to speak about contracts.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order.

So have I.

On the same point of order, Presiding Officer. I hesitate to embellish what you said, but standards are laid down for the conduct of ministers in the chamber and the minister's conduct today would not meet them.

Will the member give way?

Does Alex Johnstone think that the British Government has been any better able to defend Scottish farmers?

First, I congratulate the SNP on using its debating time to discuss a motion on developments in the EU. I disagree with Irene Oldfather—we should not wait for others to make up their minds before we express an opinion. We are supposed to be representing the Scots and giving voice to their thoughts and opinions. Now is as good a time as any to do so, before the die is cast and some of Ted Brocklebank's dire warnings are proved to be true. We call this morning's session a debate and we will vote on our consideration of the arguments that have been put forward by members of all parties. There is the rub. It will not matter a docken leaf what decision we reach, because we do not have the power to enforce any decision that we might make on the advisability of joining the euro or of endorsing the draft constitution. We cannot even ensure the implementation of the outcome of the considered deliberations of the Parliament's committees on the effect of genetically modified foods. We have heard faint echoes of the argument that we should leave such things to London. I would have hoped that that idea is gone. In saying that we should open our minds, Nicola Sturgeon  began well. She said that, instead of the SNP and Labour bashing each other as usual, we should consider the matter at hand. That is what I would like to do. I want to examine some of the options. We talk glibly about the benefits and disadvantages for the Scottish and UK economies of joining the euro, as if those two economies were the same. Again, I must congratulate Nicola Sturgeon, who pointed out that the Scottish and UK economies are not the same and that the economic situations north and south of the border are very different. The Parliament has nothing to lose by admitting the reality and examining where that admission takes us. The SNP suggests that we should have a referendum on the euro right away. I freely concede that a 2 per cent interest rate would advantage the Scottish economy at the moment, as Keith Raffan said, but would it advantage the English economy? Why do I mention the English economy? I do so not just because I am an independent, but because the English economy is Scotland's biggest market. Do we want to beggar our neighbour and jeopardise our market by imposing on England an interest rate that is as unsuitable for its needs as the current rate that is set in London is for our needs? If we want to consider the interests of the economies north and south of the border, we must examine the economic developments in Europe that will flow from the existence of a single interest rate. Europe's single interest rate suits us just now, but it might not suit us in future. I do not claim to know economics, but if we know anything about the subject it is that—as a number of honest European politicians have noted—there is a closeness between having a common interest rate and having a common fiscal policy, which is what the rate feeds into. Would we be happy with a common fiscal policy that operates from Poland through to Scotland? Have we thought about the implications of that? I seem to recall that members of this Parliament have suggested that there should be different fiscal policies north and south of the border.

The point is a fine one, but I did not make a mistake. The people who live in the north-east of England think of themselves as English and identify with most other folk who live in England, just as the people who live in Shetland—as Tavish Scott would admit—probably  think that they have more in common with the people of Lanarkshire than with folk who work in Poland. Let me return to my theme, which is the honesty of European politicians who are prepared to talk about what should happen in the future. What does the Labour party think about the issue? We know what Tony Blair thinks, although like the rest of the population, I do not believe a word that he says. However, I am prepared to believe Gordon Brown. Gordon Brown has said that joining the single currency is not a good idea right now and that we should see how things develop before we commit ourselves. To go from one system of economic management to another and from one economic cycle to another would be a huge leap. Gordon Brown has said that we should give ourselves a bit of time. I happen to agree with that very sensible suggestion. What does the Scottish Executive think of the single currency? We know that the Lib Dems think that we should go in tomorrow. Being federalists, the Lib Dems have no objection, as far as I can work out, to the federalisation and harmonisation of tax policy, but what does the other half of the Executive think? It would be nice if some of them were here to tell us. Perhaps that is why there are no Labour ministers in the chamber. And what does the SNP think about tax harmonisation across Europe? SNP members want us to go into Europe. They love Europe, and are passionate about it, but do they realise that Europe is a pork barrel? The reason that Ted Brocklebank's party, when it was in Government, agreed to the common fisheries policy is that it traded off fishing against other perceived advantages to the British economy. What advantage would be gained for the Scottish economy? Would we trade fish for tax? What would we oppose? The SNP will need to take a cold look at the implications of the federal development of Europe. We need to be honest about this issue. Within the last fortnight, the European Central Bank's spokesman has said that we could forget the national health service because we would not have the taxation system to support anything more than an accident and emergency service.

I, for one, am not willing to cede that sort of sovereignty to any unelected crowd, in Brussels or elsewhere. I do not believe that there is an homogeneity of understanding across Europe about what democracy is. For goodness' sake, have a look at France just now. The President would be in the jail if he did not have immunity. It is true. And the man who has  drawn up the European constitution was heavily into diamonds—he was into diamonds in a big way.

We should not forget what other European countries' history of democracy is, especially when we are willing to give up so much of what our people fought and died for for over 200 years.

Does the member agree that it is the underlying differences in the concept of democracy that give rise to that secrecy at Council of Ministers level? To take one example, an Italian Prime Minister who owns the media outlets and the television channels is not used to having to explain things in public. We seem to accept that and to think that that is the way that it should be.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On the matter of the constitution, I absolutely agree with what the member has just said about steadfastly opposing a federal constitution, but what will she do if Germany, France and Italy say yes to federalism?

Will the member give way?

I just want to clarify a specific point.

I want to raise a point of information to ensure that the chamber is not confused. I think that I am correct in saying that, even if the minister were to lodge an affirmative instrument, the chamber would be unable at that stage to amend it. I think that that is what Brian Adam has inadvertently suggested. Such an instrument can only be knocked back.

On a point of information. I agree with everything that Fiona Hyslop said about the policy intention of amendment 8. However, the Parliament could ensure that the minister had to think again even if the regulations were introduced under the negative procedure, which is just used in a different way. I suggest that we all bone up on  our subordinate legislation.

I thank the member.

Can I vote now?

But I wanted to abstain—I do not agree with any of them.

I am a novice in the issue and I am here to learn. Will Brian Adam explain whether Craibstone could establish the centre of excellence and the critical mass of academic achievement and research potential that exist in Edinburgh? Does he suggest that that could be moved from Edinburgh to Craibstone?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions there have been with City of Edinburgh Council about its new housing system for homeless people. (S2O-20)

I thank the minister for her usual attention to such matters and urge her to keep a close eye on the "EH—your key to choice" programme, which is a new programme for letting in Edinburgh. The programme might be a very  good idea, but might also put undue stress on people who have chaotic lifestyles and who are in most need of housing. Although the scheme is very recent, will the minister assure me that she will keep a close eye on it?

I declare an interest: I am patron of the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. My parliamentary office assisted Moira Adams in taking her case against Breast Cancer Research to the appropriate authorities.  I am interested in the implication that I think I detected from the minister when she said that she would consider the charitable status of private schools. She could, in theory, come to a different conclusion on that matter from that of her counterpart at Westminster. Were that to prove the case, would it pose any difficulties with regard to establishing what constitute organisations with charitable status in Scotland, as opposed to campaigning organisations?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for being late. Will you clarify for me whether, according to sections 44 and 47 of the Scotland Act 1998 and the standing orders of the Parliament, the purpose of this morning's proceedings is to endorse the First Minister's choice of ministerial colleagues or to comment on the First Minister's team? The two things are different—one presupposes that we sit in judgment on the suitability of the individuals chosen and the other presupposes that we should pass comment on the strategy that the First Minister has outlined.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Since the First Minister has been duly elected and stamped as fit for use by Her Majesty and can choose his ministerial team, what is the purpose of this meeting? If, in future, the Parliament finds the First Minister wanting, we can use the time-honoured tradition of moving a motion of no confidence.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for taking up Parliament's time, but if we are lumbered with irrelevant proceedings simply because they are in the Scotland Act 1998—if I am correct, the matter went undebated at Westminster—why do we not change them?

Further to the point of order that was raised by the First Minister, Presiding Officer, may I congratulate you on your elevation? I noted that you took up the spirit of the suggestion that was made by my colleague, Mr Canavan, who referred to paragraph 3 of standing order 3.1. I promise you, Presiding Officer, that if you stick to that standing order, I will be very responsible.

And I was going to say something nice about you, Presiding Officer.

On the regeneration of the Borders economy, will the minister explain why the Executive has chosen to transfer 270 Scottish Natural Heritage jobs to Inverness rather than to Galashiels? Inverness has a booming economy—this week, only 48 houses were for sale on the market in Inverness. Galashiels is on the opposite side of the economic coin. Further to that, will the minister assure me—I think that I speak for Angus MacKay, Susan Deacon and the other Edinburgh MSPs—[MEMBERS: "Oh!"] They do not mind. They are broad minded. Perhaps other members should try to be so as well.

The question is about the policy of moving 270 jobs. I am in agreement with those other MSPs that I mentioned. I do not agree with the transfer of those jobs in this way at this time. Will the minister assure me that, after I have seen his colleague Ross Finnie tomorrow, the policy will be put on ice?

After such an exchange, I hope that my question does not seem like we are going from the sublime to the ridiculous. However, we have other responsibilities in the Parliament. Is the First Minister aware that the efficiency and costs of Scottish Natural Heritage will be detrimentally affected by today's decision to disperse the headquarters, with its 270 jobs, from Edinburgh to Inverness? Will he give me an undertaking that that decision will not be acted on until the new Parliament can review it? I fear that today's decision will be regarded as a poor, politically motivated decision, given that SNH is a model for the policy of dispersing people and departments throughout Scotland.

Does the First Minister agree that one of the most effective means of laying to rest the insecurities and uncertainties felt at present by Muslim communities in Scotland and throughout the world would be for the United Nations to state clearly that the state of Israel is in contravention of the spirit of the United Nations' founding fathers and that it should desist and resist the harassment and containment of the Palestinian people now?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

My voting card is not working.

But I have tried again. Oh, it is working now. That is magic.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assistance it is giving City of Edinburgh Council in developing a cohesive and integrated public transport system. (S1O-6641)

Absolutely. I think that the minister is terrific. I would think him even more terrific if he promised and earmarked money for the Borders rail link, but more of that later. I am concerned that the anti-congestion policies that, with the best of intentions, have been pursued so far have proved utterly unsuccessful. Given that any referendum on car congestion in Edinburgh will not be carried out until at least 2006, I am concerned that there is a gap. What will the Executive do to help the council to fill that gap?

Will the member give way?

I apologise for not being present earlier. I was at an international women's day meeting at which I spoke to Iraqi women. Is there a time limit that Phil Gallie would consider reasonable for the work of the inspectors—who might become investigators—in Iraq?

The First Minister said that we would attract people from outwith Scotland. He mentioned that the British embassies had been responsive to that message. Will he say whether we will have people on the ground or whether the process will be done entirely through information technology? I would like him to take on board my suggestion that, if we cannot have commercial embassies inside the British embassies, we should have welcome-to-Scotland desks.

To ask the Scottish Executive on what criteria its decisions to disperse civil service and executive agency posts are based. (S1O-6586)

I draw the minister's attention to the position in which Scottish Natural Heritage  finds itself. He should treat the dispersal that is already evident in that agency as something of a prototype and model. Instead of pursuing some unholy grail to disperse people if they are not nailed down, should not he realise that losing between 50 per cent and 75 per cent of its staff in a dispersal programme from now on would not be in that agency's best interests?

I am not at all sure that, after 2009, it will be possible to buy the supplements in combination. I was making a point not about safety but about the existence of a further, unnecessary restriction.

That is why some people touched on the issue of the directives that are still to come. It is a related issue.

One is still to come.

As Mr Quinan said, there are "developing" remedies. I wonder whether he is aware that the directive is defective in that it is so structured as to militate against the companies that are currently developing remedies, because of the expense involved in testing them and reaching European standards of proof. Frankly, that is not required.

I agree with Murdo Fraser. The matter is a prima facie case for subsidiarity, because it is obvious that the different cultures and cuisines that are to be found in the UK, Finland and France suggest that we need different systems for food supplements and different potencies. However, I should also say—it might not find much favour with Murdo Fraser—that one reason for harmonising products is that the big pharmaceutical companies would like standardisation throughout Europe. They want to standardise potency downwards, not upwards. We must deal with what might be done with the directive. The directive contains a list that is not comprehensive. It misses out essential minerals such as boron, which is important for bones and is in nearly all the osteoporosis preparations—osteoporosis is a key concern in the Government's health plan; sulphur, which is in a substance called methylsulphonylmethane and which people use increasingly for joint problems; and silica, which is used in formulations to improve hair and nail quality. Such substances are used by people who want to make themselves as well as they can be. That is supposed to be a Government objective. For the reasons I have given and many others that, unfortunately, I do not have time to go into  but which I hope other members will deal with, I commend the motion to the minister.

I thank the people who have been campaigning against this measure for a considerable time and regret the fact that it has taken many of us some time to catch up with what was being done in our names. We could not quite believe the stupidity of it. Although tonight's debate cannot, of itself, change the Westminster Government's policy—far less the misguided thinking of the European Commission, whence came this assault on consumer choice, individual responsibility and the general well-being of people who, like me, have safely purchased and used vitamin and mineral food supplements for years—it can alert most people in Scotland who are unaware of the seriousness of the measure that is being proposed. The debate and the number of members who support the terms of my motion to oppose the European directive, which will remove tried and tested food supplements that are sold in specialist health food shops for no better stated reason than to harmonise the market throughout Europe, can alert the Scottish Executive to the support that the health ministers in the Parliament will have if they oppose the full implementation of directive 2002/46/EC, as it stands at present, by August 2005. The timetable for implementing the directive starts on 31 July, so time is very short for the Minister for Health and Community Care to prevent the loss of up to 300 currently available safe nutrients that are purchased every day by hundreds of thousands of satisfied customers. I should say at this point that I refer particularly to nutrients that can be purchased in specialist  health food shops. I am not necessarily referring to nutrients of a lower standard of efficacy that can be bought in supermarkets and other mass retail outlets. I am sure that members who take part in the debate will explain the difference between the two types of nutrients. The Scottish Parliament's subordinate legislation on the matter has gone through, which is thanks to the magnificent Subordinate Legislation Committee. The minister is empowered to bring the order into effect. There was nothing technically wrong with the order, but everything was wrong with the substance of it. As members will know, the superb Subordinate Legislation Committee can do nothing to alter the substance of instruments.

I will give way to a superb member of said superb committee.

I thank Ian Jenkins. I will call him to speak a lot at next week's meeting of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. There is a chance, before August 2005, for the United Kingdom Government to ask for a new law on the issue. If, after debate, we decide that a new law would be the best way forward, we could ask for a new law that would allow national Governments to decide what would be suitable for their different circumstances. As I said, the point of the directive, which was sold on the basis of its raising of safety standards, is harmonisation. Anyone who reads the directive will see in the first two lines that that is the case. It is obvious that we all aspire to harmony, but in this case harmony is not a good idea, because we are all different—as I will explain. It is not impossible to make a bad law good. However it is done, Scotland must have some sort of derogation from the directive. I suggested to the minister that the UK Government might be prevailed on to think about having a new law on the issue that reflected national circumstances and needs. However, there is an absolute requirement for that in Scotland because lower levels of essential nutrients exist in Scottish soil than exist in soil all over Europe, whence the directive came. As members will know, there is a great difference between Scotland's agricultural methods and those of other areas of Europe.  If the soil from which we obtain our food does not provide sufficient nutrients, we must obtain them in another way. That is where the idea of food supplements, consisting of essential minerals and vitamins, comes in. However, under the directive, the combination of echinacea and vitamin C, for example, would be forbidden. At the moment, we can buy that combined food supplement, which is used without problems by hundreds of thousands of people to prevent colds and influenza. I suppose that it is trendy to take echinacea, which can certainly be taken in conjunction with vitamin C. The directive will prevent echinacea and vitamin C from being sold in combination because echinacea is regarded as an herbal remedy and vitamin C is regarded as a food supplement. However, there is no justification for not being able to self-medicate or look after ourselves by using those substances together. No contraindications of such use have been noted. There is no history of anyone falling ill because of using the combination or of anyone abusing it and falling foul of it. Therefore, why on earth is it necessary to ban the combined use of echinacea and vitamin C? It could be argued that echinacea and vitamin C can be bought and taken separately. However, there is no recommended dosage for vitamin C. The recommended level for vitamin C is still being discussed by the European Commission and European food safety organisations. However, we can be certain that the level of vitamin C that will be allowed will be far lower than the level that we are used to taking in this country. That will perhaps be because many of the people who are helping to make the policy come from countries that have lovely sunshine. We have a fantastic sunshine record in Scotland and folk in Leith, for example, will probably never have to bother about what I am saying. However, there are areas in Scotland—in the north-east perhaps—where those who are getting on a bit and who are suffering from colds and flu might feel the need for echinacea and vitamin C taken together. As I said, the chances are that they have been taking them together for a while with no ill effects. My motion seeks to persuade the Scottish Executive to oppose the directive in whichever ways are constitutional and feasible. That would allow somebody who needs to purchase a remedy or a preventive product that they have been buying for years to continue to do so.

In winding up the debate on the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill, I thank all the members who have taken part. I not only enjoyed the contributions, but learned from them, which surprises me because I had thought that I had heard it all. I should also mention absent friends of the bill who, for various reasons, are not present. Tommy Sheridan, Mary Scanlon and Kate Maclean indicated to me that they would have taken part in the debate if they had been able to be present. I turn to the points that members made during the debate. Tricia Marwick said that legislation was not needed. I wonder whether I can draw her attention to a letter that was sent to Councillor Donald Anderson, who is the leader of the City of Edinburgh Council. He has been advised by the council's solicitors that, although the power to advance well-being that is provided for in the Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 "is indeed a quite deliberately worded ... provision, it is still nonetheless a statutory provision which, like other statutory provisions, is exposed to judicial challenge." Given that the council's solicitor immediately raised a doubt about that provision, which, as an enabling measure, depends on the council acting in what it considers to be the best interests of its constituents, the likelihood is that the council would choose not to act.

Let me reiterate the views of the solicitor to the City of Edinburgh Council. He continues by saying that any such zone could be subject to a potential challenge by local residents. Such a challenge could be based "on it being legally unreasonable for the local authority to connive at breach of the criminal law and/or to be action which was not expressly sanctioned by statute and involved a contravention of the rights of local residents to their right to respect of private and family life in the terms of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights." I prefer to go with the expert opinion. I also prefer to go with my own knowledge of the situation in Edinburgh when we come to the difficult business of finding a location for the tolerance zone that my proposed policy would enable. I have never said that setting up such a zone would be easy but it would be possible if the will was there. John Young said that we would enter a legal quagmire if we adopted bill. However, as he knows, the Local Government Committee said that the present law is unsatisfactory. We need to weigh the balance of evidence by weighing the benefits that may be gained from this imperfect measure against the detrimental effects of continuing with the current, imperfect law. Iain Smith said that, for him, paragraph 90 of the Local Government Committee's report was the most important paragraph. I welcomed his speech, which I found interesting, but I disagree with him. The most important paragraph in the committee's report is paragraph 92, which states: "the new power to advance well being, for provision of support services to prostitutes, should be monitored and kept under review by the Executive." Of course, I agree with that point. The paragraph continues: "Should experience or changing circumstances show, in due course, that the powers available to local authorities are not adequate, it would be a matter for the Executive of the day to decide whether it was necessary to bring forward further legislation." The committee already admits that its idea is not watertight, so let me try to persuade members of my case. Now, I hear the convener saying that she has never claimed that the current law is perfect. I  do not claim that my solution is perfect either, but I do not believe that the one position contradicts the other. Trish Godman's speech was excellent. Indeed, I must thank her for the care and attention that she and her committee gave to the issue. In her speech, she stressed the need to change attitudes. I could not agree more, but changing attitudes takes time. As we heard from Margaret Smith, we may not have time, given what is happening in Edinburgh just now. I appreciate that the situation may be different in other cities, but the bill is an enabling measure that would allow each city to adopt a pragmatic policy of management to suit the conditions that exist now. Local authorities would not be precluded from adopting a longer-term strategy for dealing with prostitution, which is what the committee favoured. Bill Aitken asked what the police would do about drug users. He said that drug usage drives prostitution. He is right that it drives prostitution in many instances and drug use is most certainly allied to the growth of underage prostitution in Glasgow. As I pointed out, in Edinburgh—even with the deterioration over the past 15 months, since there has not been a tolerance zone—only 50 per cent of the prostitutes are estimated to be intravenous drug users. What are the police to do with them? Are they to be treated differently from other prostitutes? I turn briefly to the differences in the record as regards violence and the number of murders committed. I certainly do not want to do a head count. In Edinburgh, which had the tolerance zone, there have been two murders in the past 12 years, both of which were solved and the culprits found and charged within 48 hours because, the police assure me, of the intelligence that had been built up. In Glasgow, there have been eight murders, but none has ever been solved and no one has ever been brought to court for them.

I am very tight for time and I have already given way to the member. I will come back to one of the other issues that she mentioned. I stress that the Routes Out of Prostitution approach described by Pauline McNeill is not at variance with the tolerance zone that was operated in Edinburgh, because SCOT-PEP played the same sort of role in helping women come out of prostitution and supporting them while they were in it. The police in Edinburgh have also said that they think that the preferable way of policing involves having a tolerance zone.  I took everything that Margaret Smith said very seriously, because, like her and Susan Deacon, I represent Edinburgh and I am concerned that we must deal with the matter urgently. Elaine Thomson suggested that the drugs courts might be used as a method of disposal. Yes, but that is not the whole answer—certainly not in Edinburgh. Donald Gorrie reminded us that this is a matter of local democracy—I could not agree more. However, he also said that he regretted the fact that there appeared to be some whipping in at least one party in the chamber. I regret that also, but that might be because the SNP's policy was to decriminalise prostitution per se, which this bill does not seek to do. If the SNP has changed its policy I would be glad to hear about it. I feel that there was a lack of understanding in what Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said—I hope that he does not mind my saying that—but I will talk to him afterwards and explain how the services and location are indivisible. It is unfortunate that I do not have time to go into that just now.

I welcome and greatly appreciate what the minister said and the intention to properly investigate the whole situation, particularly as it affects street prostitutes and residents affected by their activities. The situation has assumed urgency in Edinburgh. I wonder whether it would be possible, should the bill not pass at stage 1—there is just a chance of that—to institute a pilot scheme, perhaps in Edinburgh, to test the propositions in the bill so that any review would have the fullest possible information available to it. I believe that any review could proceed alongside implementation of the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill. The bill could be amended in any way that the Parliament wanted to amend it at stage 2. For example, the bill could be a renewable piece of legislation that is up for approval every year.

The longer-term process of eliminating prostitution is not compromised by a duty of care to prostitutes and the pragmatic management of the social and health problems associated with prostitution.

I refer the minister to SCOT-PEP's experience of successfully operating a pre-employment training scheme to help women out of prostitution.

As Donald Gorrie said, the measures enabled under the bill would be a matter for local democracy. No local democratically elected council would place a tolerance zone in a residential area. As regards the cleansing of business areas, that is part and parcel of the policy. It is not just a question of geographical location; a set of services would be delivered in partnership inside designated areas.

The only activity that would be legal in the zone that is currently illegal outwith the zone would be soliciting. Therefore, the trafficking of people and any breach of the peace would be treated in exactly the same way as they are now: they would be criminal offences.

I agree that no one wants to have a prostitution tolerance zone in their street, and the bill seeks to ensure that that would not happen. However, the committee received evidence from Annie Rhodes, who owns commercial premises in Salamander Yards, who said that if the zone were operational in the way in which it would have been operational had there been time to put the plans into operation in Edinburgh, there would be no great hazard to businesses in some areas.

Eight.

I have great sympathy with the idea of women being treated as individuals and services being geared to their individual needs, but the business of prostitution is not the same as a nine-to-five job. Women go in and out of prostitution. In some periods of their life they act as prostitutes, and in others they do not. Therefore, location is central to the delivery of services.

As I have already conceded, there was obviously great concern among business people and residents who own property in Salamander Street. However, after the zone had been operational and after there had been a level of consultation and information supplied to people, the number of complaints to the police dropped drastically. What we have now in Leith is a much greater level of hazard for the security of the prostitutes, and also annoyance to residents. Because there is no tolerance zone, the police cannot operate in the way in which they operated before, which minimised the level of associated criminality and annoyance.

Will John Young accept an intervention?

Certainly, if John Young will accept an intervention from me.

I am glad that that point has arisen, because there seems to be some misunderstanding as to the details of how prostitution operates, particularly in Glasgow and Edinburgh. The tolerance zones were, in effect, what was described at the Local Government Committee as pick-up zones. That was where clients engaged with prostitutes. They then went to another part of Glasgow, usually the lanes, which I think are well known to former Councillor Anderson, in a professional capacity, of course. In Edinburgh, they usually go in cars. I am sorry. I should have said former Councillor Young, not Anderson. I was thinking about someone else whom we both know.

We are going to. It is an interesting subject, but we can go into it later. What happens is that—

It is indeed, but I was giving information that is pertinent to the debate, Presiding Officer, and crave your indulgence.

The police have intelligence about who uses such zones and know whether women are there. Women can look out for one another. SCOT-PEP had an ugly-mug system. If a client abused somebody, a record of that was kept by SCOT-PEP and shared with the police, so there was a much greater flow of information as to what happened in prostitution. That is why women like to work in tolerance zones.

Some 133 organisations and agencies were approached in the consultation process and only Glasgow City Council and South Ayrshire Council objected to the bill. The others either did not object to the bill or supported it.

The member will recall that as part of the evidence given to the Local Government Committee, the deputy leader of Glasgow City Council admitted that the city's tolerance zone arrangements were likely to break down, exactly as they had in Edinburgh, and that there would be a problem in relocating the women. How does she envisage that could be done without any legal basis?

It is with great pleasure that I invite Parliament's approval for the principles of the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill. Members will be pleased to hear that the bill is a short one and has only eight sections. It is an enabling measure, which would empower a local authority, if it so decided, to designate an area forming part of the authority's area as a prostitution tolerance zone. By that, I mean a zone "within which loitering, soliciting or importuning by prostitutes is not an offence under section 46(1) of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982". The bill seeks to exercise a duty of care towards prostitutes and to minimise annoyance, inconvenience and embarrassment to the general community. It does not seek to condone or promote prostitution; instead, it seeks to minimise the criminality that is associated with prostitution and to enable health and social services to be delivered more easily to a group of very vulnerable people. I introduce the bill because for some years now I have been associated with the Scottish prostitutes education project—or SCOT-PEP—which is the voluntary organisation in Edinburgh that supports prostitutes. I was asked by officers in Lothian and Borders police to convene a steering group to investigate how best to build on the successful tolerance, or non-harassment, zone that had operated in Edinburgh for the best part of 20 years. The steering group became necessary after the area around Coburg Street in Leith, which had been the original tolerance zone, was redeveloped and residents complained of nuisance and embarrassment caused by the women who solicited there. After discussions with SCOT-PEP, which represented the prostitutes, the police moved the zone to a strictly defined part of Salamander Street in Leith. As members will see from the evidence that was submitted to the Local Government Committee, such a solution might have proved possible if the police had had enough time to consult local people in the area before a  very unfortunate spate of mass media reporting made any calm assessment of the matter well nigh impossible. The Salamander Street tolerance zone was discontinued on 30 November 2001 and a new solution was sought, which is how the steering group came about. In fact, I should point out that the group has greatly influenced the production of the bill. Therefore, as members will appreciate, the bill is not ideologically based. Instead, it is a pragmatic, workable and legal way of managing the problems that can arise from street prostitution and of exercising a duty of care to prostitutes and the wider community. I dare to suggest that such a duty will be needed for as long as there are street prostitutes. In their evidence to the Local Government Committee, even the bill's opponents conceded that street prostitution is likely to remain a part of life in Scotland's four big cities for the foreseeable future. At this stage, I should assure members that we are talking only about the four big cities. To the best of my knowledge, no other area has street prostitutes. There might well be women who work indoors as prostitutes elsewhere, but the problems and challenges that are presented by street prostitution are to be found only in Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow. I will explain the differences among the cities later. Because street prostitution in those cities is a fact of life, even though we might not wish that to be so, local councils, health authorities, community drugs action workers and the police in Aberdeen and Edinburgh have indicated their support for the bill's intentions and principles. Both cities have operated acknowledged informal tolerance zones. Moreover, having heard evidence on Glasgow's red-light area, the Local Government Committee has concluded that it, too, is a tolerance zone by any other name. Because the pattern of prostitution is different in those three cities, the bill itself is non-prescriptive. However, Dundee is something else. I can say that because Kate Maclean is not here this morning. Dundee has a very small number of women who work as prostitutes and who are known to the police. That system works, and if it ain't broke, I would not be so presumptuous as to say that it should be mended. However, representatives of Tayside police attended meetings of the steering group, contributed to our discussions and did not raise any objections to the bill's principles. Grampian police and Lothian and Borders police noted that the benefits of operating a non-harassment policy within an agreed area include the very low levels of criminality within such a zone. Attacks on women are much less frequent and underage women are not tolerated either by  the women who work there as prostitutes or by the police who patrol the area. Pimps, managers or other exploitative people who live off the women's earnings are also not tolerated. Some people who enjoy dancing on the head of a pin would say that there are no such things as pimps in Scotland. I have used the word "pimp" to describe someone who lives off the earnings of a woman who works as a prostitute. Such people certainly exist. Grampian and Lothian and Borders police officers cited the intelligence gained by the police as the most effective way of preventing or minimising alcohol and drugs offences and other crime. Obviously, as the law stands, soliciting is a crime. However, no other crime is tolerated within the zones that have been, or are, non-harassment zones. One of the most urgent reasons for reinstating an agreed tolerance zone in Edinburgh centres on police officers' concern that, without knowing where prostitutes are working at any given time, they are finding it more difficult to prevent developments that are worrying municipal authorities all over Europe, including—as some members might know—those in English cities. The new Mafias from eastern Europe and Albania are trafficking women from there and from elsewhere. Some of those women were discovered in Glasgow, not in its de facto street tolerance zone but working indoors, where it is much more difficult for them to be noticed by regular policing and the intelligence that builds up, as I described a few minutes ago. Police in Edinburgh are concerned that, with the tolerance zone suspended, trafficked women might be working as street prostitutes. That would be an entirely new development and one that we should fear and attempt to meet as quickly as possible. The ending of the tolerance zone has made it easier for drug dealers to infiltrate prostitution. During the time in which the Coburg Street zone was operational, it was estimated that about 20 per cent of the street prostitutes in Edinburgh were injecting drugs. In the 15 months since the zone was suspended, that percentage has grown to more than 50 per cent. Aberdeen and Glasgow adopted their sensitive or tolerant policing policies later than Edinburgh, which might go some way to explaining why there should be such a difference between the 90 per cent plus drug injectors among prostitutes in Aberdeen and Glasgow and the much lower percentage in Edinburgh. To take members back almost 20 years—I can do that because I was there—when heavy drugs such as heroin first came on to the streets in Edinburgh, there was a fear that the HIV virus—and the hepatitis virus  before that—could be spread through the prostitution route via drug dealers and drug trafficking. The drug scene gave rise to the management of prostitution. That did not happen until a few years later in Glasgow, which might explain some of the differences between the cities. When the bill reaches stage 2, I want to lodge an amendment to include in the list of persons to be consulted under section 2(4) community councils and drugs action groups. I want to do that before a tolerance zone has been established, even when the zone has been triggered by the local authority. The bill makes provision in section 2 for voluntary and statutory agencies to consult residents, business people and prostitutes. There must be a partnership to effect the bill's provisions in order to maximise the benefits to public health, security and good order in the entire community. Members will note that health boards are listed. The director of public health of Lothian NHS Board gave evidence to the Local Government Committee in support of the bill because of the perceived benefits to public health in a tolerance zone. The zone makes it easier to deliver preventative measures such as condoms or medical examinations for sexually transmitted infections. In support of that, during the time that the tolerance zone was operational in Leith, there was not a single recorded case of the HIV virus being transmitted via a prostitute. That is a record that no one else can lay claim to, certainly not among the people whom I have consulted when introducing the bill. If there are measurable benefits from having a tolerance zone policy—even an informal one—why do we need legislation? The Local Government Committee recommends that Aberdeen, Edinburgh and presumably Glasgow—as it has a de facto zone—could apply the well-being provision of the new Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 and install whichever facilities those cities think necessary in a suitable area to deliver health services, support to get out of prostitution and security to prostitutes. Soliciting would remain a criminal offence. At this stage, I say that those are precisely the services that are being delivered via SCOT-PEP in Edinburgh. Aberdeen would like to replicate the delivery of those services to its street prostitutes. Aberdeen would deliver the services via Drugs Action. Under the scheme suggested by the Local Government Committee, soliciting would remain a criminal offence. I might have been tempted to accept that but, unfortunately, I have had legal advice from local authority solicitors and others who doubt that councils would have the necessary legal basis to instigate that informal style of tolerance zone. Local councillors in Edinburgh  have told me that they are not confident that they could proceed on that basis after the breakdown of the previous policy and the ensuing publicity. Perhaps the convener of the Local Government Committee or the Executive could help to allay councillors' fears about that matter and I sincerely hope that they will be able to do so. For a successful tolerance zone policy, there must be compliance from prostitutes, such as there was in Edinburgh, even when the tolerance zone was relocated. The women knew that if they observed the code of conduct agreed by SCOT-PEP and the police, they would not be prosecuted for soliciting. There was a strong argument for them to operate inside the zone and to respect business hours of opening and so on. The suggestion from the Local Government Committee is that soliciting should remain a criminal offence. As evidence to the Local Government Committee has shown, there can be different views among procurators fiscal and police as to how rigorously the law against soliciting should be enforced, which might not induce an easy system of partnership among the relevant agencies. In time-honoured tradition, I have got my retaliation in first. Finally, I record my thanks to the men who did such a professional job of producing the bill—Neil Brailsford and Kenneth Campbell from the Faculty of Advocates. I am also greatly obliged to the Parliament's draftsperson who gave advice, dotted the i's and crossed the t's, and to the Parliament's non-Executive bills unit. The clerks to the Local Government Committee, its committee members and the distinguished members of the superb Subordinate Legislation Committee are all to be thanked for their consideration and help with the bill. I also thank my advisers and SCOT-PEP, the researchers in my office who put up with me and all those who took part in the consultation and gave evidence to the committees. Thanks to their efforts, I am now able to ask Parliament to agree to the general principles of the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill.

I have a serious point of order. I have raised previously what I regarded as points of order, but I was ruled against by the Presiding Officer. I accepted those rulings because I assume—I think that standing orders will bear me out—that it is the job of the Presiding Officer to decide on what is and is not pertinent, what is trivial and what is worthy of further consideration. I put it to you, Presiding Officer, that what happened earlier this afternoon is not worthy of further consideration.

To ask the Scottish Executive what means of redress are available to taxi drivers whose passengers refuse to pay legitimately incurred fares. (S1O-6484)

I will get to the nub of the matter. Unfortunately, the City of Edinburgh Council has issued a publication for the taxi trade, which states: "if a driver decided to carry a passenger to a cash point, police station or the original pick up point they may well be guilty of an offence of confining that person against their will". Will the minister make it plain that, if someone refuses to pay a fare, that is an offence and that taxi drivers would be effecting a citizen's arrest should they decide to lock the taxi doors and take the person to the nearest police station?

Does the minister agree that he will find it much easier to meet his target of every primary school child being instructed in swimming if sufficient physical education specialists are recruited to teach in  primary schools?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given the sensitivity of the topic and the good will of members towards the amendment's intention to open up the process of public appointments, would it be possible for the Parliament to state at some point in the debate that it would like to have sight of the proposed code of conduct before it passes into law?

Further to that point of order—

Further to the same point of order, Presiding Officer—

I realise that. Further to the letter on the topic that I have written, will you give us an assurance that although you are not bound to do so by the corporate body, you will ascertain the views of MSPs on this very sensitive issue of public service and its role in the corporate life of the Parliament before a decision is taken to award the contract outwith the public services, although I am sure that the Parliament would not wish to do that?

I asked about MSPs, not party groups.

Is the minister as confident as he was that Waverley station will be redeveloped? In October, he told me that the redevelopment of the station was one of the Executive's top priorities. He said that he saw no reason why it should not proceed by 2008. Today, a spokesperson for the SRA stated: "The plans are still at the development stage and we are looking at a number of options." Is the minister still as confident as he was when he replied to me in October that nothing will hold up the redevelopment of Waverley station, given its importance to the crossrail proposals and the Borders rail link?

I will support the motion and oppose the Executive's amendment because it is important that we should not be mealy-mouthed. The motion refers to the notion of justice in warfare. Justice is the concern of many of the organisations that are listed in the motion and it is why they will go on the march. They do not believe that a just war is being proposed. We must define justice in warfare, but the Geneva convention helped us to define some of the terms that are understood in societies and cultures throughout the world, so I will go along with those terms. If we go to war against Iraq, the Geneva convention will be shattered. Even with the sanction of the United Nations, it is doubtful  whether we will live up to the lessons that were learned following the second world war, but I will leave that to the side and deal with how the action will be perceived elsewhere, which Lloyd Quinan discussed. We should be acutely anxious about the consequences that any war on Iraq will have on relations between the west and the Islamic world.

I will let Phil Gallie intervene after I have developed my point. The Scottish Parliament cannot make foreign policy, but it has standing in the world, which Phil Gallie and I discussed yesterday. We therefore have a responsibility to articulate Scottish opinion and to add to world opinion; Scottish opinion has not been articulated in the declarations that have been made by the heads of state in Europe. I know from friends who live on the continent that the same unease is felt throughout the continent about the injustice of the proposed war. It is important that we hear the perspective of Scots Muslims. That is why Parliament should articulate what Scots of all persuasions think. Two nights ago, I spoke to Scots Muslim friends of mine who are concerned that young Muslims will think that the inequity of the treatment of Israel in comparison with that of Iraq means that the west intends an attack on Islam.

I am sure that Phil Gallie and I will pursue the issues, because both of us have sincere intentions. I am adamant that the Parliament must make heard the voice of Scotland, including the voice of Scots Muslims, on the matter. Muslim parents are concerned that young Scots Muslims will be affected by what they see in the attitudes of Muslims throughout the world, which is that a great injustice is being done to Islam.

I would be interested to hear Mr Gallie's explanation of what leads him to believe that a tyrannical regime, hated by its own people, would feel pressure to capitulate to the demands of the west simply because there is a threat. If there is a threat, will they not fight to the last man because they know that they do not have the support of their people?

It is absolutely obvious that this Parliament cannot make foreign policy, but does the Executive not feel up to endorsing the stance of the Church of Scotland's church and nation committee and the Roman Catholic Church's justice and peace commission, which will join the march against an unjust war?

The member should concede that Alasdair Morgan did not say how he would redistribute wealth via the taxation system from those who have too much to those who do not have enough.

Until John Scott's speech, the statement in the debate with which I found most accord was Peter Peacock's assertion that there is no perfect system of taxation. He is absolutely right on that issue—I am glad that the minister sees the truth. However, we should not stop there and—thank goodness—John Scott did not. He made a fantastic nationalist speech about the inherent dignity of Scots and, I think, their inherent genetic superiority. He waxed lyrical about how well we have done in other parts of the world that have excellent fiscal systems to support all that entrepreneurialism. All Robin Harper's motion asks for is the imaginative blue-sky thinking that John Scott  outlined—I see Robin Harper nodding—which is absolutely terrific. The motion simply asks the Executive to investigate land value taxation. Although I hate to say this, Maureen Macmillan's speech, which outlined all the possible downsides of such a tax, made me quite sad. The Parliament was supposed to take time to investigate new ideas and new ways of doing things. Just because we have not done something in the past does not mean to say that we cannot do it in the future. We should not be so negative in our approach to this new system of taxation. Contrary to the Tories' fears, land value taxation does not necessarily mean that Tory supporters—there must be some to whom the tax would apply—would be required to pay more tax. Land value taxation would mean that people would pay taxation in a different, fairer way. That is why I think it is a great idea that the Executive should investigate the proposal. To be quite serious, we have got to the stage where Scotland's universities are under fantastic threat because of the way in which our tax system and social service delivery are interlinked. We seem no longer to be able to ensure that money is spent on providing for the next generation the quality, standard and equity in public services that should be taken for granted at this stage of the 21 st century. It would be worth while to investigate a system that promises to redistribute more fairly. I make no apologies for saying that. My former colleague, Alasdair Morgan, said that there is not much wrong with Scotland's system of taxation, but that the problem is that Scotland has no fundamental control over it. He is right in the latter statement, but quite wrong in the former. When people live in abject poverty in blankets on Princes Street while other folk live off the fat of the land and do not pay the income tax that they should, there is something wrong with our tax system. Therefore, I support Robin Harper's motion. The Executive should look into the future to see if there is any other way in which we could prevent land values from being distorted. In rural parts of Scotland, such distortion can discriminate against people and cause fantastic rural poverty, but the issue is equally important in a city such as Edinburgh, where land values can mean that house prices and property prices are utterly distorted. In turn, that means that a community or a society can be distorted because there is not that mixture of people to form a community in which, theoretically, people would help one another. I would like to see anything that would investigate an evening-out of land values in Edinburgh in particular. That is why I want members to support Robin Harper's motion.  I also support the Liberal Democrats' reasonable proposal that there should be trials. As one would expect, Donald Gorrie outlined the reasonable man's way of trialling: perhaps in a whole district, a part of a city or a rural area. That is very sensible, good thinking. Of course there would have to be variations in the application of LVT. Robin Harper said that there were variations in how the principle was applied throughout the world—and why not? There are different conditions throughout the world. Events, dear boy, change people's priorities, and so they should. The Parliament must not sit on its laurels and get dug into a taxation system simply because it has been used for a long time. For goodness' sake, let us think about alternatives. As Peter Peacock said, we do not have a perfect system.

I was interested in the minister's point about the setting of national standards leading to a diminution of local democracy. How does that sit with the existence of the uniform business rate?

In order to clear up any confusion about whether discussions on negotiations took place when the Deputy First Minister met the Deputy Prime Minister and Nick Raynsford, will the minister tell the Parliament what alternatives to John Prescott's "shape of policy", as I think it was described, were proposed by the Deputy Prime Minister and his colleague?

I speak as the convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, so my remarks do not apply to the policy implications of the Executive or Opposition amendments in the group. I inform Parliament that amendments 67 and 80 would put back into the bill two broad powers that troubled the Subordinate Legislation Committee at stage 1. I heard what the minister said about consultation, but nit-pickers "r" us. We had the powers removed at stage 2 and we are concerned that they are to be replaced. Amendment 67 will give ministers wide scope to modify access rights under section 2 and to modify landowners' obligations under section 3. Amendment 80 also relates to the bill's fundamental purposes. In effect, it will allow ministers to decide how much or how little land will be subject to access rights. The powers go to the heart of the bill. In fact, the Subordinate Legislation Committee's stage 1 report questioned whether such core provisions should be open to alteration by ministers, even by affirmative instrument. The Subordinate Legislation Committee has had an understanding with the Executive that it will be told in advance about any substantial changes to subordinate legislation provisions at stage 3 of a bill. Indeed, a letter from the Executive in December told the committee that no new subordinate legislation powers were envisaged for the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill at stage 3. It is unfortunate that, in the past couple of days, we have found out that the substantial provisions that were removed are to be reinstated. I hope that the minister is as concerned and disappointed about that as the committee members are.

Do the proposed new regulations encompass mobile homes?

After thanking Johann Lamont for putting private rented accommodation on the Parliament's agenda, I would like to ask, "If the minister is going to meet Pauline McNeill, can I go with her, please?" I would also like to talk to Des McNulty about HMOs. There is a specific problem with HMOs in parts of Edinburgh that were previously known as the leafy suburbs—most unfairly, as they were just full of decent people trying to live in a decent area and bring their children up decently. Those people are now finding that the standards of communal behaviour, which Trish Godman referred to, have fallen. After the HMO legislation had been in place for a year, a review was carried out. That indicates that  there is a need to include tenancy management issues in the registration procedure. I agree with that. I also back the extension of HMO regulations to ensure that the number of HMOs in a given stair or street is limited. For example, there might be a maximum of two per stair. Such an arrangement should take account of past problems with tenant behaviour and resolution of neighbour issues and might ensure that residential areas such as the ones that I have described are not dominated by one particular type of property. It would also help to ensure that mixed neighbourhoods with families, elderly residents, students and others can exist and that the people in them can get along as a community. We must take measures to ensure that a sense of community is once again injected into city living. I would also like to raise with the minister the issue of mobile homes. It may seem strange, but in Scotland's boom city we have a bit of a problem with mobile homes, and I foresee that the problem will grow, because rents in Edinburgh are so high. I know of one instance of a private landlord who condemned a mobile home on his site. He then bought the mobile home, did it up and relet it. However, no subsequent checks are carried out to ensure that such properties are done up to a suitable quality or that the reasons why they were condemned have been removed. There is a park homes charter, but it can only make recommendations. There are legal requirements for mobile homes, under the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960 and the Mobile Homes Act 1983, but there are lots of loopholes. For example, there are no minimum fire regulations. Mobile homes are not subject to the HMO regulations, so there is tremendous potential for overcrowding. On a mobile home site, home owners have no legal power to complain about the condition of other homes on the site, even if the value of their own home is at risk. Environmental officers to whom I have spoken—particularly those involved in the outskirts of Edinburgh—have said that their hands are tied. I put it to the minister that some attention should be paid to that specific problem.

Hear, hear.

I respect the member's position, but I am unsure about what she would consider to be a just war. What rationale must there be before she would consider a war to be just?

Will the member give way?

I concur with Elaine Smith's final remarks. Although the debate has been excellent, its main interest has been that opposition to the SNP's motion began as outright objection to the Scottish Parliament discussing the matter at all. That opposition now appears to consist of taking exception to the final sentence of the SNP's motion. I suggest that, under standing orders, it might be possible to release some Labour party members from supporting an amendment with which they are not comfortable by having a textual amendment of the motion, even at this stage, given the importance of the matter that we are discussing. Like all other members, I look to the UN to give a lead in relation to our conscience, our information and our knowledge and in setting down what will amount to international law. Under its charter, if the United Nations Security Council succeeds in getting nine votes for the position of the United States—it will be the United States that takes the lead in that body—that position will be recognised internationally as being legal. However, it will not necessarily be right. We are determining the correct way in which we should proceed. We are considering how we can express opinion in Scotland in a consistent, decent and humane way. Once the issue moves into the hands of the Security Council, after Hans Blix has reported, we would be foolish to imagine that the same politicking that persuaded Russia to support resolution 1441 will not go on. Since resolution 1441 was passed, the membership of the Security Council has changed. Angola, Chile, Germany, Pakistan and Spain have joined the Security Council. It is possible that Angola, Germany and Pakistan—never mind Chile—would find it difficult to support a resolution in the United Nations that created an international precedent for it to be legally correct to wage war on a state, rather than on a regime. The Parliament has not answered the question whether the proposed military action is against the state of Iraq or against the regime of Saddam Hussein. Let us consider what would happen if the former were true. Let us assume that there is a war, that Saddam Hussein is deposed, that a popular president or leader of the country is elected in Iraq and that he decides to pursue the same sort of weapons policy that the independent state of Israel is pursuing. Would the United Nations feel that it could again move in to remove such an arsenal from Iraq? As we can see from North Korea today, the one does not necessarily follow the other.  If we do not exercise our own judgment on whether the decisions taken by the Security Council are correct, the result in the middle east will certainly be to spread and deepen the hatred of western countries that is already being expressed. Young Arabs, who simply want to be like young people all over the world, now refuse to buy American goods and tell their parents not to co-operate with American companies. That will soon extend to United Kingdom companies, because the United Kingdom is seen as an adjunct to America. I have one final question, which I hope someone from the Labour benches will answer. Tom McCabe said that today was not the time for us to debate this matter. When would that time be?

Will the member give way?

For the purposes of clarity, will Mr Scott repeat what he has just said? He made the same point that I raised in an earlier debate on Iraq—that there is a difference between the Security Council of the United Nations and the entire body of the United Nations. Is that the point that he is making?

Does the member agree that, although the United Kingdom has responsibility at present for pursuing foreign and defence policy, this Parliament, as the most representative forum in Scotland, has a moral obligation to express opinion in Scotland?

I too thank Keith Harding for bringing this issue to the attention of Parliament once again because, unfortunately, it is an issue that just does not go away. I speak in my capacity as the president of the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. Rhona Brankin and I launched a questionnaire, which was unique in terms of health care surveys in that it was organised by women, all of whom had experienced the breast cancer service because they had been sufferers. They questioned as many women as they possibly could in 2000 on their experience of the breast cancer regime in this country. Their findings have to be listened to, because they are not theoretical; they are a record of what happened to them as individuals.  One issue that came through clearly was the postcode lottery that Shona Robison referred to. However, it is not that there is a postcode lottery for treatment: once someone gets to the treatment stage it is usually uniformly good. It is getting to the treatment that involves a postcode lottery. One suggestion from the survey was that the Government must never let up on the information that is provided for all women, which means public campaigns every so often and money for information campaigns. It is important that women, particularly women in rural areas—the survey bore that out—are well aware of treatments, where they can be obtained and the frequency of clinics, so that they take advantage of the available services. I would not say that referral from general practitioners is lacking, but it is not uniform. Considering mandatory guidelines for GPs to follow might be sensible, because GPs still have differences of opinion about how to deal initially with a woman who complains of vague symptoms. I will say no more than that, because I do not want to castigate any group of people who are concerned with breast cancer care. As for the general service provision and back-up support from the voluntary sector in Scotland,  when the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign's survey was taken to international conferences in Europe and other places, we discovered that Scotland is way ahead of almost everywhere on information dissemination among patients and in the voluntary and statutory sectors. Perhaps a few lessons might be learned. I urged the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care's predecessor to examine that survey and to incorporate its findings into anything the Government promotes in Scotland. I will pick up where Rhona Brankin left off on HRT and the fact that some women are scared and put off going for that first vital examination that might lead to earlier diagnosis and a less traumatic regime of treatment. When I inquired of my doctor—I have a personal interest—whether the HRT low-oestrogen pills had made any difference in my case and what I should say if people asked me about the matter in general, my doctor said that, first, what was involved was a particular trial of a particular brand of a particular type of HRT treatment, so drawing too wide a conclusion from that would be unwise and would certainly be scary for women. I am pleased to see the deputy minister nodding her head in agreement. I am glad that we are debating breast cancer again. We have debated it before, but it cannot be debated enough.

I am glad that Alex Neil introduced the debate by referring to the inadequacies of the Bain report. If anyone doubts those inadequacies, they should think back to the fire in the Cowgate. We have proof in this city. The Bain report lost credibility on that Saturday night. Had the manning levels suggested by Bain been in place, the Cowgate and much beyond would have burned to the ground. Bain's recommendations also rely heavily on the availability of firefighters on their rest days but, in practice, many firefighters would be ruled out on a Saturday evening because they do the sort of things that other folk do on a Saturday night. The basic argument advanced by Bain would not have worked for the Cowgate. I am not an expert, but I have spoken to those who are—the firefighters—and they tell me that the general point is that the Bain report is London-centric. Not many of them are nationalists; they are just firefighters. They know that nobody is in the City of London at night, so it is true that the night rescues that were referred to do not apply there, but they do apply in Scottish cities. We cannot go down the road of having the manning levels, particularly at night, suggested by Bain.  In the time available, I also want to lay to rest a couple of myths. We hear about four and four—firefighters working four days on and four days off. The four days off are not four days, but three days, because the first is spent sleeping after two long night shifts. Firefighters work a 42-hour week, which is a lot longer than most public servants. The other myth is that Bain has recommended a generous settlement. He has not. As Alex Neil said, Bain said that there should be an increase in the total wages bill. If retained firefighters are brought up to the same level of payment as the regular firefighters, as they should be, there will not be enough left for firefighters of anything over 10 years' standing. The Bain report is seriously flawed. With all due respect, minister, we should not give it any credibility.

Cathie Craigie's suggestion is the most sensible route to follow. I ask the minister to remember that she recognises that not everyone needs the best-quality digital hearing aid. Some people need only traditional hearing aids, but I know of instances in which people cannot be supplied with either type of hearing aid. Will the minister take up that point?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for taking a minute or two to think about the ruling that you have just made. Have you created a precedent? If a committee requests that the Parliament consider a motion, can that be ruled out of order because the issue was not dealt with at the correct time?

Presiding Officer, had you believed that Mr Robertson—I mean Mr Robinson—

From as far back as I am, they all look the same. Presiding Officer, had you decided that Mr Robson was in error in arguing the case in the way in which he did, he would have been out of order.

You have created a precedent.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that another important way of ensuring that the people of the EU do not become disenchanted by the idea of Europeanism, would be to vote no to the euro? That issue undercuts all the constitutional questions that we are talking about.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has held any discussions with, or issued any guidelines to, national health service trusts regarding the inclusion in public-private partnership agreements of hospital ancillary facilities such as parking, television and telephones. (S1O-6013)

I genuinely thank the minister for that reply because, when I raised the matter with him in September, there were no plans to revise the guidance. Does he think that the Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust has breached the general guidelines that have been issued in regard to what it charges patients for car parking? It charges £10 per day, compared to the daily rate of £1 at Perth royal infirmary. I assure the minister that I am not being selective in my comparisons; I have investigated all the health boards in Scotland. The minister will find, once he gets into the subject, that the television payment rate of £3.50 per day at Dumfries royal infirmary compares to £1.50 per hour at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh. Will he comment?

I, too, wish the new minister well in his post. I imagine that he will carry out his role extremely well, given his experience on picket lines in the past. Has the minister had time to give any thought to the very interesting suggestion from Bill Spiers of the Scottish Trades Union Congress? None of us would be irresponsible enough to break into the middle of the negotiations, such as they are at present, but, on the other hand, there was just a germ of a new idea and new thinking in the suggestion.

I appreciate the minister giving way when time is short. Rather than saying that there is a greater problem in rural Scotland, will the minister accept that there is the same growing problem in Edinburgh as there is in the south-east of England, because we can no longer provide housing for people with socially responsible jobs in the community?

That is a good point.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I may have missed your instructions. Are we discussing the move to the Hub?

Can we go back, please?

I simply want to inquire which budget heading the move to the Hub will come under. Will it be under the heading of the Scottish Parliament project or another subject heading? Further to that, if anyone is found to have contributed to the additional cost, will they be pursued for recompense?

rose—

I can hardly add to what Dennis Canavan and John McAllion have said in support of amendment 69. Although those of us who oppose exceptional attachment orders have lost the battle against them—I accept that—we thought that we had won the fight against the  inhumanity of warrant sales. As long as the Executive maintains an exceptional attachment order that will militate against the interests of the children of the poorest of the poor, the Parliament should not pass the bill.

I shall take only a minute, because I do not mean to comment on the policy content of the bill. I speak as the convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. My committee and I want to point out that the Executive's timetabling of the bill gave the committee inadequate time to consider stage 2 amendments. The committee was able only to consider the bill briefly yesterday and the Executive's memorandum arrived only the evening  before that. As a result, the committee has been unable to produce a paper report in time to inform the Parliament in general and on this debate in particular. I would therefore like to record the committee's unhappiness at being put in that position, particularly as the bureau had agreed to a paper setting out reasonable timetables for my committee's scrutiny as recently as September. I appreciate that lots of people do not understand the workings of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, but I have to inform the Parliament that when regulations touch as closely on people's lives as do those that will be made under this bill, we take a very close interest in them. We have not had time to scrutinise the bill properly.

If you would like, Presiding Officer, I will be John Swinney—he is not here either. I express my gratitude to Sarah Boyack for lodging the motion and I thank my fellow southsider Angus MacKay for tackling what he described, somewhat disparagingly, as the parochial point of view. From where I am sitting, there is nothing parochial about south Edinburgh. I will think globally by reminding members of the attraction of New York Central station, which is an integral part of the city, its society, its culture, its tourism and its day-to-day life. We should aim for that for Edinburgh. It can be done. Franco's station in Barcelona, which was in a state of ruin—its condition was much worse than the present state of Waverley—was completely refurbished for the 1992 Olympics. Its refurbishment was considered to be central to the drive to ensure that people saw Barcelona on the world stage. Members should see that station now. I point out that the Barcelona refurbishment was done quickly. We must concentrate on the urgency of the issue. We should not wait until 2008, when it appears that all sorts of things will happen. We must start to put in the services that will get people on the railways, keep them there and keep Edinburgh's economy turning over. It is self-evident that we need to facilitate the new services to the Borders and the airport. We must get those projects through the planning stage as quickly as possible. It is also self-evident that the Strategic Rail Authority must prioritise Waverley. Kenny MacAskill asked who the lead agency would be. About three weeks ago, Iain Gray told me that the SRA would be the lead agency, which was very good. He saw no reason why things should not be scheduled for 2008, but he did not say who would pay. Kenny MacAskill asked the right question. Will the SRA pay, if it is nominated as the lead agency?  Kenny MacAskill was sensible in suggesting that the SRA should have an office in Scotland. The SRA needs an office in Edinburgh, because construction firms in Edinburgh are experiencing huge difficulties with the supply of skilled tradesmen in the local labour market. To do the job, we need an organisation that is on top of the local market situation. That suggestion is a good one, which we should push. Let us not throw the baby out with the bath water. We have a responsibility to maintain our world heritage site status. Waverley could be a beautiful station. We should investigate keeping operations under the glass roof. That can be done—it was done with the Reichstag and with Scottish Widows up the road. I am told that similar attempts are being made at the bottom of Holyrood Road, but I am waiting to see. We start with something good and we can make it better. Development to the west of the station should not even be contemplated; we should develop to the east, by using the ground off Market Street. That is my plea and I hope that someone listens to it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am sure that it cannot be in order for any member to suggest that my husband was appointed by Michael Forsyth and then endorsed by Donald Dewar on anything other than merit.

Sometimes.

How will the minister address the problem of homelessness and lack of housing in Edinburgh? Although the situation is quite different from that in the crofting counties, the minister will agree that the average price of a house in Edinburgh is £130,000. The problem is so bad that the police are suggesting that there needs to be a weighting system to allow policemen to live in the city. The minister needs to address this problem.

Will the Deputy First Minister tell the Parliament whether the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has joined his ministerial working group? I was surprised to hear that COSLA had not been invited to do so at the outset. Will the minister assure the Parliament that the Executive will make it plain to the office of the Deputy Prime Minister that we deprecate his approaches in respect of the fire service review to local government in England but not in Scotland?

I think that the minister said in reply to Adam Ingram's first question that the Executive means to require local authorities to adopt adequate and suitable waste management policies. Is he willing to require Midlothian Council to act on the planning permission that has already been granted to a company for what I am told is a proposed high-tech waste management scheme? In co-operation with the City of Edinburgh Council, that scheme might kills two birds with one stone: it would give Midlothian an adequate treatment centre and Edinburgh access to something other than the proposed landfill into which Midlothian would otherwise have to put its waste.

To ask the Scottish Executive what stage the discussions with the lead agency for the redevelopment of Waverley railway station have reached. (S1O-5703)

The minister will know that a number of people are anxious to know the plan for Waverley station, given its strategic importance to transport in Scotland. Does the Executive have a timetable for the redevelopment of the station? Is it in a position to order that timetable? If it is not, who is?

I also associate myself with the Executive motion. Its heart is in the right place and it has put its money where its mouth is. Unfortunately, not quite enough money to overturn the steady drip of venom and distortion that is fed, not only through badly edited newspaper articles, but through nightly television news. For example, if one listens closely to how news of the Sangatte camp is reported, the reporter makes the assumption that it is a bad thing that refugees should have come via that camp to this country. No attempt is made to analyse who came and why they came. No attempt is made to analyse why they would want to stay here, but I will return to that later. The Executive's £1 million will not be enough to change attitudes in the way that everyone in the chamber wants. What Michael Matheson said—and what Bill Butler said eloquently—must be listened to: it is local organisations that can use the minister's advertising campaign to kick-start a change in attitudes. Those organisations must be funded and listened to. If anyone wants to evaluate the £1 million—incidentally, that is less than well-known comedians get for advertising the Lotto—ask the people who organise the neighbourhood anti-racist groups. They will tell you whether the kick start has achieved its objective. I understand that it is difficult for the Scottish Executive to disown the Home Secretary. Behind the scenes, however, he should be advised that his choice of language has done harm. The Executive is trying to create positively the sort of atmosphere in which people who are refugees in this country for a short while, and for whom  English is not a first language, will not have their confidence swept away because of reported tales of what the Home Secretary has said. We all know that and it does us no good to ignore it. When someone of good standing, such as Robert Brown, says the sort of thing that David Blunkett was trying to say about the use of English in the home and the access that it can give a refugee or immigrant to the services that we have to offer, and not one of us thinks that there is anything wrong with that, then it must be that there is something wrong with David Blunkett, because when he talks about the use of English in the home of an immigrant family, we automatically assume that he has in mind the immigrant family whose children swamped schools in England. As Bill Butler pointed out, there is no such phenomenon in Scotland. We should not shy away from saying such things if they are the truth. I wanted to talk about the global market in people and their skills moving all over the place. Most Government ministers who are concerned with enterprise and the economy might use that language too. However, when the Home Secretary says that he has no sympathy with young people in their 20s who do not get back home and rebuild their country and their families, it undermines everything we say about a global economy and an inclusive society. I am a nationalist: I am supposed to want Scotland only for the Scots. I want Scotland for everybody who wants to come and live here. Therefore, I welcome the Executive's initiative to try to get rid of racism, but I warn ministers—they will need a lot more than £1 million.

Can the First Minister assure me that, as part of the programme to make Scotland a welcoming place and to ensure that we engage properly with the global technology marketplace, we will ensure that people in the far east are aware that they will be as welcome in Scotland as many of them believe themselves to be in silicon valley? I was astounded to discover that people in the far east prefer to go there because they think that it is a more welcoming place than Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what investigation has been undertaken into the effects on tourism and the economy of bus strikes in Edinburgh. (S1O-5637)

I appreciate that the problem might appear to be a local issue. However, given the importance of the smooth running of the capital's economy to the entire Scottish economy, I ask the minister to join me in urging the management of Lothian Buses to spell out its demands for productivity changes, if the meeting that is taking place now does not result in an acceptable offer. I am told that those demands are the reason for the drivers having voted against the package that is on the table.

I, too, was tempted by the Tory motion, because everything is in it except the kitchen sink. However, I will support the amendment that my colleague Kenny MacAskill has lodged, because it recognises where the Government's plans and spending review and the Tory's concerns hit the buffers. Before anybody accuses me of talking only about constitutional niceties, I point out that I am referring to the powers that reside not with the Executive, but with what has during the debate increasingly been called the national Government in Westminster. As evidence I refer to a written answer that the minister gave me on 18 September 2002. He said: "Neither the Scottish Executive, nor any of its executive agencies, has carried out any detailed study focused on determining the comparative suitability of Glasgow and Edinburgh airports for a hub operation."— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 18 September 2002; p1607.]  For goodness' sake why not? It is pathetic management of our economic development for the Executive not to have foreseen that it would have to come down on one side or the other and determine what its airport policy was to be. Is it going to be what is outlined in the strategic rail services review as determined by Westminster? When is the Executive going to decide that there is a priority for its spending review and for economic development? I do not know whether to feel mad at the Executive or sorry for it for not deciding. It knows perfectly well that there is a limit to its powers and that the decision on the airport will be determined not by it, but by what I would call its superiors in Westminster—I do not doubt that the Executive would call them its senior partners. However, whatever the reason for the lack of a decision, will Lewis Macdonald undertake now to say what is likely to be the better option for Scotland's  economy—a hub airport centred on Glasgow or one centred on Edinburgh? The Executive cannot afford to hang around on the matter. Just before I press the case for the capital—as members would expect me to—will the minister consider what John Bowis, the Tory MEP, is saying today. Because of the strategic air services review, he is saying that there is the possibility of a central Scotland airport at Airth. We screwed up on that once before and missed the opportunity. Although it is unlikely that the minister will foresee a huge economic benefit to outweigh the environmental concerns of starting from scratch with a central airport, I still think that the minister should consider it. However, the hub airport should be at Edinburgh for the reasons that are outlined in the strategic air services review. Edinburgh airport is in the right place when we consider the development of the business park—the fastest growing business park in the UK, never mind Scotland. There is room for a second, close-spaced, parallel runway. Believe it or not, there is potential for a reduction in noise pollution, because the two runways could have alternate take-off and landing directions. That is the way that I read it. I have concentrated on airports, but the minister mentioned that it was in his power to reorder priorities. Will he listen to what James Douglas-Hamilton said about Edinburgh and congestion? The minister says that his own studies have identified congestion as the primary concern of transport policy and strategy in Scotland. Instead of concentrating on the rail link to the airport, will the minister concentrate on moving working people and tourists around within Edinburgh? Iain Gray has suggested that we may know by 2008 whether there will be a rapid rail transit in Edinburgh. We need to know much sooner than that, and we need Government help to move people around within Edinburgh. After that, the priority will be the rail link to the Borders, to ensure that people can get in to work in Edinburgh. The other big barrier to economic progress is the labour market problems that Edinburgh is experiencing. There are priorities other than airport links.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Can you rule that, should the Deputy First Minister inadvertently speak at a party-political meeting in his capacity as Deputy First Minister, he would be out of order to refer to policy that might be enacted by the Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to increase the number of physical education student places. (S1O-5582)

I thank the minister and inform him that I spoke to the director of physical education at the University of Edinburgh this morning. He assured me that, if the minister can talk turkey to his friend the Minister for Finance and Public Services about assistance for the University of Edinburgh, the best thing that the minister could do, given the recent reports on the poor health standards of Scottish schoolchildren, is to allow the university to introduce a greater number of places particularly for teachers who wish to specialise in physical education at primary school level. If he decides that that might be a reasonable course of action, perhaps he will refer it to the physical education review group. At the same time—

Will the minister also review the curriculum needs in schools?

Will the minister be a bit more precise on the question of targets and the delivery of service with particular regard to sport? My heart lifted this morning when I heard the Minister for Finance and Public Services—I was there to hear him—saying that the Executive would double spending on sport. I also read that there are to be more resources in the active primary schools programme, but unless the Executive has a much better target than 60 trained PE teachers coming out of Scotland's one professional institution each year, it will not achieve those benchmarks.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Surely the debate is about the spending review and not about the drinking habits of affable fellow members?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will introduce guidance for local authorities and NHS boards entering into any form of public-private partnership to ensure that charges levied by contractors are set at a level which takes account of social responsibility as well as solely commercial considerations. (S1O-5519)

Because he is glad that I am not going to mention the embarrassing leakage of money to the PPP at Edinburgh royal infirmary, the minister might be prepared to think again about the tightness of the guidance. For example, does he think it fair that the new Edinburgh royal infirmary has £10 a day parking fees, 50p a minute phone charges and £1.50 per hour charges for the television and internet? Does that sound like good value for PPP?

I regret that some of the things that have been said about the amendment have been said. Jim Wallace was quite wrong to imply that, because the chamber does not have responsibility for military matters, we have no responsibility at all for humanity and for the ties of friendship across the world. Brian Monteith said that the SNP should have given part of its day tomorrow for the debate and that a demarcation line should have been drawn between discussion of the past and discussion of the future. In their homes, our fellow Scots who sent us here will not observe such demarcation lines. They will discuss the past year and they will discuss the coming year. That will in no way diminish the solidarity and sympathy that they have with the American people today. It is  impossible to discuss what has happened over the past year without looking at the choices that are available to the United Kingdom and the United States in the coming year. There is a special relationship.

I am sorry, I do not want to reiterate my point about the demarcation lines—the topic is indivisible. What happened over the past year will condition what happens over the next year. The holistic nature of the debate and its varied speeches represent Scotland and what we want our friends in America to know of our thoughts and feelings towards them. As I said, we have a special relationship. Sometimes at the level of Government, that relationship is a little less special than it might be. However, as we have heard, there is a continuing relationship at the level of communities. The ties of history, language and modern culture—let us hear it for Dolly Parton—are unbreakable. The function of good old friends is, in sensitive situations, to be able to say the things that others may not. Old friends can hold up the mirror that we might, as Burns said, "see oursels as others see us!" How will the action of the United Kingdom Government and the United States Government be seen by our other friends throughout the world? Of course Americans are our friends, but we also have friends in the middle east, the far east, in Muslim countries and in the southern hemisphere. Those friends do not necessarily agree with the terms that, so far, have been set down by White House spokesmen regarding the action of the United States and the United Kingdom against Iraq. We must consider how the opinions expressed by Donald Rumsfeld and others will be interpreted elsewhere in the world, where we have friends who are just as valuable. Will those friends understand, for example, that a justification for attacking Iraq—breaching Iraq's sovereignty—inside its borders is that that country has ignored United Nations resolutions? What about Israel? Israel has refused to observe United Nations resolutions, but no one talks of attacking Israel. "Ah," the apologists say, "Israel is a democracy, but Iraq is a dictatorship." What about Pakistan? Pakistan is not a democracy. Pakistan has nuclear weapons under the control of a military dictator, but no one would advocate attacking Pakistan. Our friends elsewhere in the world will be  concerned that more devastation might be visited on innocent Iraqi men, women and children. Unfortunately, I cannot support the SNP amendment, because it seeks to find some justification. Like John McAllion, I cannot agree with that. However, I may have misheard John Swinney. Perhaps the SNP can clarify whether the mandate in the amendment refers to a resolution of the whole General Assembly of the United Nations or just the Security Council. That may appear to be nit-picking, but it is not if we bear in mind the views of our other friends throughout the globe.

Having set up and managed the first NHS patients helpline, I should put on record my support for the concept of NHS 24. However, the minister might have to take account of the fact that GPs in Aberdeen are a little underwhelmed by the way that it is working so far. The concept itself is not to blame and I ask him to ensure that, in reviewing the service, he looks back at the original standards that were set 10 years ago. By doing so, we might be able to get around the problem of nurse recruitment.

I want to follow other members and state my gratitude to Karen Gillon for putting this subject before Parliament. As legislators, we must realise that there is no quick fix to this problem. Paul Martin mentioned one or two legal remedies that might be sought, and I hope that the minister will comment on those suggestions. The Parliament must create a framework of social, legal and other policies that might make it easier to change attitudes or behaviour. That is what we are trying to do. One or two other people have referred to the fact that this is not just a problem of firefighters, bus drivers or ambulance men; it is not even about a specific form of public disorder. It is a whole attitude towards or lack of social responsibility, and that cannot be changed overnight. On the other hand, the Parliament provides the forum in which we discuss how we might tackle the matter. I add my remarks to those of Angus  MacKay. He and I take the same approach to what is happening in Edinburgh. Both of us take a huge pride in the city we represent and we are horrified that there are areas in the city where the fire service cannot go without a police escort. That is horrendous in social terms. It is also poor quality in operational terms when we know that the police do not have extra people lying around to accompany a fire truck. It is a waste of resources and money. I will keep my remarks short. We all share a sense of horror and a sense of urgency. We must start tackling the situation. I regret to say that, in this instance, I disagree with something that the Executive has already decided, and that is to pack in public service broadcasting. I do not say that because I still have a family interest in that trade, but there is a role for the attitude-changing mechanism of television. If we know that children behave badly because of what influences them on television and in video games, then for goodness' sake, the good guys can start influencing them as well. If we think back 20 years to the anti-AIDS campaign that was run on television and in the mass media, we recognise that awareness can be raised quickly and we can do something to change attitudes. We will have to do that quickly. I ask the minister to consider public service broadcasting. We cannot expect police and fire officers to visit every school in Scotland to start undoing the neglect of today's parents and grandparents in social education. I am part of the me generation and we are to blame in that we have not instilled in our children an understanding of the respect that is carried merely by being a public service worker. We have told them nonsense about having to earn respect. Nonsense! If someone is a firefighter or an ambulance man, they have already earned respect. Children have to learn the difference. I did not mean to lecture too much, but it is off my chest now. We can hardly sit here and pontificate about how much we value public service workers, particularly firefighters, without saying—as Angus MacKay said—that we should consider how we prove that we value them through how we, as a society, reward them. I certainly believe that the Fire Brigades Union should be supported by the Parliament in calling for an independent inquiry into the worth of firefighters and their wage levels. We could do that as a Parliament. That is not going to upset anyone in London, is it? As well as that, one or two of the suggestions that Margaret Smith made should be taken on board. They were practical remedies and I am happy to give them my support.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to introduce a certificate in the management of drug misuse in conjunction with the Royal College of General Practitioners in Scotland. (S1O-5428)

I press the minister to move on the issue as quickly as possible. The National Assembly for Wales and the Westminster Parliament have adopted the certificate. It is entirely reasonable that GPs in Scotland should have the same access to the required training, because a huge percentage of people who present for primary care services are suffering from drug abuse.

The minister referred to finding the best way. Will he explain whether his objection to the way that was outlined by Tommy Sheridan is that, at £174 million per annum, it will cost too much money or that it is the wrong way to collect that money? I suggest to the minister that there is a simple way of doing that: the notional value of £1.60 could be put on each school meal that is provided and that could be reclaimed in tax from parents who can afford to pay it.

Is the minister aware of the practical elimination of child prostitution in respect of girls that resulted from the  establishment of a tolerance zone in Edinburgh? If I am successful in lodging an amendment to the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982, to allow local authorities to do legally what Edinburgh did successfully but informally, will the minister look kindly on that measure?

I was prepared to be guided by you, Presiding Officer, on whether I should declare a vested interest. To ask the Scottish Executive whether its policy on social inclusion is meeting its targets. (S1O-5381)

Some of the targets—and outcomes—are admirable and I agree with them. However, I wonder whether the minister will take kindly a warning from me that many of those targets are being undermined by the inability of the  national health service to deliver the support and throughcare that is required for many people with disabilities. For example, constituents of mine have found, as post-polio syndrome sufferers, that the new way of throughputting therapy in the new Edinburgh royal infirmary means that they do not have the on-going care that would allow them to take a full part in normal social activity, which they want to do.

I am absolutely delighted to hear the minister restate the seriousness of the objectives that are outlined in the sports strategy and the physical activity task force strategy. However, the issue comes back to resources. We have to put our money where our mouth is. Will the Executive put more money into recruiting more PE teachers, sport co-ordinators and PE advisers? Will it spend more money through the local authorities to provide facilities and coaching?

Will the minister give way on that point?

Will the minister give way?

We should not underestimate character-building stuff, but we must consider the hard facts of the resourcing to provide the facilities in which characters will be built. Hutchison Vale football club in Edinburgh is trying to persuade the City of Edinburgh Council to release land to allow the football club to cater for more than 200 kids in that area of the town. Local authorities do not have the required resources for such initiatives. Ministers must consider strategically what they ask local authorities to do with ever-less money.

I am extremely glad that Mr Macintosh mentioned exercise on prescription, as I did not have time to refer to it in my speech. That programme points to the necessity of considering the resourcing of sport. The national health service is expected to bear the burden of that programme and often it is the private facilities that gain from it. The resourcing of that programme should be addressed as a matter of urgency.

Although I do not disagree with what Alex Johnstone has said about the role that leading sports people and other such role models play, I think that he is really talking about football, which is what most members have done. Talking only about football militates against an appreciation of all sports. Rather than tune in to the football programmes that masquerade as sports programmes, people should listen to John Beattie's programme on a Saturday morning on BBC Radio Scotland—I hope that the cheque will be in the post.

Can the Scottish Parliament get any better? We have had African dictators and now we are going to get heavyweight boxers. Are the member's proposals to be gender specific? Are girls to be encouraged to take up boxing?

It is not much of a motion that we are debating. It does not exactly get the blood leaping and the endorphins coursing through the system. Its somewhat unctuous tone betrays absolutely no indication that the Government understands the central priority—the core nature—of the debate that we are having. I am sorry that so few MSPs are in attendance. Members obviously thought that the debate was just about drillies, gym shoes, showers and things like that. However, it is about much more. We know that we are an aging society and that the cost of having unfit elderly people in the health service has a huge impact on our spending policies and on our economy. We also know that the population is decreasing and that people have to work longer. Unless they are fit, they cannot work longer and—once again—that has economic consequences. Those issues should be at the centre of any Government strategic plan for the development of the Scottish nation and of our  economy, rather than merely for the health of Scotland, although health is integral to the debate. I was rather scathing about the motion, because it does not mention motherhood and apple pie, but it does get a couple of things right, including bringing the physical activity task force into the debate. As far as I am concerned, we must place physical activity at the centre of our strategic thinking. Hard questions must be addressed because we seek an outcome, which we thought might be delivered through the health service budget, but which we are asking the education budget to deliver—a fitter, healthier community. The question is whether that has resource implications. We have had argy-bargy about whether PE teachers are needed in primary schools and whether there are a sufficient number of PE teachers in secondary schools. As far as I am concerned, we do not have sufficient numbers. For example, there are only 10 PE specialists in primary schools in the city of Glasgow. This is the most unfit nation with the most unfit industrial capital—or former industrial capital—in Europe. The children in Glasgow schools are not staring at a healthy, fit future; it will be an expensive future for the small number of people who will have to work to pay for the benefits that they will need when they are older. It makes sense to have primary teachers teaching their core subjects and a specialist core teacher available to primary school children. I know that Rhona Brankin disagrees with me. I also know that there was a fashionable belief in education staff rooms and think tanks and so on that Scottish teachers were excellent generalists. They are, but they are now burdened with a huge amount of administrative work. When Rhona Brankin, who is a lot younger than I am—I say that to gain her support—was teaching, there was not the same administrative burden.

I will continue with this point, then I will give way. Primary teachers who, like Rhona Brankin, took their pupils out running every day were thin on the ground. Even if primary teachers wanted to do that now, they could not, because of the amount of administration and the type of teaching structures that we have imposed on them. Therefore, specialists are needed more than ever.

The task of the PE specialist in  primary school should be broadened. There should be three tasks for the PE specialist in primary school: first, to teach the children; secondly, to teach the teachers; and thirdly, to teach the parents, so that they can take the lesson into the wider community through sports coaching and so on, to which Brian Monteith referred. That should be the new role for the PE specialist in primary schools. They need to be recruited now. The University of Edinburgh can find them and they stay the course, so the raw material is there with which to achieve the strategic objective. Several other things must be done. The Government must take responsibility for ensuring that if physical activity is to be seen as a core essential of the wider education of the person, that activity must be resourced. Report after report has been full of warm words. All PE teachers and all people interested in sport and physical activity will say that each report is usually followed—as we have already heard—by local authorities spending less money on their sport, leisure and recreation policies. Fewer people are becoming PE specialists. There has been the demise of local authority PE advisers. Warm words will not cut the mustard. We need to restate the objective, if for nothing else than to challenge the academic snobbery that has always made it impossible for PE to be taken seriously as a subject in schools and universities.

I appreciate that you have allowed me to go on, Presiding Officer. I gave way earlier. We will vote on the motion later. I make a plea that we should not cast aside the motion, the well-meaning amendments and all the rest of it. We should get serious, listen to the activity task force, see that it identifies the urgent need for PE specialists in schools and recruit them now.

I hate to take issue with Rhona Brankin on this, as she put much good work into what preceded the physical activity task force's report. However, she is wrong to imply that we can do without specialist PE teachers, especially in primary schools. Perhaps I can also help to get Brian Monteith off the hook on which he has impaled himself. I think that he is referring to the peripatetic primary school PE specialists who visit perhaps three to five schools in the course of a week.

Will the member give way?

There is no difficulty in recruiting PE teachers. The University of Edinburgh, which offers the only graduate PE course, regularly takes a complement of 100 students and the course is heavily oversubscribed. Between 95 and 100 per cent of the students stick with the course, which is a much higher percentage than for any other discipline. As I said, there is no difficulty in recruiting PE teachers, but the Government is reluctant to pay them.

Will the minister give way?

With reference to the review of PE in schools, will the minister tell us whether that will encompass both PE in primary schools and the number of sport graduates who come out of Scottish institutions?

Will the minister give way?

No cheers, thank you, Presiding Officer. I ask the minister to pay attention to what Robert Brown said about the physical activity task force, which is brimful of ideas, but needs a bit of money. I suggest to the minister that it is not enough to wait until people are elderly to tell them that they must exercise. Some of the budget could be used now to inform companies what they must do to encourage their workers to take exercise where they are working. I will see you in the gym later, minister.

On a point of order.

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, if it is shown that a minister inadvertently, or otherwise, has misled Parliament, is it not in order for that minister to correct that at the same meeting?

I regret that I was not able to take part in the debate and would like to pick up on some of the comments made by my colleague Stewart Stevenson. Are all the options, whether for the north-east or for elsewhere in Scotland, open to the Executive? How constrained will it be in its policy making after the publication of the House of Commons Home Affairs Committee's report and now that the Home Office is in chaos?

Will the minister expand on his answer? Will he give an assurance that if the quality commission reports that quality standards cannot be met under the present arrangement of contracting out cleaning services, he will renationalise those services and return them to the standard that they once had?

The motion refers to "the key role of the United Nations and the rule of international law." This debate is not only about the middle east. The repercussions of what is happening in what we call the middle east will be felt throughout the globe. In the future, when we, as a world society, face the human rights problems that are bound to arise because of the changing balance of power between east and west—by which I mean the far east and our west—we will need the United Nations. Therefore, it is imperative that the UN should not be degraded in the eyes of people all over the world as it is being degraded by the refusal of the Israelis to recognise the UN resolutions to which members have referred. America bears a large responsibility for what has happened because we all know the practicality of the situation. If it were known that America would not veto security council sanctions against Israel for its disobedience of UN resolutions, we could start the ball rolling. Ken Macintosh talked about a path to peace. If America did not use its Security Council veto, that would be part of that path to peace. Any pressure that the British Government or other permanent members of the security council can bring to bear on America must be brought now. The situation is urgent and serious, not only for the humanitarian aspects that Lloyd Quinan described, but for the global implications. There are other consequences. It is not merely that we diminish the UN at our peril. Yesterday, a Libyan friend told me that he had spoken on the phone to his family in Libya, who had expressed their part of the world's disgust at, and distrust of, British hypocrisy. He is a Libyan Scot who has lived here for ages and his family are young Scots. How do we build the sort of multicultural harmony of which we have talked if Arab people such as my Libyan friend know that our Government is discriminating against Arabs? That is how he sees the situation and I do not think that he should see it any other way. I do not think that there is any other interpretation of the part that our Government has played. It has tried to play a middle role but there is no middle role—illegality is being practised against the Palestinians and we should take their side. I spoke to Saudis yesterday, who told me that,  although some people here think that it would be impractical to have a boycott of Israeli goods as there was a boycott of South African goods, in the Gulf area there is an effective boycott of everything American. Young Gulf Arabs do not want to know about America and do not trust America. Does everyone understand the seriousness of having a whole region of the world totally opposed to the world's only superpower? I am sure that everyone in the chamber understands why we must take every possible step to break down the total distrust that is growing between what we call the middle east and the far east and the west. We are dividing the world. There are areas of the world that will look with dismay at our attitude towards the middle east, which is that our sanctions on Iraq are legitimate because it has ignored UN resolutions and has not allowed UN weapons inspectors but that it is fine for Israel to refuse to accept a UN fact-finding mission without the imposition of sanctions.

I regret that the only practising democracy in the middle east should have put itself in the same position as a despotic regime such as Iraq. That is the tragedy of the situation. We have to look at the situation as it is, not as it might once have been.

I am hearing from a colleague that Israel might not be a democracy, but I do not have time to investigate that just now. I am trying only to convey the feelings that have been expressed to me by Arab friends. Ken Macintosh talked about the paths to peace, but Israel must send the same signal that was sent by the UN. Israel must accept the right of the Palestinians to have a state side by side with Israel. Somebody somewhere has to say this sometime: the people who chose to emigrate to the settlements to make a better life for their families—and I appreciate that that might have been their only aim—may stay where they are, but they will be living in the state of Palestine, not the state of Israel.

On several occasions over the past six or seven years, the Arab League has made it absolutely plain that the countries that it represents recognise Israel's legitimacy and right to survive.

I regret that Kenneth Macintosh said that. I will regret it even more if he genuinely believes it, because there is no one in this Parliament who believes anything other than that no boundary—devolved or reserved—demarcates humanity. We are all concerned about humanity in this debate. It has nothing at all to do with the constitutional settlement.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive plans to introduce any new policy or programmes designed to promote social, racial and inter-community harmony. (S1F-1871)

I am delighted to hear that. Given the current situation, is the First Minister willing to accept responsibility for a more sharply focused anti-racism, anti-sectarianism campaign? Last night, the Finsbury Park synagogue was desecrated in a way that might well be copycatted. Although the Scottish Parliament is not responsible for immigration policies or for any of the other foreign policy attitudes that might underlie such behaviour—if they do not encourage such behaviour, they certainly do not prevent it—I ask the Executive to accept more responsibility, to ensure that no such copycat behaviour takes place in Scotland. I have lodged a motion on the subject, and I invite the Prime Minister, I mean the First Minister—oh gosh, that was Freudian.

I crave your indulgence, Presiding Officer. We all know about the current situation, and I ask the First Minister to set a precedent by putting his signature to a motion on anti-Semitic behaviour in Scotland.

I'll haud the jaickets.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I can scarcely believe that the following debate is heavily oversubscribed, but never mind.

Will the Presiding Officer be good enough to explain how that convention can be changed, because the view from the back benches is that it could do with a bit of changing?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you will give me permission, under rule 8.2 of the standing orders, to move a motion under rule 3.10, which refers to "Removal of members of the Parliamentary corporation".

I hesitate to question your ruling, but I see nothing in the standing orders to forbid me from raising this matter now.

With respect, Presiding Officer, how can you rule on whether my attempt to raise this matter is exceptional or unexceptional until you have heard it?

With all due respect, I have become aware of an exceptional circumstance in which this member, and the other members of this chamber, have been misled. We have been misled into expecting that we will enter the new Parliament building in May next year. I now know—but, obviously, I stand to be corrected—that we will not be in that building until September. It may be that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body is labouring under a misapprehension because it has not been informed of that delay.

With respect, Presiding Officer, would you explain when I would be able to raise the issue?

I declare an interest, as I am the patron of the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. I want to ask the minister about a matter that is related to clinical trials and money, as I know that he met representatives of the campaign earlier this week.  Does the minister agree that the work undertaken voluntarily by the campaign to produce its questionnaire 2000 could be used as a pilot study to discover the experiences of women in Scotland who are diagnosed with breast cancer, provided that such a study was funded by the Executive and undertaken by an independent body?

I will vote for the SSRB's recommendation, but not because I particularly think that I am worth that amount of money. That is not what I am being asked to vote on; I am being asked to vote on the rate for the job, as agreed by an independent tribunal, which considered the matter with the agreement of the chamber. It is strange that now, when some members are sensitive about public opinion, they say that the valuation should be set aside. What will happen if an independent tribunal says that nurses, doctors, policemen or other public servants should receive an inflation-busting wage increase at some point in the future, because they have fallen behind their comparators in the public sector? It was agreed that the initial wage level for members of this Parliament was not commensurate with what members would get through service in the Westminster Parliament. There is a parallel in those situations. Are we to say to a future arbitration body that we do not agree with its decision? The public are sensitive about the train drivers' demands for an inflation-busting increase that would raise their earnings above the average industrial wage. If we listen to the public, as my colleague Shona Robison urges, they might say that they prefer Tommy Sheridan's proposal. In that case, what will we say to the train drivers?  If we depart from the time-honoured tradition of paying the rate for the job, we will become involved in hypocrisy and double-dealing. Although I understand Donald Gorrie's wish to make a gesture towards people in the public sector who are underpaid, this issue is not gesture politics—it is the real thing. Whether members like it or not, they will have to vote every year for a budget, which will include our salaries and the salary of every person who works in the Parliament. The issue cannot be dodged. If members agree to either of the amendments, we will have to go through the procedure again and the time will never be right to set a wage that is almost what we think we should receive. I believe—I know that most members agree—that our wages should be equal to those of MPs in Westminster. [Applause.] I am glad that that meets with approval. However, that is not what we will vote for tonight. Members are concerned about public opinion, but they must set aside all consideration of the Scottish Television opinion poll, because if it had asked, "Do you think all MSPs should be beheaded?" I think that 99 per cent of people would have said yes. My final point is about events in my office today. As members know, I have spoken in various places around the town today, some of which were draughty and cold. People know that I support the motion—I do not support the exact figures, but I support the principle that the rate for the job should be determined by independent arbitration—and although I have been inundated with faxes, e-mails and phone calls in support of my comments about Alain Baxter, not one member of the public has contacted my office about members' pay.

On a point of order.

Alain Baxter has been stripped of his Olympic medal by the International Olympic Committee. Does the Executive have anything to say in support of that young man, who has been unjustifiably castigated?

What advice or recommendations have been forwarded from this chamber to the Home Secretary, who has announced his intention to reclassify cannabis? Is there unanimity in the Executive, given that the two parties that form the Executive have, I think, diametrically opposed opinions on the reclassification and possible eventual liberalisation and legalisation of cannabis?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is nice to see you.

I did not mean it then.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will meet any costs incurred by Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust's reappraisal of the managed equipment services public-private partnership for the new Edinburgh royal infirmary. (S1O-4729)

I thank the minister for that reply, but I inform him that the reappraisal was brought about because of the Executive's decision to reconfigure the hospital trusts. The expenditure anticipated by the original trust, which negotiated the new equipment, has been thrown out of kilter because of the Executive's decision. I think that the Executive has a moral duty and I hope that the minister agrees.

I have a vested interest to declare: our eldest grandson has just got into the Scottish ice hockey squad at the age of 13, so we are not all girns on this side of the chamber.  I ask the First Minister to request a cost-benefit analysis of the investment in winter sports as opposed to summer sports. Not that I want to deprive summer sports of investment, but we have seen that winter sports probably have much more to offer than we previously thought in terms of input into the economy. Tourism is the first and foremost benefit. Will he make sure that VisitScotland gets off the mark, recruits those Scottish Olympians and gets them on top of an open-topped bus on tartan day?

I congratulate Dorothy-Grace Elder on her persistence and determination in bringing such a worthwhile debate to the Parliament. As John McAllion suggests, if we consider the numbers that have been mentioned, chronic pain would appear to be an epidemic. I cannot recall any other health debate in which so many people were mentioned as suffering from the same symptoms or condition. It is self-evident that we must have a much-improved strategy for the self-management and self-help of pain sufferers. However, although a great many people are involved, I would like to make a special plea for one particular group of people—those who have multiple sclerosis and who use cannabis to alleviate their pain. There has been much discussion over whether using cannabis is desirable or, indeed, efficacious. I will not go into  that discussion. All I know is that I am impressed by the number of people who for a number of years have been helping themselves to manage pain that in some cases is intolerable. Those people have been subjected to the full rigours of the law because of their use of cannabis. I ask how we can help those cannabis users to alleviate their pain. Their present behaviour should be decriminalised. They should be able to help themselves—as they have been doing—with more security. And while we determine the best way in which to use cannabis or cannabinoids to help MS sufferers, can we please not be judgmental or punitive in our approach? If by smoking cannabis, or by having it baked in cookies, people gain just a bit of pleasure or just a bit of relief from the dreadful drudgery of the pain that is imposed on them, let them do so. How many of us here would deprive someone of a glass of red wine if that would take the edge off their pain when they were desperate to get some sleep at night? As well as being sensible in our approach to a strategy for pain management, can we be humane in the way in which we apply it?

I would like to address the amendments on compensation as the convener of the Subordinate Legislation Committee.

I will say this carefully, so members should listen. Unfortunately, no time has been given for the proper process of scrutiny that this Parliament says is preferable to the process that is followed at Westminster. On compensation, we must be seen to be fair. We must be seen to examine the issue properly. Although I have more sympathy with one of the amendments than with the others, all the amendments have fallen outwith the scrutiny of the Subordinate Legislation Committee. We know  that that stores up trouble. I therefore urge members to have great caution in adopting any measure without proper scrutiny, even if one amendment might appear a bit fairer than the others.

Will the member give way?

Does David Mundell know whether advice was taken or any consultation held on the matter of enforcement in relation to amendments 94 and 41?

Will the member give way on a point of clarification?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to remedy the nutritional deficiency recorded by National Children's Homes Scotland in one child in six examined at the royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh. (S1O-4568)

Does the minister agree that a great deal of money has been spent on health education programmes to persuade people of the merits of eating fresh fruit and vegetables, for example, but that, according to the National  Children's Homes Scotland survey, those programmes do not appear to have had much impact? Does she think that it might be a good idea to ensure that every child has a free school meal every day and that, if the Scottish Executive cannot find the £174 million that that would require, we should consider raising the money through the limited tax-raising powers of the Parliament?

I congratulate Angus MacKay on securing the debate. Like him, I do not know how that happens but I am glad that it has happened because it allows us to do two things. First, as Donald Gorrie said more eloquently than I might, we are able to mark Colin O'Riordan's extraordinary contribution to music in the city. I met him twice in the course of my work as a journalist. It was his work that I knew. I did not know the man, but his work stands as testament to the man. It is absolutely proper that we should find time in the Parliament to record what he did for this city and for the music education of children outside the city—and not just their music education. Secondly, the debate gives us the opportunity to put into context the contribution of music to the education of the whole person. It gives us the opportunity to make the case, again, for motivated and inspired specialist teachers of music, drama and physical education, because those three subjects link and they are all required. They must be taught by people who are as motivated as Colin O'Riordan was. Yesterday, I was out in Wester Hailes. As Edinburgh members will know, the school there is in an area that is pockmarked by severe deprivation—which, unfortunately, is reflected in the results in quite a number of the academic subjects. They are not as good as we would want them to be, but the results in music soar way above the others. There is a life about the music in the school. It is the music that inspires children. It is the music that makes them feel a sense of self-confidence and self-worth. There is also an inspired teacher in the school, whom I will not embarrass by naming. I wish to pay tribute to the work that is done by her and other specialist music teachers in Edinburgh.  During question time this afternoon, Susan Deacon asked the Minister for Education and Young People for an assurance that we will continue to educate the whole person. To do that, we should not just concentrate on the basics and the three Rs, although they are important. We will never produce civilised citizens unless they are taught about music, art and drama. Unfortunately, as Donald Gorrie said, those subjects are looked on as frills. I learned much from Peter Mooney, who was the conductor of the Glasgow Phoenix Choir and who I am very happy to record was also the man who took the choirs when I was at school. The choir was where I learned the self-confidence to get up in front of a crowd of people. The first time I entered the Usher Hall was to sing in a choir conducted by Peter Mooney. Experience convinces me that it is important that people learn to appreciate music and, from being part of the orchestra or the choir, experience being part of a team. Doing those things in school is part of education. I make a plea: that the Executive and the minister realise that we will not be educating our children unless we give them the motivation that comes from the arts, particularly music and, in this case, the memory of Colin O'Riordan. The Executive should support the trust in any way possible.

I welcome the fact that there is some change in the attitude to cannabis use and abuse. What plans does the minister have to make plain his point of view, and those of chief constables and senior police officers in Scotland, when senior police officers in England and Wales inform the Home Secretary of their deliberations on whether a similar attitude should be taken to people who are found in possession of hard drugs such as heroin, ecstasy and cocaine? I would be most concerned if the Parliament and Scottish police forces were not consulted on the matter.

Does the minister agree that it will do nothing to improve in-patient or out-patient services for diabetics if Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust is able to proceed with its plan to dock one specialist diabetes nurse from the complement in Lothian?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance. I think that the First Minister said that the cost of any decision that is taken by the Westminster Government that leads to expenditure by the Scottish Government will be borne by the Parliament that took the decision. In the case of the new Scottish Parliament building—

Will the First Minister also ask Historic Scotland to keep under review the source of revenue from a much bigger market than euroland? Will our major tourist attractions please accept the US dollar also?

I wish the Presiding Officer a happy new year. I will pick up where Susan Deacon left off. The situation is urgent. The motion refers to the congestion and pollution that have been caused by Edinburgh's bus wars. Sarah Boyack took issue with that and said that buses were not causing the pollution. She is right—the pollution is not caused totally by buses, but it sure ain't helped by the bus wars. That is why we must deal with an urgent problem, which had been building in Edinburgh and of which we were already aware. With all due respect to Sarah Boyack, I think that the motion is in order.

Thank you. The diminution in the frequency of some of the services in the south side of the city seems to this Southsider to be forcing people in an affluent part of the city, where the level of car ownership is high, back into their cars to get into the city to work. That is a personal observation. I have no figures to back it up other than the fact that I am sometimes late for things—as members may have witnessed earlier when I missed the vote. The frequencies of bus services 5, 41 and 42 have been reduced. Anyone who lives on the south side  of the city, and I see Angus MacKay agreeing with me, knows that that is where people who go to work in Sarah Boyack's constituency live. I am concerned greatly about pollution. I have four grandchildren who live in Edinburgh. From speaking to my daughter and her friends who also have young children, I know that there is genuine concern about the level of pollution that is recorded in Edinburgh. Pollution has to be tackled. I am the link person in the Lothians for the National Asthma Campaign. A survey undertaken for the campaign showed that 81 per cent of people who suffer from asthma cite pollution generated by traffic as a negative contributory factor in their condition. I am disappointed that no one has referred to pollution, as it is an issue now and needs to be tackled urgently. Many new houses are being built in the city, which is leading to the arrival of new families. In that respect, the pollution caused by traffic congestion is of great importance and the bus wars are not helping. Research has been produced in the Netherlands that shows a close link between the pollutants in diesel fumes and asthma in young children. That is another argument in favour of sorting out bus transportation in Edinburgh. I realise that the Office of Fair Trading is examining the issue and that everyone has talked about the commercial aspect of bus transport, but I am interested in the health aspects of the issue. We cannot wait for the Office of Fair Trading. It is also not enough to say that we have quality contracts, as they will not sort out the pollution problem. A narrow degree of regulation will not do that—we need to do more. I pay tribute to City of Edinburgh Council for what it has tried to do, and to Sarah Boyack for what she tried to do to make sense of traffic in Edinburgh, but we need to do more. Strategic planning is required. I will not widen the debate at this stage, but we need to examine the size of the city, as with more houses come more cars. If we want to reduce the number of cars in the city, and get more people on to buses, we must examine the size of the city and we must also examine city-centre workplace parking. That has not been tackled and it must be done. I am sorry to have introduced two caveats at the end of the debate, as I welcome it and we have talked about important things. However, the debate is wider than what we have managed to tackle tonight.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek clarification. Is it in order for a member to move a motion without notice after question time has concluded? As we know that the work has been done, the First Minister could lodge a motion to the effect that the Parliament notes it. Could that be done?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek further clarification. Can only a bureau motion be accepted?

This is one of those wee gems of a debate that is perhaps unexpected. However, it should not be unexpected, because we are discussing a very practical issue. The trustees of the National Library of Scotland say: "NLS should, in the Trustees' view, do what it does do well rather than offer a further degraded service across the board." In other words, they are prepared to limit the aspirations for the service. They are prepared to lower the ceiling and say, "We can do this little bit well and forget the rest." The trustees should be out in the wider world, looking to see how they can market their unique service. Marilyn Livingstone referred to the possibilities for science and the importance of seeing science  as an integral part of lifelong learning. That is where the National Library of Scotland should come into the picture. I suggest that the NLS should have approached business interests. It should also do that in the future—I will come on to the extension in a moment. Why does the NLS not approach Scottish Enterprise and talk about getting together? Scottish Enterprise offers a business information service that is not as good. The two things fit together neatly. This resource and a marvellous pool of expertise is being lost—the staff are being reduced from 13 to three, which is a terrible loss of talent. Can we have an extension to the end of the financial year? It seems incredible that the Scottish science library does not have a marketing and promotions department. The trustees say that they have approached business and external sources for sponsorship, but "without success". For goodness' sake, the trustees are selling something that is unique and of high quality, so I fail to see why there should be such continued lack of success. An extension should be given. A time limit could be placed on it, such as the end of the financial year. Do not close the place down on 21 December. Let us have a look with Scottish Enterprise's marketing and promotion outfit.

I do not disagree in the slightest, but right now we are here to try to manage a crisis—because it will be a crisis if we lose the resource. Mike Russell is right to say that the Executive needs to sort out its heritage problem, but right now we need to stop the library and reading room closing and contracting further. I ask the minister for time until the end of the financial year, and to take on board what Angus MacKay, Marilyn Livingstone and Mike Russell have said. The minister could make the thing fly if someone tried hard.

Is the First Minister aware of the tolerance zone for prostitution that has operated informally in Edinburgh for 20 years and of the fact that it has been more than two years since an under-age girl was cautioned by the police in Edinburgh for prostitution? Does he realise that those two factors are not unrelated and will he look kindly on the bill that I want to introduce for tolerance zones for prostitution in this Parliament? Or rather— [Laughter.] Well, it would do no harm for some folk.

The First Minister knew as well. That is what worries me.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to review its spending priorities in light of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's pre-budget statement. (S1F-1423)

I thank the First Minister for his first reply to me. They can only get better. I press him further on plans for transport. An exchange earlier between Lewis Macdonald and Karen Whitefield resulted in Lewis Macdonald saying that the Executive wished to promote partnership among public authorities. I ask the First Minister to do more than that. Will he take into account the situation in Edinburgh and Midlothian, where population growth means that a 30 per cent increase in peak traffic flow is expected over the next 10 years? We cannot have the sort of growth that I know he wants—based on cities, as all modern economic planning advises—if we do not now have a commitment to public spending on light rail systems, for example, and on the link between Midlothian and Edinburgh. Will the First Minister give the councils in Edinburgh and Midlothian guarantees of cash now, regardless of the black hole in the chancellor's finances in the near future?

No.

I will not attempt to tell the new First Minister his job, as I will have 18 months in which to do that. I simply make a plea to him to appoint a member of his team to be answerable in this chamber for the goings-on at the foot of Holyrood Road. I have just learned that the Holyrood progress group has decided that the person who was named as the chief architect for the project, Benedetta Tagliabue, is no longer to be seen as the main person and that a person unknown to most people in this chamber will assume full responsibility. It is time that we knew what was going on and it is time that we had a minister whom we could question. I hope that the First Minister enjoys his term of office.

On a point of order. [Applause.]

I shall make it short, Presiding Officer. What is wrong with subordinate legislation?

I would like to repeat a question that I put to the previous First Minister in June this year. Will the acting First Minister appoint a minister for tourism? If not, why not?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the new Edinburgh Royal infirmary will offer an enhanced service compared with the present services provided by the Royal hospital for sick children, Princess Margaret Rose orthopaedic hospital and the existing Edinburgh Royal infirmary. (S1O-4096)

I thank the minister for her answer. Will she expand on why she has such faith in the service being provided and in the new infirmary being an enhancement, given that between 138 and 160 jobs will require to be lost? Those will include accident and emergency nurses, clinical nurse managers, diabetes nurse specialists and radiographers—to mention just a few.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether a medical needs assessment is carried out on patients on entering hospital for the purpose of determining their length of stay, or whether length of stay is determined solely on the basis of the type of medical procedure to be undertaken. (S1O-3979)

I thank the minister for his reply. I am sure that he will be as concerned as I am about the removal of orthopaedics from Edinburgh royal infirmary and the present centre of excellence at the Princess Margaret Rose hospital to the new Edinburgh royal infirmary. The contemporary trend for quicker throughput of  elective surgery patients can mean that patients entering hospital who have other existing conditions and who require a longer period of rehabilitation can be pushed, rather than progress at their own rate. What plans does the Executive have to counter that?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I apologise for taking up time. Whether we like it or not, the status and integrity of the Parliament is being questioned outside, so this is an important matter. Is it in order for a petitioner to the Parliament, presenting a petition to the Public Petitions Committee, to request the First Minister to make a statement?

On the general campaign to combat the spread of terrorism, will the Scottish Executive impress upon the Westminster Government that the quickest, most effective step that it could take to ensure that there are no more recruits for terrorist acts over the next few weeks would be to ensure that Israel withdraws from the occupied territories?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take on board the fact that the members who think it relevant to debate the matter here and who give voice to what we feel are concentrating mainly on the moral and humanitarian aspects of the situation, and that morality and humanity know no artificial divisions between reserved and devolved powers?

Will the member give way?

I think that I speak for Dennis Canavan when I say that neither he nor I would attempt to demonstrate such moral equivalence. Both of us say that neither action—the killing of innocents in America and the killing of innocents in Afghanistan—can be morally justified.

Will the member give way?

On the war being just, does Mr McLetchie agree that, if it is just for us to pursue Osama bin Laden in a way that affects innocent women and children—as he has admitted—it is also just for the representatives of those innocent women and children to pursue a war against us? If we dignify a punishment campaign by calling it a war, I presume that action can justly be taken against us.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As someone who is qualified in physical education, I take great exception to my subject being referred to as "physical jerks" by that jerk on the other side of the chamber.

Will the minister take an intervention?

If members will indulge me, I will conduct a wee exercise of my own so that we do not just preach without practice. Hands up those members, apart from me, who took part in organised sport or exercise before they came to work today? I knew that Frank McAveety was a good boy. That response was an indication of how seriously we politicians are taken when we try to tell people that we can organise sport. One of my few good habits is that I have maintained my interest in exercise and sport—I think I am the only professionally qualified physical educationist in the Parliament. Exercising regularly is one of my few good habits. You do not need to be a wee skelf to exercise. That should be some comfort to some of the shyer members in the chamber. I am glad that my bandwagon for more PE teachers is finally coming home to stay. The minister assured me in his speech that the Executive will consider again the provision of PE teachers and specialists in primary schools. Dennis Canavan is right. Every teacher should be encouraged to take part in the development of every child in every way. So much benchmarking and administration is done now, particularly in primary schools, that primary school teachers who may not have a background in PE cannot be expected to participate. For the past 20 years, a huge gap has developed between the people who had the opportunity to play sport in schools and the folk who were educated in the 70s and 80s and did not have that opportunity. The minister must go back to basics—if he will excuse the expression—and get PE specialists into the primary schools, where they will do three things: they will properly teach and coach the pupils; they will teach and support the teachers; and they will co-ordinate with the parents, because parents, too, must be brought into this. The message must be sold all over again to parents, because they probably did not take part in organised school sport. The key to all this—I hope that the minister hears me—is more PE specialists in primary schools. I am glad that the minister is nodding, because I did not want to hear once again in a debate that we have school sport co-ordinators. I am glad that we have them, but they  were meant to co-ordinate something that was already there; they were not meant to be coaches, teachers and sport developers. If the minister wants to add to the welcome announcement that he made about the sport alliance, I suggest that he looks at the example that was set by the British Airports Authority youth games, which were held in Edinburgh at the weekend. I attended them and I was absolutely knocked out by how good they were. The games involved parents, coaching to a high standard, organisation and hundreds of active children. By the way—I am sure that Murdo Fraser will be pleased to hear this—all those children understood competition and understood that competition is a part of growing up that allows them to learn to win and to lose, and to learn to do both with equal grace. Further to the idea of the sport alliance, it might be a good idea for the minister to set a target for the sport co-ordination strategy to look forward to an all-Scotland youth games for all Scotland's young people. That would be a target and an innovation. That is why I will probably support the motion, because it talks about innovation.

I thought that you would never ask. Although I agree with my generous colleague that the provision of facilities and hardware in Glasgow has, along with the sports card, been excellent, I wonder whether the sport co-ordinators on their own will be enough. Does my colleague agree that the employment of more PE teachers by Glasgow City Council would provide an all-round package that would be bound to raise standards in Glasgow's sport?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention? It relates to McCrone.

The minister referred to the collection of relevant data. This afternoon I attended with other members an excellent presentation by the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. The society explained the requirement for all-Scotland data to be collected so that the interface between local authority care services and physiotherapy care services can be made more effective and efficient. Will the minister comment on that?

I add my plea to that of my colleague. I have written to the minister regarding a constituent who is terminally ill and would therefore welcome any decision on the matter to be made as speedily as possible.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Would you be minded to accept a motion without notice from me, so that the Parliament can attempt to bridge the democratic deficit that has been left by the Westminster Government's refusal to scrutinise and discuss the great matters that are in front of us, with troops being committed to adventures that many of us know nothing about, and about which we want to know much more?

Will the First Minister eschew complacent self-congratulation and recognise that, even following the welcome announcement by the Minister for Health and Community Care that the Executive intends to write off deficits, 200 jobs will be lost in Lothian among medical workers? Does he believe that that does anything to enhance morale in the health service?

Will the minister give way?

Can the minister clarify whether physical chastisement would only be about punishment for something that a child might have done wrong? In the case of a young child, that might be the physical encouragement not to do that thing again. Such chastisement would not be to punish, but to warn.

Will the minister give way?

I intervene at this point in the debate because, at the end of Tavish Scott's speech, I wanted to ask whether he considers that anything that we say about the bill has been affected, adversely or otherwise, by the events in the USA in the past 48 hours. Donald Gorrie made the point that the whole chamber is involved in the bill. Although the bill is highly technical—it is about international law and international regulation—it is at the interface of humanity, politics, individual morality, international crime, legislation on that crime and orderly conduct of the pursuance of war criminals and criminals against humanity. The events in the USA were of such magnitude that we should not only pass the bill, but pass comments or recommendations to the UK Government, which is the signatory to the Rome statute. The reason for the rush with the Scottish part of the legislation has been to enable the UK to become one of the first 60 countries to ratify the Rome statute. Frankly, I have never thought that that was desperately important. That is a personal point of view. If the USA does not now sign up to the ICC, the court is greatly diminished, particularly in the wake of what has happened, whose repercussions for international law, commerce and the global economy we can only guess at—there are huge repercussions that we have not even considered yet. The bill, of course, has the correct intention and will be supported by almost every member. The application of that intention may have been greatly compromised by what happened in the USA and by the USA's absolute determination until now not to sign up to the ICC.

On a point of information, one of the last acts of Clinton's presidency was to indicate that the USA would take part in the ICC. That had more to do with the internal politics of the USA than with the ICC. The incoming Bush Administration said that it would not sign up to the ICC and that it would not put American servicemen in various parts of the world at risk of almost automatic prosecution. The USA's position is crucial to whether the ICC can be implemented soon, later or at all. For that reason, I would like every member to debate the much wider question of international criminal justice. We should pass the bill—it is the technical side of international criminal justice—but we have much more to consider and, perhaps, to contribute to the UK's deliberations on the matter.

Will the member give way?

This golden oldie is finding it hard to keep up. [ Laughter. ] I apologise for missing the minister's opening remarks. However, in an answer to me dated 25 July, she said that the Executive will launch a digital inclusion strategy. I followed that up with a request that the position of disabled people—housebound women in particular—should be examined. Disabled people and housebound women were not mentioned among the groups to which Pauline McNeill's question referred. However, the electronic magazine Aurora , which is run by disabled women, could serve as a prototype resource for those groups and should be included in the digital strategy.

Does the member believe that the local government legislation will make provision for proportional representation?

Will the member give way?

Hear, hear.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wish to raise a point of order under standing order 1.6, which  refers to the code of conduct for members of the Scottish Parliament. Under section 2.10—accountability and openness—the code states: "Members have a duty to be as open as possible about their decisions and actions." As the Minister for Parliament misled the Parliament last Thursday when he stated that to his certain knowledge no ceremony was being planned to take place in the new Parliament building in March 2003 and as he has not replied to the letter that I sent to him last Friday, in which I provided proof of the initial planning for such a ceremony, I ask you to rule that, in accordance with the Scottish ministerial code, paragraph 1.1(c), the minister should give "accurate and truthful information to the Parliament, correcting any inadvertent error at the earliest opportunity." I refer to only the first sentence of that paragraph, as I have no proof of the relevance of the second sentence, which states that "Ministers who knowingly mislead the Parliament will be expected to offer their resignation". I regret having to raise this matter at this time, but it is the last opportunity for the minister's misleading statement to be corrected before the Parliament goes into recess. It is also, presumably, the last opportunity for you to be made aware that the Parliament's information officer was able to confirm the possibility of a ceremony, although the Minister for Parliament, replying for the Executive, denied it and stated that such a ceremony was a figment of my imagination. It cannot be in order for such a misleading statement to stand uncorrected on the record. That implies a corruption of the Parliament's processes of accountability and of responsibility for public finances, as the planning—never mind the organisation—of a closing or opening ceremony has budgetary implications.

With respect, and further to your ruling, Presiding Officer, the letter to the Minister for Parliament was delivered by hand last Friday. As the matter concerns the misleading of the chamber—however inadvertently—it appears that I have not been replied to "at the earliest opportunity", as the code of conduct for the Executive says I should have been.

On a point of order.

Indeed. I made a special effort to come here today because I think it important that the chamber not be misled. You have confirmed that the date may have been pencilled in and that there may be initial planning. If an Executive spokesperson confirms to newspapers that a plan has been pencilled in, can the allegation that it is a figment of my imagination be struck from the record?

Will Mr Home Robertson give way?

Will Mr Davidson give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister please take an intervention?

Presiding Officer, since you have already said that the time for the debate is limited, I will give a wee  piece of information and ask a question. My views on the project are well known. I do not quibble about the cost of a magnificent Parliament; I quibble about whether it is guaranteed to be magnificent. I also think that, just as our democracy is ill served by retrospective legislation, it is even more ill served by retrospective spending, which is what the motion asks for. I see no reason to believe that the project group has shown such management efficiency and expertise that we should continue to trust its judgment, which is what the motion asks us to do. Just before we came here today, John Home Robertson admitted in a television interview with me that he knew nothing at all about a planned closing ceremony. Although I am told that it is being planned, I am not at all sure that it has been budgeted for. Who knows about a closing ceremony? How much is it costed at? Is it just another figment of my imagination? I also want to correct the misapprehension about inflation in the building industry in Edinburgh which, once again, the motion rests on. The motion claims that inflation is 16 per cent. Last night, we heard from the progress group, which estimates that inflation of 16 per cent has been built into the contracts that have been let and that are about to be let. Because only British indices for inflation exist, it is difficult to get a figure specifically for Edinburgh, but according to the Halifax house price survey, we should allow for 8.5 per cent inflation for house building in Edinburgh. That is half of what is being claimed. I suggest to the progress group that if it had a professional manager running the project, he might tell them that contractors sometimes—only sometimes—add in a little bit to cover contingencies. Perhaps that is why we estimate inflation to be twice the rate that everybody else who is building in Edinburgh just now is working to. I said that I would not take any more time, Presiding Officer, but I sincerely hope that my friend and colleague Donald Gorrie will be given time.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Des McNulty give way?

rose—

Contrary to the expectations of my dear colleague Duncan Macmillan—[ Interruption. ] That is not right. I am so overcome by the debate that I have forgotten his second name—[MEMBERS: "Hamilton."] So it is—Duncan Hamilton. I must put that right. [ Interruption. ] Or perhaps I meant Duncan McNeil. I imagine that the motion will be backed unanimously by the members who sat in the chamber and basked in the warm glow of the words of President Mbeki, when he congratulated the people of Scotland on their contribution to his nation's struggle for democracy and freedom. That sits ill with the denigration of Scottishness and Scottish nationhood that we have heard from some members this morning. However, in the brief time I have available, I would prefer to ponder what Scotland's contribution to the world should be. When we talk about Scotland's place in the world—or in the EU—we should focus not simply on what we can get, but on what we can give. We  have a great deal to contribute as individuals and as a distinct nation. I want to focus on the opportunity and responsibility that that implies for our ability to influence the future political and social development of the EU. I must take issue with what Keith Raffan said—I am sorry that I cannot give way to him on this point—about our ability to exert influence through the Committee of the Regions. The EU is based on an international treaty; treaties are brokered between power-brokers. The issue will always centre on the exercise of power; although it might sometimes be about an agreement to share power, it always centres on power. A delegate body such as the Committee of the Regions will never exercise that power, which is why regionalism is not enough. We should aspire to the sovereign status that allowed Irish voters to have a referendum on the treaty of Nice. Through such a mechanism, people in all EU member states have been encouraged to challenge the anti-democratic, centralised policy making and future planning of the EU by EU leaders such as Chancellor Schroeder, President Prodi and Wim Kok. It might be a little late, but democrats across all EU countries are beginning to wake up to the dangers of using a eurodiktat to forbid finance ministers of the member states to do what Charlie McCreevy has just done in Dublin. The Irish finance minister defied the instructions from Frankfurt and Brussels and kept Ireland's taxes at the levels he judged would mean that other countries in the eurozone would not experience inflation. He has been proved right and the Irish are still good Europeans; their democracy is stronger than ours because he exercised that democratic right on their behalf. Good Europeans will welcome Ireland's spirit of independence and action. People who mouth euroslogans miss the point and jeopardise the spirit of Europeanism, as more and more European citizens judge the EU to be just another powerless playground for politicians. I am disappointed that David McLetchie thought that it is better to be a big gun in Europe. Bigness is not necessarily a sign of strength, as I am sure he will recognise with the small number of folk he has behind him. No one should imagine that the antithesis of global corporations is a situation in which states can get together to do away with the individuality and awkwardness that allowed Ireland to do what she has done. She has lit a beacon of democracy for the rest of Europe and I will be ashamed if the chamber does not implicitly endorse what Ireland has done by endorsing the motion.

Does Ben Wallace share the hope that when Henry McLeish signed up, he did so believing that everyone in the chamber would endorse the move towards the democratisation of European decision making and the attempt that was made by the Flemish people to oppose the centralising, anti-democratic tendencies in Europe today?

rose—

Instead of reciting the normal litany of the poverty and pestilence that would befall an independent Scotland, torn from the clutches of Mother England, will the minister give us three examples of people in Scotland benefiting from being part of the larger union? [MEMBERS: "Jobs."] I hear "Jobs, jobs, jobs," but we will not go there, because that is too embarrassing. I would like to hear three examples of how people in Scotland benefit from that clout—perhaps in the Security Council of the United Nations.

The minister will know that, informally, I have raised the question of the qualifications of the examiners. What reassurance can he give Scottish teachers that the entire complement of people who will be marking this year will meet the criteria that he has set out—and with which we all agree—on the standard of competency and experience required?

Will the First Minister give us an undertaking that he will appoint a minister for tourism? If not, why not?

I know. I know.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Now that I have aired the matter of forbidden questions in the chamber, I ask you for guidance as to whether I take up the matter with the chamber desk or with you. Is it not the Presiding Officer who rules on whether a question is in order?

On another point or order—

It is not a debate. I do not want to debate the subject with you. However, I would like to talk to you about it.

If the subject matter has been discussed in the chamber and ministers have introduced it, is not it permissible for me to ask a question on it?

Repeats and replays.

Can we afford to send anybody to the promised land? During the previous debate, we had questions on whether we could afford to live up to our own ideals. I support what Donald Gorrie says about the structuring of debates. Yesterday's stage 3 debate was a very good example of the problem. People outside the Parliament can easily understand the issue that was being discussed, which was not esoteric but was about housing costs, conditions and provision. There were amendments that were undebated, so arguments went unrehearsed and information did not go out to the people who pay our wages. We fell down on the job yesterday. I do not want that to happen with other legislation that  comes before the chamber. I agree with the point that Donald Gorrie made—we did not collude and there was no inspirational questioning—about quangos and non-departmental public bodies not being as accountable as they should be, given the influence, power and finance that they have. That is an excellent point. Our procedures are a bit old-fashioned and are not up to date with the way in which public duties and policies are discharged. If the convener of the Procedures Committee does not mind, I would like the committee to address that point. Finally, I will raise the point that I meant to raise in the first place. I had a question for the minister, and if he had just answered me I would not have had to take up time by making this speech. Can we find out which questions are forbidden? I asked a perfectly reasonable political question, as I am supposed to do of an opposing politician, but I was forbidden from lodging it by the clerks, because it was not about something covered by the Scotland Act 1998. The question I asked was: will the Executive instigate an investigation into full fiscal autonomy for the Parliament? I have no doubt that the Executive would not be too keen to do that, but I would like to hear why it would not be keen to do it. As I had heard ministers discuss the concept, I thought that it would be reasonable to have a further explanation in the Parliament, but I was not allowed to lodge the question. I ask the minister to tell us in his summing-up which questions are forbidden.

Will the minister give way?

I have a question.

I appreciate the fact that the minister has tremendous experience in this field, which many of us do not have. Nevertheless, does he agree that there is still an element of victor's justice in tribunals such as those that were set up for the former Yugoslavian territories, in which the only people who were arraigned came from the losing side? Many people throughout the world argue that the actions that were undertaken by NATO should be subjected to the same sort of scrutiny.

Will the minister give way?

I could not disagree more with Phil Gallie. We are not adding to a UK act.  Scotland is contributing to an international cause. We are not tail-end Charlies. We are seeking to place our distinctive legal system on the world stage—where it should be—so that it can make a contribution.

I want to comment on what Bill Aitken said about the difficulties in the bill that remain to be ironed out. I am not referring only to universal jurisdiction, which has taken up most of this morning's debate: there are many more areas of detail that need to be considered at stage 2. Several members have suggested that we are in a pickle tackling the huge concept behind this important piece of legislation. We are squeezed for time because we must march in step with the UK legislation. Well, why? Is it not more important to get it right than to get it at the right time? I know that there is a desire to be among the first 60 signatories to the statute, but we will probably manage that anyway without too much trouble. It is much more important that we get it right, rather than at the right time. We are altogether far too mindful of Robin Cook's late signing and decision to bring a bill into the Westminster system. We should determine our own timetable, which should be conditioned by doing things to the best possible standard in producing legislation, particularly legislation that will take part of Scotland into the international arena. We should not short-change ourselves or our legislation. It is pretty obvious from what the minister said this morning that the absence of universal jurisdiction from the Scottish bill is entirely due to the fact that it is not in the UK legislation. We must ask why it is not in the UK legislation, because many of the countries whose legal systems and societies the UK has influenced have adopted that principle without any problem at all. Many of our new partners in the European Union have adopted the principle of universal jurisdiction. Why have we not? Could that indicate a parallel with what Roseanna Cunningham suggested might underlie the United States' decision not to sign up—if we no longer have victor's justice, but have the concept of victim's justice in international law, a number of people could be called to account, such as Henry Kissinger for his policies in Cambodia? We should not be too sniffy about this. People in the former Yugoslavia have been indicted under current international criminal law, but NATO has not. If the universal jurisdiction that we are asking for existed and there was equity in apportioning blame for acts that were outwith what we would consider the usual rules of warfare, NATO might well have been indicted for the type of bombing it undertook in Serbia. The UK might have a vested interest in ensuring that there is not universal jurisdiction. Is that why the UK Government is fighting shy of it? Even if it is, we should not fight shy of it; that would be  wrong. We are trying to right the world's ills in this bill. We are trying to make justice equitable throughout the world, so our actions should be conditioned only by what would be the right thing to do. It is rather feeble for Jim Wallace—a man whom I admire in this field of activity—to say that universal jurisdiction would compromise the principles of Scots law. It would enhance the principles of Scottish justice. That is why we want to see it incorporated. I presume that that is why Alastair Duff from the Law Society of Scotland made it clear on page 76 of the Justice 2 Committee's report that lawyers such as him, who share with the Minister for Justice an appreciation of Scots law and a determination to protect it, believe that universal jurisdiction is "a matter of policy", which is for politicians to decide.

With all due respect to the convener of the Justice 2 Committee, that would not clear up the anomalies that we have uncovered in the brief discussion this morning and that the committee began to find in its pre-legislative scrutiny. After reading the evidence and listening to the witnesses, I think that the most effective way of introducing the concept of deterrence—presumably that is one of the reasons we want to introduce international criminal legislation—is to make the law as simple as we can so that it is understood throughout the world that no one who breaks it is safe anywhere. The notion of universal jurisdiction is simpler and easier to apply than residency tests and so forth. I am asking, as I did at the start of my speech, for more time to consider the bill. Please do not be influenced too much by the UK Government's requirements. That is not a narrow nationalist point; it is an internationalist point. This is international legislation so we should be looking to the rest of the world, not only to London.  Some pertinent points have been made in the debate—especially by Bill Aitken—about the effectiveness of the apparatus that we seek to set up. He said that dictatorships might not co-operate with it. That is true. It is also true that the Government of Israel would not co-operate with it now. We do not consider it to be a dictatorship. However, a signal would be sent out that the perpetrators of the barbarities that are currently being carried out in some parts of the middle east would not be safe for all time. That is another reason for introducing the bill. On resourcing, we should not think small. One of the gifts that we tell ourselves we give the world is our humanity as expressed through our legal system. We should not think small by being concerned about what the Procedures Committee, or whoever doles out the money, would say about our asking a visitor from New Zealand or Norway to tell us what their thinking is on the matter. This is not small legislation; please do not think small about introducing it.

I agree with Pauline McNeill, the convener of the Justice 2 Committee, that we were under pressure of time. However, although we heard evidence of excellent quality, does she agree that it would have been nice to have heard from someone from New Zealand or Canada or some of those other strange places that have adopted universal jurisdiction?

Will the minister give way?

My question is on this point.

We would like to think that that decision was taken for the reason outlined by the minister—that is, on the basis of the territorial principle in Scots law—rather than because universal jurisdiction was not included in the United Kingdom International Criminal Court Act 2001. I start from an even more fundamental principle than that contained in Scots law: doing the right thing.

Legal experts carried out much research into universal jurisdiction in compiling the Rome statute. The statute is in many respects a hybrid measure involving politics and law. Political considerations entered into the framing of the original Rome statute. The fact that the United States, for example, would never have accepted universal jurisdiction at that stage coloured the determination that eventually led to the statute as published. However, we can go back to first principles and say that it is much better to have universal jurisdiction if we wish to pursue international criminals in an equitable fashion.

Will Karen Whitefield give way?

Do you take requests, Presiding Officer?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the recommended waiting time is for a specialist breast examination at breast cancer units and whether this target is being met. (S1O-3535)

It is customary to thank ministers for their reply, but I will just sympathise with that shabby response and ask the minister to apologise to our joint constituent, Sharon Gray of Broomhouse, who has learned today that she will wait 12 weeks before being seen at the Western general hospital. I would like to hear the minister's comment on the leaflets that are supplied to cancer patients. In September 1998, the promise was: "We will give you an appointment within two weeks of receiving your doctor's letter." The latest one says that "there is sometimes a delay of a few weeks between seeing your General Practitioner and your appointment at the Breast Clinic." Will the minister explain why, when the Chancellor announced in March £85 million of extra spending for health in Scotland, that should be the case? We were also told that we could  expect the cancer plan in March. Why have we not seen it yet and what has the Executive done with the Chancellor's money?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No. I apologise for being unable to give you notice, Presiding Officer, but the point of order to which I refer arose during question time. Both the First Minister and the Minister for Finance and Local Government discussed and referred to possible full fiscal autonomy for this Parliament. I had a question to that effect, asking the Minister for Finance and Local Government to instigate a proper study and inquiry into full fiscal autonomy. My question was rejected; I was informed that it was outwith the scope of this Parliament. If ministers can refer to and discuss full fiscal autonomy, is it outwith the scope of the Parliament to discuss the subject?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will instigate an exchange of information with the Norwegian Government on matters of common interest. (S1O-3519)

I am very glad that the minister has already established links. If he has made friends in the Norwegian Government, he may agree that it would be sensible to find out why, with wildly fluctuating oil prices, the Norwegians have an oil-based economy that delivers much better economic standards, welfare benefits, internal sea transport—I will not go on with the list—than we do although they have much in common with us and very much the same basic resources. If he will not try to find that out, is it because hearing the answers would force him to rethink his unionist position?

I do not expect the First Minister to have an excuse to hand for every hospital in Scotland that is underperforming according to the standards that were promised at the start of the Parliament. However, I draw to his attention the current seven weeks' waiting time for women who are referred to the Western general in Edinburgh for breast examination. I invite him to agree that there is no way that we will ever make up the shortages in the specialities working in the oncology unit involved unless we have control of all Scotland's taxation and spending and call it full fiscal autonomy for the Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for a members' business motion to be contentious, controversial, argumentative and misleading? The motion in the name of Des McNulty, on Chester Street Insurance Holdings Ltd, gives the impression that the only people who are concerned with and who own the asbestos campaign are Gordon Brown, Helen Liddell and Tony Worthington.

Does the minister agree that the success of out-of-school schemes is more likely to be ensured if there is an adequate supply of specialist physical education teachers in primary schools? Those teachers could have the dual role of ensuring both that children grow up used to exercising on a regular, daily basis and that their parents become involved and take over some of the coaching of out-of-school activities.

When the minister conducts his review, will he bear in mind the parallel set of non-local government organisations that operate what we used to think of fondly as public services, which were owned by the public and run for the public? I refer particularly to Edinburgh Leisure. Will he take into account the fact that public services have been handed over lock, stock and barrel to people who are not able to run them like private businesses yet are expected to apply the lessons of the market?

Could the minister advise—not tell to do, but advise—the Scottish Tourist Board, of fond memory, that we would like it to spell its name properly again,  because the spelling of the new name confuses visitors, never mind the rest of us?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order.

It is. I think that I am correct in saying that it is not in keeping with the standards of the Parliament, or with the standing orders, for one member's probity to be questioned by another during a debate.

Will the member take an intervention from a moderate, sensible nationalist?

My question is about responsibility. The Minister for Finance and Local Government may discover that more will have to be paid for the frame for the east wing of the Parliament building—I think that that is what John Home Robertson called it—and that the money for that will have to come from the education budget or the teacher training budget. Should not the  Minister for Finance and Local Government therefore be part of the decision-making body that decides the Parliament's priorities? That is what the Tories are trying to establish.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that members from outside Edinburgh might not be familiar with the number of newer buildings in Edinburgh and how much they have cost. The Scottish Widows building, which has a complicated IT system and is a sophisticated building, cost £60 million. A great number of people have questioned whether what we are about to construct represents value for money.

I thank the Tories for putting this motion on the agenda before the general election. If they had not done so, we would have had to wait until the election was out the road before we heard the true cost and state of progress of the building. We owe them that debt of gratitude. I came here today—even though it is the third time round—in the expectation that a bit more truth would out. After hearing John Home Robertson, I am sadly disappointed. I have heard what are now shibboleths repeated by Richard Simpson, a man whom I respect, who says that Queensberry House should be knocked down—that was the clear implication. It was vandalised after the project started. We should not allow such things to go unrecorded and unreported. I used to believe that the Parliament had been misled inadvertently. Having heard John Home Robertson, I believe that it is no longer inadvertent; I believe that systematic deception is being practised on this Parliament by the people associated with the project team and I am prepared to back up that claim if anyone asks me to. If I am wrong, let those concerned come to the Parliament today with the true costs to which they are now working. I do not believe that they do not have a bottom-line figure. I want to know whether it is true that we now expect to pay £15 million for landscaping. If we are, where will the extra £4 million come from? It will have to come from the health, education or local authority budget. We have a duty and a right—on behalf of the people who sent us here and who believed that we were going to spend £195 million on the building—to find out how much  more is to be spent. Let me say to anyone who is interested in the facts that I have never, ever carped about the cost of the building; people can go through the records and will see that. What I have carped about are the aesthetics and the siting of the building and whether it represents value for money. The same is true today, which is why I will not support the Conservatives' motion, although I thank them for bringing it to the Parliament. The rubicon of £195 million has been passed; we cannot now go back on that. I may be the only person in the chamber who believes that the project need not become a hole in the ground. Michael Russell mentioned that and it is true that there is a history of that happening in Edinburgh. However, the same council that was responsible for such projects is now looking for a new place to roost. Perhaps the City of Edinburgh Council should try Holyrood; Eric Milligan said it was a great site. There are a number of uses to which the site could be put and many millions of pounds could be recouped from the sale of the MSP block, such as it now is. A number of architects do not concede that we must go forward as planned rather than take another route. However, I accept that I have probably lost that proposition, so there are two things we must get straight today on behalf of the people who have sent us here: how much will the project now cost and does that represent value for money? When will we be told? We must also establish the principle—perhaps the most important principle of all—that, if the Parliament votes for an amount of money to be spent on its behalf by a minister of the Parliament or a group appointed by the Parliament, that minister or group must come back to the Parliament, if they go above the budget, to explain why they have done so and to seek permission to go ahead. That is what the SNP amendment seeks to establish. I am thankful to see Labour members who agree with what I have just said. Members should support the amendment. I accept that we are never going to agree on the aesthetics of the building. As far as I am concerned, it will ruin a very beautiful part of Edinburgh. We are never, ever going to hear the admission we should hear that misleading information was given to Parliament about the exact state of Enric Miralles's health. I do not expect ever to have an apology from where I ought to have one, to say that I was right in saying that the poor man would be unable to see his concept fulfilled and that anything following that would be a hotch-potch job. It is nonsense to say that we have gone down the same route as the politicians in Australia who  objected to Sydney Opera House. Sensible people realised that the architect was a signature architect who had been chosen for his vision and that, when he was no longer there to see the project through, that vision should perhaps be reassessed in the light of reality. We were misled. As this is probably the last chance that I will have to say this, I urge the Parliament, please, to do away with the lies, to do away with the people who have given misleading information to the chamber and to demand to know what the budget now is.

Will the member take an intervention?

I want to underline the fact that Mr McLetchie's claim of incompetence stretches back to the very time that he describes, when the original specifications were drawn up. At that time, the assumption was that there would be 250 people working in and around the Parliament. Five months after Parliament opened, however, 1,200 people were working here. The advice tendered to the then Secretary of State for Scotland was wrong and the people who tendered it should have walked.

I agree with almost everything Gordon Jackson said, but far from persuading me to vote for this complacent little Executive motion, it confirmed my belief that the motion does nothing to reassure people who are afraid to leave their houses at night and who fear that their cars will be burgled. In no way does the motion touch on any of the points that Gordon Jackson addressed in his speech. I am well aware of the view, as is everyone here,  that the fear of crime is not warranted by the number of crimes that are reported and detected, but if as legislators we do not take on board the perceptions of members of the public to inform our policy making, we will not produce policies that reduce the number of crimes that make people afraid to go out at night in their own areas. This is where Gordon Jackson got it absolutely right. It may be possible to point to a Scottish figure and say, "We have reduced it by 1 per cent"—which is the number we are talking about for some of the statistics—but if people do not see a genuine reduction, they will not believe that anything is being done to fight crime or to make the place a better place to live in and they will lose faith in the system of justice and policing. We should not be too haughty about the importance of public perception. It may be that people do not always get the right end of the statistical stick, but they know what it feels like to live in their areas, and they know whether they have the confidence to report petty crimes, which can make their lives a misery, to the local community policeman who they know is run off his feet, or to the policewoman who is stretched by trying to do her best in the community. The SNP amendment recognises the contract of reciprocal trust and respect between lawmakers, keepers of public order, those who dispense justice and the ordinary people who live in Scotland. That is why I am happy to support the SNP amendment rather than to go wholeheartedly into the breach behind Gordon Jackson. In all fairness, the Executive has given the impression of trying to meet the criteria for a successful criminal justice policy, as was outlined by Gordon Jackson. For example, in Edinburgh, the Executive gave additional funding to the police. I am tempted to damn the Minister for Justice with faint praise by thanking him—a wee bit, anyway—for handing over the money that has allowed Sir Roy Cameron to set up the city centre policing unit. Previously, he was denied the ring-fenced money for the police in Edinburgh to provide the sort of capital-city policing—proportionately—that is provided by the Metropolitan police in London. It is reassuring, not just for tourists, but for ordinary people in Edinburgh, to see the 22 officers, two sergeants and chief inspector in and about the city centre. That is excellent. Seeing them there, residents also know that policemen and policewomen have not been drawn off their normal day-to-day duties. However, that is still not good enough, because it is possible to go up to the south side of the city, for example Morningside—I will not excuse myself for being parochial here; not after what Gordon Jackson said—and find that all the shops have been broken into. They are not in a social  partnership area. They are not in an area of tremendous need; the area is not targeted for help; but the people are losing faith in the natural order of a pleasant part of the city in which to live. They need more police. It is as simple as that. Even though more money has gone into the police service, it is not enough to suit the genuine requirements of the people in that area. Although it is not an area of tremendous social deprivation, the people there are entitled to good policing and a feeling of security.

When I was a Morningside matron—I am now a Grange granny—I took the initiative and approached the shopkeepers to say, "Look, we'll get together with the community police and work out a scheme." As I said, I am very much in favour of what Gordon Jackson said. His basic idea is correct. The Executive would do well to set that as a strategic framework for improving policing in Scotland. I am terribly sorry for taking more time, Presiding Officer, but I must say to the minister that he must not move money from the Scottish Prison Service's revenue account to its capital account. That would make prison officers, who have been driven to industrial action, pay to end slopping out. That would be disgraceful. I apologise for leaving now—I have a family emergency.

Will Mr Wallace give way?

Will Mr Wallace give way?

I will press Mr Wallace on seizures. Focusing on quality, not quantity, is likely to show the best return in tackling the damage that drug misuse and abuse does to society. We should consider not only the number of people lifted or tonnes of drugs lifted, but which drugs are lifted, by whom and in what circumstances.

Will Ben Wallace give way?

I will pick up from where Richard Simpson left off. I am surprised at his conservatism in this matter; although I do not ignore his arguments about the possibility of transatlantic attitudes entering the practice of medicine in this country, I think that it is part of this chamber's function to set the parameters not just for good practice, but for the morality and humanity that permeates our health service. It seems mean-spirited of the Executive to deny compensation to people who have been injured through no fault of their own. Although I understand the legal arguments that advise caution, we are not debating the legality of the situation, but protecting the people who have been harmed. The arguments against compensation do not hold water and I am glad that the Labour party whip seems to agree with me.

I might return to the member after I make the following important point. I welcome today's debate not only for the people who have been affected by the faulty blood products that were used in their transfusions; as Keith Raffan would say more eloquently if he were here, the situation is a ticking time bomb. I cannot explain just how deeply I feel about this matter. The right noises have been made about providing money and a scheme of treatment for sufferers, but no one understands how many people are involved. At a seminar yesterday, Dr Toby Delahook from the University of Edinburgh's infectious diseases research unit explained that 1,200 people with the virus had been picked up in Edinburgh alone. As yet there is no screening, because we have not worked out how to implement a screening programme that would not make life impossible for the people who have the virus, which incubates for 10 to 15 years. People can get on with their lives without knowing that they have the disease, so it comes as an absolute bombshell to realise that they probably have inoperable liver damage. This is not the time or place to go into details; however, it is the time to acknowledge that hepatitis C is as much a priority as HIV was. As a result, I ask the minister to tell us in his summing-up what happened to the promised helpline for hepatitis C sufferers. As someone who managed the national AIDS helpline, I know the absolutely crucial part it played in supporting sufferers and ensuring that the pool of transmission was contained. Such containment should be part of any hepatitis C strategy. As the two ministers with responsibility for health are local Edinburgh representatives, will they urgently consider using some of the money for  drug action teams to ensure that Capital C—the support and counselling service for hepatitis C sufferers in Edinburgh—does not go out of existence because of lack of funding? It is a well-grounded and well-established service that desperately needs funding and, as far as I am aware, the money that was allocated to the drug action teams to combat the drug-related effects of infection has not all been spent. I apologise for being a bit garbled, but I had a number of specific points to raise, and I hope that the minister will be able to answer them.

Will the minister give way?

Can the minister tell us whether the skills of the people working in Motorola now can be directly transferred to the promised research and development facilities to which she referred? I remember that, when Continental Tyres closed its Newbridge plant, it was said that the people who were made redundant could not transfer. It would be good to hear what has made the difference between then and now as, if only 31 of the former Continental Tyres workers are currently unemployed, something must have gone right in that case. Will the package that is to be delivered recognise the knock-on effect of the closure of the Motorola plant on small businesses and other services in the West Lothian area? Although the people who are working in Motorola come from a much wider area than just West Lothian, the people who will suffer most are those who run the other businesses and services there.

I welcome the minister's statement that the Executive sees the tranche of measures that he has announced as a first step. I also welcome the implicit, underlying theme of a concentrated strategy: the survival of small and medium tourism businesses. We may have to look beyond the current tourism season to regain markets. We must also ensure that the people who we have trained do not depart the industry, taking with them their tourism skills. With that in mind, I draw the minister's attention to a survey that is currently being undertaken by Edinburgh and Lothians Tourist Board. The survey shows that 90 per cent of its members questioned so far say that their business has suffered as a result of foot-and-mouth disease, although only 30 per cent of its members so far questioned have laid off staff. We can see where that equation will lead us. Bearing that in mind, I will return to the point made by my colleague Kenny MacAskill. He asked whether many of the measures that have been directed towards very badly hit rural areas should be directed towards Edinburgh and Glasgow, for example. More than 50 per cent of people who visit rural areas in Scotland and tourist areas, if you like, start from Edinburgh. If we lose the key to Scotland, I am not sure how we can keep the door open.

Is the  minister satisfied that in the disposal of hospital grounds, particularly in Edinburgh, the same meticulous attention has been paid to the need for value for money and a properly considered business plan for the dispersal of facilities and resources as there is for the development of new facilities?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the financial position of the Lothian  University Hospitals NHS Trust in light of the statement by the trust that it does not have the resources to use its additional magnetic resonance imaging scanner. (S1O-3226) The financial position of all NHS trusts and health boards is constantly reviewed as part of our normal monitoring work. Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust forecasts that it will meet its financial targets. I have already announced that Lothian will receive an additional £32 million in 2001-02 to pursue national and local priorities, including improved cancer services.

I thank the minister for her reply, but will she bear in mind the urgency attached to the provision of scanners throughout Scotland? Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust has said that it does not have the £375,000 it needs to service a magnetic resonance imaging scanner. Will she therefore say that she is willing to allow the trust to install a computed tomography scanner, which is cheaper to run and is more urgently needed by the Western general? Will she promise me that, in future, whenever she wants to give the impression of an NHS that is not under pressure she will sit down and plan strategic objectives with the hospital boards, patients' representatives and the trusts?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I believe that it is a genuine point of order. Will you confirm that it is quite proper for the Parliament to express an opinion on matters that might be reserved to Westminster? This afternoon, the First Minister perhaps inadvertently gave the impression that although we have no control over the date of the general election, it is also not legitimate for us to express an opinion on it.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will issue guidance to local authorities on their continuing responsibility for, and relationships with, arm's-length companies that are wholly or partially owned by local authorities. (S1O-3143)

I am glad to hear that consultation is taking place. Does the minister agree that new Labour Executives at national, UK and local government level have to accept ultimate responsibility for publicly owned assets or facilities? When he is in discussions with local authorities, will he consider whether more attention should be paid to how arm's-length companies work? He should look at the position in Edinburgh, which exemplifies the problem.

The senior councillor who is the executive member for recreation has said that he is unable to give any answers about what the arm's-length company Edinburgh Leisure does. The councillor who is the executive member for economic development has refused to discuss public appointments.

Will the minister look at how the City of Edinburgh Council operates its arm's-length companies?

For the benefit of Phil Gallie and anyone else who is interested, the ECHR is an international treaty. It is not that someone is taking over our law—we agreed that the treaty was a good thing and therefore we signed up to it. What has been said about making the ECHR more accessible to people in Scotland is both perfectly obvious and entirely reasonable, and I would have thought that that would be accepted throughout the chamber. The remarks from the Conservatives therefore came as a bit of a surprise, because, as far as I am concerned, so far, so good. I will mention a couple of exceptions to that comment later. Like most members, I welcome the proposed change in the treatment of adult mandatory life prisoners, which the bill brings into line with the sentencing of designated life prisoners and is the correct way to go about sentencing. The Minister for Justice jumped before he was pushed, and I hope that he will complete his answer, now that he has started, to the question about the length of mandatory life sentences. He must be aware that strong voices will be raised in favour of allowing the punishment element of any future sentencing policy to be lengthened beyond the period during which a prisoner might hope to return to the community—that applies even to prisoners who have committed crimes that are judged most harshly by the public. The Scottish Consortium on Crime and Criminal Justice reports that there is no evidence that tougher or longer sentences have a deterrent  effect on serious crime. We must examine the effect of any changes on deterrence, as that is what the public is interested in. It is important that we stress that, in order to reassure the public. When the bill becomes law, there is no doubt that there will be media interest in how it will affect different categories of prisoner, or even individual prisoners. It is in everyone's interests to show that the bill does not soften the existing system of punishing murderers and the like. Rather, it introduces a more consistent and effective way of dealing with prisoners—both as individuals and as members of the prison community—that is much more likely to produce the sort of regime that will make our prisons more satisfactory places. I could not agree more with Maureen Macmillan's comments on the proposed changes to how information is relayed to victims. The victims of crime should be informed, after sentence has been handed down, about when release will be considered. However, after that, the onus should be on the victims to seek further information should they wish or require to. It is absolutely excellent that Jim Wallace is prepared to do what Jack Straw—who is being pulled by his back teeth by the more liberal consensus north of the border—is not. Far from the Parliament and Scots law being subservient to UK law, I suggest that by taking the approach that is proposed in the bill, we may be showing the way forward for UK law and taking a properly responsible role in building international law. The task of making sentencing policy must be removed—and be seen to be removed—from ministers. Such policy must be left to an independent parole board. I urge the minister to take note of the evidence of the Law Society of Scotland to the Justice 1 Committee. The number of members of the Parole Board must rise and more resources must be allocated to the board, as my colleague Roseanna Cunningham pointed out. To distance the Executive further from the day-to-day operation of compliance with the ECHR, an independent human rights commission seems to be the best way of ensuring that justice is seen to be done. We had much debate about the bill's provisions on subordinate legislation and about how the remedial orders are envisaged and would be introduced. However, if a continuing independent audit and monitoring process were to be provided by an independent commission, many of the difficulties associated with the ECHR compliance would be overcome. David McLetchie said that he thought that the bill was a lot of nonsense, because a properly accountable and responsible politician could take remedial action and decide whether there should be remission of sentences. I have news for David McLetchie: not all politicians are accountable and  responsible—some of them are absolute rogues. I am not prepared to leave such decisions to politicians and would prefer to have an independent parole board and to give its members security of tenure.

Briefly, as I want to mention something else that is dear to Phil Gallie's heart.

The case that says that politicians are any more accountable to society is not proved. Politicians have already made mistakes; their track record on this issue shows that they are not absolutely essential. I crave the indulgence of the Presiding Officer. The big omission, which I want to refer to before I close, is the minister's lack of reference to slopping out. Why is the minister not taking his courage in both hands? Why is he not anticipating the fact that prisoners are waiting to take that issue to the court in Strasbourg? The minister should say now that it is embarrassing to find ourselves past the deadline that the Executive had hoped to meet. Let us put our hands up and say that we will do it now.

Will the member give way on that point?

Is the minister in a position to say whether, at this stage of the bill, he has taken into account the age of those who are eligible for appointment to the Parole Board? There has been some discussion as to there being an upper age limit.

Having published the draft bill, will the minister take into account in the consultation the difficulty that people might have in obtaining information from companies that are described as self-standing, hands-off or arm's-length, and which were previously the preserve of local council departments and have been hived or spun off? It is very difficult, since those organisations are operating to commercial criteria, for any member of the public to gain information from them. I have had recent experience of that when mothers in Edinburgh, who were using the facilities of Edinburgh Leisure, were unable to get the direct answers that they needed from that company, because it was not acting as the council used to.

I have a genuine question. Although I accept that some people may have given confidential and professional information to the Minister for Health and Community Care in the instance that Iain Gray mentioned, a Swedish expert, who is acknowledged as the world's No 1  expert, was approached. He gave an opinion that was contrary to that which the minister eventually reached. I know for a fact, because I inquired, that he would not have been in the least worried had that information been made available to people such as myself who inquired.

Like my colleagues, I welcome the draft bill. It sets an excellent precedent for dealings in the Parliament, which will probably contrast unhappily with the dodgy deals that we are likely to see later today. However, I would like to probe the laudable sentiments. I endorse what Gordon Jackson said about the clarity of the intention behind the draft bill. I hope that when the minister sums up he will answer some of the questions. I would like to test a couple of issues that I have come across when representing people who have approached me and who were perfectly entitled to seek clarification. The first case probably falls within the qualified class exemptions to which sections 30 and 31 relate. According to my reading of those sections, the information that is collected by an enforcing authority during routine inspections would also be exempt, even if no offence had been detected or a decision not to prosecute had been taken. The first case concerns a gentleman from Edinburgh who approached me in October 1999 about interceptions that he suspected had taken place in the previous year of regular telephone calls between him and his girlfriend in Ireland. I wrote to Jack Straw on 7 December 1999, 2 February 2000 and 24 May 2000 to ask for information. None of those letters was acknowledged. I changed tack and approached our own Minister for Justice, who I admit replied to me, although it took him a long time. I will be interested to hear how we will improve the culture of information, never mind secrecy. The minister directed me to the Interception of Communications Tribunal. We sent out the required forms on 30 September 2000. As of today, I still await an answer, as does the person who contacted me. That is not good enough. I want to know how our freedom of information bill will better serve that member of the Scottish public. He is entitled to know why letters went unanswered and why the  staff to whom we spoke by telephone were unhelpful. Is there a conflict of interest between Westminster's Freedom of Information Act 2000 and our draft bill? What legitimacy do we have? What legitimacy do I have in representing the person who approached me with what I consider a reasonable request for information? Gordon Jackson said that he thought that the clear statement of intent at the start of the draft bill would make it difficult for public authorities to deny information, but will it make it as difficult for an authority that is under Westminster's control? We are dealing with the security services. What will be the information commissioner's role vis-à-vis the security services and the exempt cases at Westminster? My second case concerns the information that is freely available about a Government or Parliament project. I will use the Holyrood project as an example—I am sure that that will surprise a few people. I want to test whether the aspirations of the bill, the minister and all those present for the debate measure up to discovering what we and other Scots should know about the Holyrood building. Will the bill place any requirement on the policy makers who decided where to site the Parliament building to explain their reasons? Are no minutes of their meetings open for inspection on request? That is not just to satisfy a nosey-parker member of the Parliament. Such information is part of our history and the legacy that we will hand on to future generations in Scotland. We need such information to take a balanced view about whether we have the Parliament that we say we want—the Parliament that we deserve and that Scots were told to expect. I presume that that information is contained in minutes of committees. Will the bill allow us to see them or will we have to go to the Scottish Parliament's visitor centre? There, interactive displays are to help us to understand the who, why and how of the Parliament today. I have tried to do that ever since I entered the Parliament, and so far my efforts have been thwarted. I will judge the draft bill's effectiveness—not its intentions—by its ability to deal with the two test cases that I outlined.

Unlike Mr Gallie, I do not believe the draft bill to be a sop. However, it is only a start, so we should treat it seriously.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I am sorry; I could not hear. Will the minister give way?

On a point of order. I apologise for raising this matter in a point of order, because I did try to extract the information from the minister.

I believe that it is.

Will you clarify whether the Executive can point to the rule of standing orders that allows the Executive, in effect, to negate the decision taken by the Parliament last week, which is what will happen if we debate the same issue and reach a different conclusion?

On a point of order.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Does it fall within your area of responsibility to ensure that internationally accepted standards of probity and democratic practice are shown in the chamber to the people who elected us? That is what concerns me about what happened in the chamber last week.

Will the Minister for Justice reassure us that he will resist the temptation to limit the freedom of expression? The minister has expressed his own abhorrence of people who profit from writing about their crimes and, like everyone else, I do not wish that practice to continue. The onus is on the  people who publish. As a result, perhaps the appeal should be made to publishers instead of the people who committed the crime and might have repented. Does that not come into the equation?

To ask the Scottish Executive what representations it will make to the Bank of Scotland and the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry regarding the impact of retaining the bank's head office in Edinburgh in the event of any merger involving the bank. (S1O-3014)

I thank the minister for that answer. Does she agree that the Abbey National's termination of interest in a merger with the Bank of  Scotland gives the opportunity for the Executive, or perhaps the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, to mount an audit or inquiry into all the changes that have been taking place in the Scottish financial services sector, which are of fundamental importance to the economy not only of Edinburgh, but of Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

I wonder whether the minister agrees that there is a point—

Well, of course. I recognise quality when I see it. Because we are so affected by the ideas that are promulgated by the UK media, it is difficult to persuade Scottish parents that Scottish schools have a different ethos and outlook. Instead of saying that we will withhold information from parents, we should be considering more imaginative ways of getting positive information. How will we overcome the hurdle of the terrible embarrassment of Blair calling the educational shots in England?

I pay tribute to Broughton High School. It is possible to offer some specialisation within the comprehensive system in all Scotland's cities, but for people who live in Motherwell—the minister referred to Braidhurst High School and Dalziel High School—there is not the same spread of ability to offer the same quality and breadth of education and specialisation as can be found in the cities.

I hark back to a previous question about the collection of national statistics. I am informed that 30 per cent of people diagnosed as having ME are rediagnosed as having hepatitis C. Is the minister aware of that? Does he agree that it is conclusive proof that we need much more sensitive central collection of health statistics in Scotland for the self-management of many such conditions?

I would never attempt to teach an education minister how many beans make five—not one who is an ex-maths teacher anyway. I appreciate that there may be a difference of educational opinion on what constitutes a reasonable or the optimum size for a primary school class, but it is agreed across the teaching profession that, although the minister has introduced some hope of an improvement in teaching and employment conditions—conduct and so on—he still has not got it right. Far too much of primary teachers' time will be taken up preparing lessons, rather than being in the classroom. How does the minister mean to reduce that?

I would like to associate myself with the acknowledgement of the competence and compassion that were shown by our criminal justice system during the trial. Dennis Canavan and Lord James Douglas-Hamilton asked about compensation and further investigation. The responses from the Lord Advocate show that, in a trial of this sort, the law and politics interface, and the judgment that Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi committed murder in conjunction with others in pursuance of the Libyan intelligence services' interests also suggests that it is difficult to disentangle the law from the politics of the case. Given the experience of Camp Zeist and the status that is now enjoyed by Scots law in terms of the credibility and independence of its judges, what opportunity exists for the Scottish legal system to shape directly the construction of the international criminal court?

I would like to widen the debate a little. Up to now, it  has been about the Scottish Executive's programme for government. I would like to consider the responsibilities of government in general. Before I do, I will pay tribute to the First Minister. I applaud—as will everyone in the chamber, I think—his personal commitment to social justice. I sense that he really means it. That is excellent, and quite different from what we hear in some of the speeches from another Parliament. However, although not exactly boasting, he spoke about the richness of the talent to be found among young people in Scotland and said that he wanted them to make a contribution. So do I—but not only in Scotland. It is not enough to say that each of them will have access to the internet. The idea of contributing internationally is much bigger and wider than that, as I will explain later. I freely concede that the Executive's plans in some areas might well improve some of the services and facilities for which the Executive has ultimate responsibility. However, it is not enough for this Parliament to be judged to have fulfilled the normal expectations of a Parliament. People look for much more than that. Although Hugh Henry said that, as a former local government leader, he would have given his right arm for some of the settlements that local government has now received from the Executive, it is not carping of the SNP and other Opposition parties to say that that is not good enough. Last night, I was in the company of people who are described as handicapped or physically disabled. They were marvellous young people, and much of that is down to the fact that they go to a particular club. That club is due to run out of funds on 31 March. If that happens, it will be a stain not just on local government in Edinburgh but on the Executive for not being able to provide the support to develop the talents that the First Minister talked about. I do not mean to carp, but where there are shortfalls we are, as Donald Gorrie said, entitled to comment on them. I said that I wanted to widen the debate. I believe that Parliaments are supposed to exercise rights and responsibilities. In negotiating with teachers, Jack McConnell has rights and responsibilities. Devolution has given him responsibility for the Scottish education system. In another defining area of our society, Jim Wallace and the Scottish law officers have rights and responsibilities—looking after the system within our boundaries. However, because the system stops at the border, it is constrained. In the past few months, we have seen that Scottish justice will stand up to international scrutiny. Just like Scotland's children, it has much to contribute to the world. We have much to contribute to the development of international justice and to the  improvement of civil rights for all people. We should not do that through the prism of Westminster. If we have the right to have our own legal system, we have the responsibility for ensuring that it contributes to the development of legal systems in the world. We have that responsibility and the aim is achievable and reasonable, as has been demonstrated at Camp Zeist. I believe that the Executive and Parliament should seek to exercise that responsibility on behalf of the people whom we represent. The exercise of such a responsibility will make us all grow. It will make our aspirations higher. We will benefit more people—and not just here in Scotland. If we think small, we will do small things. We must think a lot bigger. If we have our own criminal justice system, and if it is seen throughout the world to be a sound system, let it interact directly with the other systems of the world. I urge the Scottish Executive to embrace as part of its programme for government all the aspirations, responsibilities and rights of government. Do not cut us off from global developments in any area of human activity, as will happen if we think small. Although I agree with many things in the programme for government document, I believe that it is too limited in its aspirations.

rose—

Does the leader of the Conservatives agree that it would have shown good sense, good management and a good programme for government if the First Minister had said that he was going to advise the people who are going to spend a fortune on duplicating the efforts of the director of the National Galleries of Scotland, whom we are already paying to tell us  what art we have that might enhance the new Parliament building?

Will the First Minister give way?

I cannot resist the First Minister either. However, I would like to give him the opportunity to withdraw his remark that noble sentiments never put bread on the table. Without the noble sentiments of our forebears, there would be bread, but many fewer tables than there are today.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Can you rule as to whether, on a future occasion, if any party wishes to make a statement following a debate, you will allow that statement to be made and that that gesture will not be made simply towards the Executive?

Can the minister give an absolute assurance that—using the terminology of the question—no baby will be "purchased" in Scotland? I am concerned by the use of the word "purchase". No loophole should be left for that.

I promise to be right beside Donald Gorrie when he does his best to create trouble. I add my weight, which is shrinking fast, to that. I shall address only two points of principle, because I do not pretend to be an expert on the matter, and I defer to many of the Labour members who have spoken, with whom I have a disagreement today, because in this area they have expertise that I do not share. However, we once did share a belief in the principle of the universality of benefits and services so that people do not fall through the cracks. I urge those Labour members who still share that belief to realise that the tremendous advances that the Minister for Health and Community Care outlined with regard to needs and care assessments, and the amalgamation of different styles of caring, can be accomplished while achieving the aim of universality. We have a sophisticated taxation system now, which can be used in a way that previous generations could not do to achieve the dream of universality and equality. I urge the minister to accept the principle of universality of service provision. The people whom the Minister for Health and Community Care reckons can afford to pay and should not be supplied with free services—unlike those whom she wishes to target with means-testing—will still be caught in the net of income tax. There is a way to achieve the principles that are being espoused in the chamber, while achieving what the minister is trying to do in the Executive, or Government.

Briefly, I will mention the other principle, because that is the one on which I think Jenkins will want to intervene. The second principle is that which Donald Gorrie spoke about. There is no use in having a Parliament if it does not speak for the people. We know what the people say. I urge everyone to listen to them, but I will listen first to Jenkins.

I do not mind if other members speak.

Right. I am sorry that I cannot guess from this distance what my colleague Christine Grahame might have said. She might have wanted to say, "Ian, we're nowhere near that yet." We are nowhere near the spin on and the interpretation of the outcome of the debate. We are still trying genuinely to debate the issue. The debate revolves round two principles: long-term care, and the status and effectiveness of the Parliament in meeting the aspirations of people in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I accept most of what Dr Simpson has said. Does he accept that the responsibility of the person being cared for to meet the costs of that care, commensurate with their means, can be operated through a system of income tax and a universal benefits system?

Will the minister bring us up to date on what discussions and planning, if any, are under way with regard to coping with the new road hazard to children and adults: drivers who are under the influence of drugs other than the drug that we already acknowledge as posing a big threat, alcohol?

I pressed my button first, so I hope to be allowed to speak for two and a half minutes. I understand why the Minister for Justice thinks it reasonable and good practice to have Westminster undertake the necessary legislation to expedite the UK's ratification of the treaty to establish a permanent ICC. The UK will be the signatory, because foreign affairs such as this are reserved for the big brains—I nearly said big heads—in Westminster. The minister, however, thinks that the treaty is anomalous. It is based on the need—as Pauline McNeill said—to create a better system of human rights throughout the world and to extend such rights to all humanity. It is based on big political and moral considerations and it depends on the intermeshing of the world's legal systems. Although Scotland has a Parliament, we do not have the mechanisms that would allow us to interact with other nations of the world in developing the intention and direction of the international criminal court. But we have a legal system, so I do not take the minister's attitude that the situation is anomalous, and that we should just allow Westminster—which has the political system and the right to sign an international treaty—to pass the legislation that is required for our legal system to interact with other international legal systems. My attitude is that an international treaty that recognises the world's legal systems should recognise the Scots legal system. Why should it be that, according to part II of the bill—I must congratulate the drafters of the explanatory notes that came with the bill, because they are comprehensive—someone who is arrested in Scotland might be able to argue their way out of appearing before the court because they could argue that it was part of an extradition process, which is reserved to Westminster? Should not it say in the treaty that there is such a thing as Scots law, and that if someone is arrested in Scotland under the terms of Scots law, that will be recognised in the international criminal court? I oppose the minister's view because I have a different way of looking at the world—I would like to join it. I would like to play a proactive part in building the treaty. I would like Scotland to be properly informed about all the questions that underlie the treaty. I want Scottish people to discuss and understand properly why the incoming  American Administration has said that it will not ratify the treaty, when one of the last things that Bill Clinton did on his way out the door was to say that he would. I want Scots to understand that if, in future, Scottish squaddies who are involved in an international effort, say in Kosovo, Bosnia or something like it, are hauled up for the sort of action that saw two squaddies from Scotland in front of a court because they wrongfully shot someone in Belfast—as judged by people in Ireland—that will be a matter for international debate. Scots must understand those issues and must make their voices heard in the world, and this is the place where that should be decided. I urge the Minister for Justice to listen to Roseanna Cunningham.

On a point of order.

On a point of order. With all due respect, Presiding Officer, if the chamber does not agree with a ruling for which you have decreed that you will accept responsibility, whether the matter refers to the actions of one of your deputies or not, and has no confidence in you, is not it the case that the proper route is a motion of no confidence in the chair, because you accepted that responsibility?

I promise that I will not get into a "silly constitutional skirmish"—I am sure that the minister will recognise the real thing when she meets it. I am concerned about the practical application of the policy in regard to the new hospital, which is being built not with Scottish resources, but with private resources for private profit, as everybody in the chamber is well aware. I would like to know about the proposed size of the increased car parking facilities. Will the car park be free—which would leave the people in housing that is close to the hospital undisturbed and which would be fair for people who are visiting relatives in hospital—or will Consort Healthcare use the car park to make an even bigger profit from the so-called cutting edge of medicine in Scotland?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek the guidance of the chair on whether, under the standing orders of the Parliament, it is possible to extend this debate by extending today's sitting.

I  would like to press the First Minister on how the additional resource might be introduced into the provision of broadband technology, without which the development of the University of the Highlands and Islands is likely to be severely curtailed. We know that BT is very unwilling to invest north of Crieff. Is the First Minister willing to give a commitment that, if BT will not invest, there will be public investment?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on a matter of this Parliament's competence—how to deal with the consequences of the motion of censure that I lodged today on Muir Russell's inability to fulfil his functions to the standards required of this Parliament. I cannot find in either the standing orders of the Parliament or the Scotland Act 1998 a means of dealing effectively with what the Audit Committee found to be a shortcoming on the permanent secretary's part, because he is not a servant of the Parliament or answerable to it but is employed by the civil service of the Westminster Parliament.

I wish to move a motion of censure. Surely the Parliament can move a motion of censure.

I have lodged a motion today and it has been accepted.

If I could return to earth and leave Mars behind, I wonder whether the First Minister recalls that following the winter crisis—

I know, but the First Minister knows what my first question is.

Right, we will go through the form. To ask the First Minister how he plans to recruit the required number of nurses for hospitals to cope with seasonal admissions this winter. (S1F-716)

Now that we have got that clear, does the First Minister remember that although after the winter crisis last year the Accounts Commission for Scotland admitted that agency nursing staff were an important resource, which should be called on, it said that they should be recruited only to fill unforeseen staff shortages or in unforeseen, unplanned emergencies? I was glad that on Monday the Minister for Health and Community Care said that she was planning ahead for the winter crisis. However, she also said that part of the plan was to recruit the extra supply of nurses from nursing banks. As the Accounts Commission said that that should be done only to deal with unforeseen circumstances, how does the First Minister intend to recruit the nurses that will be required this winter and to maintain services in elective surgery and so on, to which my colleague John Swinney referred and on which he did not receive an answer?

Will the member give way?

If the consultation shows that the consensus of opinion in Scotland backs Mr McAllion and me in believing that public ownership of Railtrack is the best step that we can take towards ensuring the highest safety standards, will the First Minister attempt to ensure that Her Majesty's Government undertakes a similar consultation exercise in England, because I am quite sure that people there will be as sensible as us?

Will the member clarify it further? Is the Conservative party's position the same as that of the Labour party, to the extent that if, during the Parliament after next, the Conservative party is the Government at Westminster and Westminster is still governing Scotland, it will ask the audience?

I meant to start by asking Mr Mundell whether he would make clear what his leader, Mr McLetchie, did not—the Conservative party's attitude to the euro. However, Mr Scott has done that for him, so Mr Mundell need not bother too much about the euro. I will repeat what Mr Scott said, as I was so glad to hear it. He said that we do not want to be part of the euro. I am not a Europhobe, but I think that a healthy touch of scepticism on the euro is well placed. As we are all putting records straight about where we were in the 1970s and 1980s, I will add that I did not inhale, so I remember the 1970s and campaigning strongly under the slogan, "No voice, no entry". That is where I stand today. If Scotland has a voice in Europe, I do not see why it should be submerged by Europe. David McLetchie suggested that that was what the SNP wanted. He is so wrong. The SNP wants Scotland to be up-front, visible and equal in Europe, not submerged. That is why we cannot support any of the rubbish in the Labour party's amendment. I want to take Mr McConnell to task. I understood that he could not give way during his speech because of the time limit, but he gave the impression that he wanted the chamber to do the job of the Confederation of British Industry and pave the way for business in Poland and similar places. I have no doubt that, with his background, Mr McConnell would be a great addition to the general effort in building up economic and trade links throughout Europe. However, I do not think that that is the Parliament's main function. Our main function is to contribute to the growth of Europe and the context in which the continent will develop in the 21 st century. It is not enough for Labour to suggest, as it does in its amendment, that there are different levels of participation, and that it is suitable for the Scottish ministers to take part at some levels. I attended a conference in Maastricht recently—unfortunately it was not an intergovernmental conference—that the eminent Professor Guenther Schaefer addressed. I see Ben Wallace smiling at the memory of that. The professor said that we were headed for a federal Europe and that we—including members in the chamber—should not kid ourselves that the European Committee of the Regions had any power. He said that it was the least effective of all the European institutions. I wonder whether that is why that committee is not mentioned in Labour's amendment. It was the fig leaf that Labour used in the European Committee, when the Parliament started, to suggest that Scotland was represented in Europe. We will have no such thing without proper independence. Jamie Stone discussed peace and stability.

I am terribly sorry. I will see whether I have time at the end of my speech. The one way of creating havoc in Europe is by trying to make everyone fit the same shoe, which is what is happening now. That has been responsible for the rise of the far-right parties in Austria and Germany. Even the applicant countries are experiencing a rise in the sort of politics that we do not want to exist in Europe. I maintain that if we try to impose cosmopolitanism, we undermine not nationalist fascists but internationalism.

I am terribly sorry. Sylvia Jackson and Irene Oldfather contributed most to the debate from Labour because they observed the practicalities. Sylvia talked about how the environment would be pan-European—all of us would say that that was an admirable objective. However, we cannot have that without a cohesive economic strategy, and we cannot have that in this world without a cohesive energy strategy. How many members are willing to allow a British Government to do in the context of renewable energy what was done to Scottish oil? Whether Labour or Tory Governments, they squandered that resource. I am unwilling to give up sovereignty over those natural resources. I want the Parliament to represent Scotland and Scots, and the resources of Scotland, which should contribute to the resources of Europe. Those resources should not be taken over by Europeans, or by British Governments, which have such a poor track record, not only on energy but on fishing. I am sorry that I have been unable to allow the minister to intervene, but he has more of a chance to speak than me.

The debate refers primarily to Scotland. What percentage of Scottish exports is hidden in that UK total? That is the sort of question that I would have put to the minister if he had just looked kindly on me during his speech, as I am trying to establish the Scottish dimension in this debate on Europe.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take my intervention now, please?

Does the member recall the independence displayed by the brave people of Denmark when they said "Nej" to the euro?

Does the minister agree that a short-cut to taking as many children as possible out of poverty might be for the Government in Westminster—which she supports—to return to the old-fashioned idea of taking from the rich, who have too much, and giving to the poor children, who do not have enough?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive plans to enhance its strategy for the development of the renewable energy industry. (S1F-670)

Do I sense some frustration behind the First Minister's words? He does not enjoy the real, sovereign, political power of his Norwegian counterpart, who has a sense of economic security engendered by the knowledge that he has an oil reserve fund of £60 billion and who would therefore be able to order—now—an upgrading of the electricity grid, were it needed in Norway. It is certainly needed in Scotland. Is the First Minister not galled by the fact that he cannot use—now—the extra taxation that is paid by the oil companies into the Exchequer, to ensure that Scotland invests in wave power to stay ahead of the rest of the world in that technology?

Good, Henry.

On a point of order. Is it in order for the First Minister to aim low blows at a back bencher? [Laughter.]

Thank you for allowing me to ask another question, Presiding Officer. Will the First Minister assure me that, as part of the review into compensation that is paid to people who through no fault of their own have contracted some disease or illness, the people who contracted hepatitis C in the early to mid-1980s will be afforded similar consideration as was shown to those who contracted CJD?

Will the member give way?

While the member applauds the chancellor for saying that he will not impose a windfall tax, will he say whether there should be a greater tax on the profits that have already been made?

rose—

I accept, and members all understand, that the matter is reserved. However, I would have thought that the minister would have been sufficiently  shocked by the difference between the previous and current numbers of rejected applications to the social fund to have a real interest in discovering how many of those applications were from Scots families. Will she do that?

I had hoped to talk about substance abuse rather than simply alcohol abuse, but time is short so I will pitch in my grenade at the end of the debate. I am glad that Bill Aitken touched on the attitude of the licensed trade. I was once part of that trade and I know a little bit about it. Responsible licensees are an important part of responsible drinking. However, in this city, alcohol plays a large part in the economy. To realise that, we have only to look at the breweries and the number of people who are employed in the advertising and marketing industries. Therefore, when we are talking about the promotion of all things that are good in Scotland, we should not forget that we are hoping to attract visitors here on the basis of having much better whisky than, for example, the Irish have. We must address the huge hypocrisy that lies at the centre of our society if we are to do what Donald Gorrie asks—and we should do it. We have shown by the campaign against smoking that culture and attitudes can be changed, but we must not forget that the marketing, sponsorship and advertising surrounding the cigarette industry was also considerably affected. We have to do that if we are serious about this issue. I commend the motion.

Will John Munro give way?

I will be brief.

I wanted to mention the European convention.

I also welcome the new Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture, and express regret that he did not wear  his football strip or a tutu. I agree with the sentiments of today's motion, and obviously with the amendment, which simply enhances an absolutely beautiful and all-embracing motion. However, I will comment on the core of the amendment, which is about ensuring high standards of international performance. That can be done only if there is a pool of skilled people from which to draw. Everything that Hugh Henry said forms the basis of the pursuit of excellence; far too many potential athletes and participants are excluded if the wider question is not considered. That potential pool of excellence must be formed at primary school, because we must reach children as early as possible. There are so many other avenues for children to pursue that unless we get them used to sport at primary school, they will be lost before the age of nine. I understand all about the active primary school initiative, but I still do not think that the Executive is managing to hit its targets. I return to my call for more physical education teachers in primary schools. I am not asking for a dedicated teacher in every primary school, but why on earth are there no travelling teachers who can go to two or three primary schools? I did that, and I know the difference that such provision makes. I also know how many folk made the Olympic team, the Commonwealth games team and the final of the Commonwealth games during that era—I will not say whether it was in this century or the last. I should be obliged if the minister seriously considered the relationship between having professionally trained teachers of movement, fitness and sport and the standards that participants in sport show at school, and even the volume of people who take part in sport or some form of exercise regularly.

I could not agree more. In Scotland, no national target for physical activity has been set, so the resources that we are committing to the programmes are not monitored. That is part of my point. It has been said in Parliament that there is no need to train more PE teachers. Oh yes, there is. I hope that the new Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture will revisit that issue. The £3 million that was announced for extra investment in primary schools is not enough to provide continuous support of coaching and teaching. We can compare Scotland with Finland, whose population had similar levels of poor fitness and health. Its Government followed a determined  public policy of getting Finns off the couch and into the fresh air. Admittedly, the Finns drank too much. There will be more discussion of that later for those who care to stay for Mr Gorrie's motion. We also have the answer to that. Perhaps the difference between Scotland and Finland is that PE is compulsory between the ages of seven and 17 in Finland. As far as I know, the World Health Organisation has not reported more suicidal young Finns than Scots, so young Finns are not being driven out of their minds by going to PE classes. The benefit of that provision is shown in the health statistics that are now reported from Finland. The potential for excellence is diminished if we do not catch people young. The potential for health in the whole population is further diminished if people are not able to participate in activities such as the aquafit class at the Royal Commonwealth pool in Edinburgh which, along with the other golden oldies, I attended this morning. Edinburgh requires more revenue to fund such activities. Edinburgh is doing its best, but it is not doing enough. It needs money—I hope that the minister will come up with the hard cash.

Norway.

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the new objectives. However, does Mr Galbraith agree that, in getting to the objectives that the Executive has set itself for active primary schools, it might need to consider the effect of budgeting, which primary schools have to cope with now? Schools often have to choose between a share of a peripatetic physical education teacher and some other facility or service for the school. Does Mr Galbraith agree that, unless the Executive gets more physical education teachers in schools, it is militating against achieving its objective?

As my microphone is not on, I will shout. Picking up from where Donald Gorrie left off, there is a problem—

Okay. We have a problem in providing a consistent message—the clear message for which Maureen Macmillan asked. I am certain that the people who took part in the Young Scot survey would say that there are more problems with alcohol than there are with cannabis, for example. I crave your indulgence, Presiding Officer, to raise the issue of cannabis in this debate. If we are to have drugs courts to separate the sheep from the goats, we will have to decide which are the very bad drugs, which will be dealt with by the drugs courts, and which are the less bad drugs, which may be dealt with in another way, such as by treatment orders. Unfortunately, we have not had time today to address that issue. I am keen that there should be proper examination of the different categories of drug that are used by different categories of people. The arrestee drug abuse monitoring—ADAM—methodology, which was piloted recently in Scotland, showed that well over 50 per cent of the people who were arrested for drugs offences had taken cannabis. However, we do not know whether most of them had used only cannabis, like Rosalind Henderson, who is featured in The Herald today. She used cannabis for medicinal purposes—for pain relief—in the same way that multiple sclerosis sufferers use it. Are we to categorise people who use cannabis for such purposes as less serious drug users or abusers? They are still breaking the law as it stands. As part of the mosaic of dealing with drugs, we  must consider which drugs we are talking about, how we are to classify them, who uses them and why. When it comes to whether drugs courts will diminish the level of drug-related crime, we should ask how many folk are lifted because they shoplifted in Boots, or wherever, to be able to smoke some cannabis at the weekend. The answer would be very few. We have to admit what happens, and research is required. Members should all sign my motion—they can do so easily by visiting the chamber office.

Is there any evidence or research to show what sort of drug-using offence has been committed by many of those who fall by the wayside? I suspect that a fairly high  percentage will be people who are using cannabis, rather than injecting hard drugs.

Does Hugh Henry agree that it is incumbent on the Executive to say how it will define a drug dealer and a drug user? If one is to  go before the drugs court and the other before a higher court, that distinction needs to be made.

On a point of order. Although I recognise your efforts to ensure that the chamber enjoys the status that it should, I suggest that there is a difference between a statement that is made by the Executive prior to its announcement in the chamber and the normal campaigning of Opposition parties. In no way do I question your right to say that Opposition parties should observe the proprieties, but I think that there is a difference between an Executive statement—which will carry the force of law—and the normal campaigning of Opposition parties.

On the particular point of when and how ministers are advised by civil servants, the Parliament had an experience in relation to that which, in my estimation, probably led to the Parliament reaching a different decision from the one it otherwise might have done. I refer to the debate on 5 April 2000, when we were misinformed, and, I believe, misled, on the seriousness of Enric Miralles's illness. Had the Parliament and ministers been properly informed at that stage, the Parliament might have reached a quite different decision on whether to proceed with the Holyrood project.

I did not vote for Dennis Canavan, although I thought about it.

On a point of order. Is it in order for this Parliament to continue with a process that denies the very foundations that the people who brought the Parliament into being assumed: an accountability on the part of those who promote themselves or their party's policies? In other words, should we not be allowed to question the candidates?

rose—

I thank the minister for taking my very brief intervention.  I was not punting the legalisation of cannabis; I was drawing the minister's attention to the position of current MS sufferers, who can find themselves caught up in a legal cobweb. That should not happen.

I have two points for the minister. I would like to add a plea in support of Tommy Sheridan's proposal that there should be a trial on the use of beta interferon and that medical advice, rather than financial consideration, should guide such a trial. As far as I could deduce from speaking and listening to people this afternoon, many consultants have told people that they would benefit from the drug if the consultant were able to prescribe it. I spoke to a young woman who, had she been able to obtain the drug, would have more than paid back the £10,000 per annum because of what she put into the general kitty as a result of the high salary that she earned. We must look beyond the financial considerations. I add my support to Richard Simpson's comments on the need for nurses to be attached to practices and so on. I want to raise an issue that is slightly embarrassing to some people: the use of cannabis by MS sufferers. I spoke to folk today who can get some relief from pain by using cannabis. I urge the minister to talk to her colleague Angus MacKay, explaining to him that MS sufferers who use  cannabis do not want to be lawbreakers. Sufferers are being put in an impossible position when they cannot obtain some of the drugs that might help them and so resort to using an illegal drug. It makes an ass of the law if we ask policemen to be judge, jury and medical adviser.

I take up a point that was made by Marilyn Livingstone. I am sorry that she is not in the chamber now, as I would hate it to go unremarked. Although adopting this legislation may, as Roseanna Cunningham has pointed out, be entirely effective, fair and reasonable, that should not set a precedent for this Parliament. Marilyn Livingstone referred to our drug enforcement strategy and said that there should be a commonality of drug enforcement law on either side of the border. Many of us disagree with that for profound reasons, which I cannot go into now. I want it to be noted that the fact that we agree to the effectiveness of what is being proposed should not be taken as an endorsement of that principle.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it supports any relaxation of the regulations covering the employment of children. (S1O-2376)

I thank the minister for that and congratulate the Executive on having such a care for Scotland's children. To that end, will he advise his colleagues who are responsible for any of the purchases associated with the new Holyrood project that it is not enough to express a pious hope that materials for that building will not come from China or India and that it is absolutely imperative that strictures must appear in the procurement documents so that we do not have the exploitation of other people's children?

On a point of order. I realise that we are not honourable members in this Parliament, but we do not impugn the integrity of our colleagues.

As I am probably the only person who has not buttonholed the minister about potholes in their road, will she answer two brief questions? Will she call in the plans for the A701? Will she share with us the result of the all-party meeting she had with City of Edinburgh councillors today? Did they agree with the minister on workplace parking charges and on charging £1 for entry to the city?

Do Mr Chisholm and his colleagues understand the genuine nature of the frustration felt by SNP members because we realise that underlying the present crisis is the absolute unsuitability of the taxation regime, which denies the fact that we are an oil-producing country? That should be reflected in our taxation. It is so insulting for us to have Tony Blair telling people to go and talk to the oil producers—we are the oil producers.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister assure us that, while he will of course observe the letter of the law, he will see fit to change the law if it is rotten? It appears that the misguided legislation drawn up under a previous Administration is not fitting the bill in Scotland. We have evidence of that, even before the inquiries start. We simply want an assurance that the minister has the courage to say: "This ain't working. I'm going to fix it." Furthermore, the minister mentioned in his statement that seven probationer teachers were identified as markers, which should not have been the case. How many teachers who had not been instrumental in either constructing the new higher still courses or teaching them recently were recruited as markers without the normal training period for marking?

Will Duncan Hamilton accept an intervention?

I think it might. I did not attend a meeting of Lanarkshire Health Board this morning; I spent the whole morning having a bone scan at Edinburgh royal infirmary. If we are considering the modernisation of radiology, ultrasound and nuclear medicine facilities in Edinburgh, I plead with the minister to give consultants, nurses and patients the resources that they know are required. I was treated in time because there was no trauma. The moment there is a trauma and the one computed tomography scanner or the one magnetic resonance imaging scanner is knocked out of use, patients like me are left waiting in the corridors and wards. I plead with the Executive to modernise and provide two scanners to the new hospital.

Will Bristow Muldoon take an intervention from a member of an Opposition party?

I tried all morning—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Could you clarify what would be acceptable to the Presiding Officer in the event of a "terminological inexactitude" being deployed in the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the information provided by Midlothian Council regarding its proposals for the A701 upgrade is in the public domain and, if not, whether it can be made available to public scrutiny. (S1O-1997)

I promise to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth if the minister will make Midlothian Council do the same in relation to the huge 50 ft by 50 ft crater that has opened up on the site of the proposed road. It probably calls for a geological survey, and I ask the minister to ask Ms Boyack—when she returns—to request one immediately.

Oh dear—and those members of other parties have not even heard the question.

Now that would be a first. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will institute a review of bed capacity, medical and ancillary facilities for the new Edinburgh royal infirmary in advance of the implementation of the Arbuthnott report on the distribution of NHS resources. (S1O-1918)

Thank you. I knew that already. I am sure that the minister expected me to ask whether she would ensure that the orthotics facilities, which are currently located in the Princess Margaret Rose hospital, would be greatly upgraded when they move to the new infirmary. She also probably expected me to ask whether we could have a decent number of orthopaedic beds, as too many people seem to be complaining that there are not enough. However, I will ask the minister to ensure that the absolutely excellent bereavement service for child bereavements, which is currently located in the sick kids hospital, is maintained throughout the upheaval that will lead to the establishment of the new hospital. I have received any number of endorsements of how good the service is.

Can Angus MacKay confirm that ultimate scrutiny and accountability rests with the committee chaired by Tom King in Westminster?

I welcome the opportunity to raise a matter concerning surveillance in general and oversight and redress in particular. I have been trying unsuccessfully to raise the matter with the Home Secretary since last December; I have written three or four letters that have gone unanswered. I reminded the acting First Minister on his way out of the chamber that I have now written to him to ask him to intercede. I am bringing living proof of the validity of Donald Gorrie's demand that we keep an eye on what is happening in the Home Office, because my experience of trying to act from this Parliament on behalf of a constituent has certainly not been productive. Mr Munro contacted me to see whether I could help him discover whether his personal phone calls to a friend in Ireland had been intercepted during the period April 1996 to December 1998. It is known that the British security services eavesdropped electronically on calls from the UK to the Republic of Ireland during that period. Mr Munro has no police record, nor has he ever been connected with any terrorist organisation. His calls were of a more personal nature and of no concern to anyone other than the person to whom he was speaking in Ireland. His simple and entirely reasonable request is that he should know whether his calls were spied on, by whom, and for what reason; he would also like to know whether a record was kept of his private conversations, by whom, and for how long that record would be kept.  During the period when Mr Munro suspects his calls were intercepted, the technology used in Capenhurst Tower in Cheshire to monitor calls between the UK and Ireland—until 1997—involved calls being selected and codified, and listened to specifically by the intelligence services. That is well recorded. Unfortunately, I discovered that information, at Mr Munro's behest, not through replies from the Home Office to my written requests for information, but from answers to parliamentary questions to the Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, following an investigation that was shown on television on Channel 4. One of the weaknesses of the intended legislation, as far as I can tell, is that if people are going to discover something, they will discover it by accident or through a leak; that is perhaps true of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers (Scotland) Bill, but certainly true of the UK legislation. That is not at all satisfactory. When new legislation is being drawn up, we can be a bit more precise about how people can monitor their individual human and civil liberties. The nub of the objections to the new scheme for interception and surveillance is that Mr Munro would not have known anything about the infringement of his personal liberty unless there had been open questions and answers in the Dail and excellent investigative journalism into Capenhurst Tower by Duncan Campbell. Nobody dropped Mr Munro a wee card to let him know that he was off the hook. He was not told that his calls had been intercepted as a matter of routine security, or that they had either been kept on record or not and that he should now count himself out. That was the purpose of my inquiry into his case. Could we start categorising people a little better, and being a bit more sensitive about who is getting caught in a security net?

I wonder how Ben Wallace knows that my constituent has nothing attached to his record. I wonder whether Ben Wallace knows whether my constituent has any record as a result of the telephone calls. I suspect that there is no record; that is what I was suggesting. He was an entirely innocent person who was caught up in a net. I do not seek to deny the need for that net; I agree that there are security requirements. However, when it is obvious, and has been proved, that the person who has been caught up in those surveillance techniques is an innocent bystander, surely that person has some right to know that he is in the clear. That is what I am talking about—redress for people who are caught up in such situations. Even if the proposed tribunal had been in operation when Mr Munro's calls were being monitored, he would not have known—he had no idea at that time that he was being listened to. Remember that this was happening from 1996 to 1998. He did not know, so he would not have known how to question or complain, or how to find out why it was happening or when it would stop. I appreciate that this part of the new security operation will fall under the ambit of the Home Secretary. I have referred to my experience of trying to deal with him. Perhaps we should consider Alex Neil's suggestion about the watchdog committee, or Donald Gorrie's suggestion that we examine how the regulations are to be applied. I am not absolutely sure that by simply saying that the matter is reserved and will be taken care of by the Home Office, we will have the protection of civil liberties that we in the Scottish Parliament want. The tribunal system appears to be a fig-leaf to cover the Home Secretary's embarrassment at his continuation of the culture in Her Majesty's secret service that has scant regard for people's civil liberties.

rose—

Would it be possible, in this instance, to categorise the sorts of people who are surveilled? I hope to raise the matter of a constituent of mine who was under surveillance. Even with the tribunal as outlined, he would not have known had it not been for an accident and a leak, yet everyone admits that he was innocent. How can we categorise cases into the very serious and those who should not have been caught in the net?

Will the member give way?

Given that the extent of that type of surveillance will be widened following the Schengen agreement on information to be shared among European countries, does the acting First Minister not think it makes sense for him to be at least consulted by Home Office ministers in other countries on what is happening to citizens of Scotland?

Can I make it clear then?

I wonder how the acting First Minister would feel if he heard that some Shetlanders were being monitored by intelligence services from another European fishing country. With the new sharing of information under the  extension of the Schengen agreement that could happen.

I would like to thank all members from all sides of the chamber who have offered their support for this motion, both by signing it and by staying for tonight's debate. I will try to be brief. Rather than simply giving my own point of view, I would prefer to show the breadth of support that there is for the continued mutuality of Standard Life. I should declare an interest. No, I am not a with-profits policyholder. I am not even a without-profits policyholder. However, I do live in Edinburgh, and so have a real interest in ensuring that Standard Life continues to be, in a practical sense, a very important part of the economy of Edinburgh. Europe's biggest mutual life assurance company provides 7,500 secure and satisfying jobs. That is to say nothing of the spending power that comes into this area from the £160 million it pays in wages. We should think of the local companies that are involved with Standard Life because of its local purchasing power. I support the ethos and humanity that is implicit in Standard Life continuing as a company that puts the best interests of its policyholders first, rather than the demands of shareholders. I am a nationalist who believes that Scotland will achieve its full potential as a distinctive community of people in Europe and the wider world only if we aspire to the quality standards of the world's best in business, inventiveness and administration in public and private enterprises. We should also take the greatest amount of responsibility possible  for the effects of our decisions on future generations. By and large, those sentiments are echoed in the way in which Standard Life goes about its business. Mutuality eschews the quick buck in favour of handing the benefits of the accumulated savings down the generations. It is to the credit of the 6,000 employees of the company who presented the Parliament with a petition that they are determined to resist—on behalf of their company, their community and all Standard Life's policyholders—the quick buck, quick fix and gold that Freddie Woollard has been suggesting. I do not intend to refer to that gentleman any further, because I have a feeling that he is a star that has shone briefly and brightly and, perhaps, is waning even now. I also salute the management of Standard Life, although it is an open secret that they have not always made common cause with the point of view that I represent. However, as the anthem reminds us, those days are past now and we are all in it together. It is in everyone's interest that Standard Life should continue to exist as it does. I salute the management's fight to keep the company mutual. They could make a lot of fast bucks for themselves if they decided to follow the plc route of Freddie Woollard. I will turn to the business case. In the endowments and pensions that it guarantees to its policyholders, Standard Life stands comparison with any of its publicly quoted, shareholder-owned competitors. Time is short, so I will resist rhyming off the figures with which I am by now very familiar. However, I will advise policyholders who have to vote on the demutualisation proposal to consult pages 6 and 7 in the booklet "The real facts and figures about your future", which is published by Standard Life. In explaining why, as a nationalist, I can make common cause with an excellent example of a capitalist Scottish enterprise—as it is seen as part of the Scottish financial establishment—I have referred to the need for inventiveness as well as entrepreneurial ability. We need to be all that we can be and maybe even half as good as we sometimes kid ourselves that we are. I am aware that some people think that Standard Life is not as inventive or adventurous as it might be in its investment policies. Perhaps a dash less considered calculation and a soupçon more flair might have realised an even bigger and better yield for its policyholders. There may be some truth in that assessment—there is always room for debate—but the company has the time, expertise and assets to live a bit more dangerously in today's global economy, if the policyholders urge the board to do so. Part of the whole exercise will be that the board will be acutely aware of the  policyholders and their point of view. Having said that, we should not forget how successful that board has been through the recent years of demutualisations, mergers, alliances and what have you, which have taken place in the shareholding sector of life assurers. Standard Life is not a company that needs an injection of cash, either to expand or to stand still. Thanks to the prudence of the management, its high standing in the estimation of the independent financial advisers and without the need to pay dividends to shareholders, Standard Life is a very viable company. Why should anyone, other than an opportunistic carpetbagger, want to risk upsetting the apple-cart? Lots of people I have spoken to in and around Edinburgh have said that nobody is going to pass up the chance of a quick buck. I hope that other speakers will have the time to dissect some of the more hopeful calculations as to what policyholders might expect. I will just mention in passing what they might not expect should they vote against Standard Life's continued mutuality. For example, if the company becomes a plc, and is just as well managed as its competitors—as it is just now—everything being equal, there is a strong argument that policyholders will have to invest 10 per cent more in order to reap the same rewards as they do now. If they go for the windfall, if they go for the fast buck, sure, it is attractive if they have the bathroom to do up, but five years down the road, if they have a big roof repair and they have to take out another policy, or if they have to increase their present policy, they will have to pay 10 per cent more for it. That is the other side of demutualisation. The ethos of mutuality is admirable. Standard Life is the sort of company that bestows an admirable reputation on Scottish business. Therefore, as the representatives of Scotland in this Parliament, we should promote and cherish it. At a time when the future pattern of investment is uncertain because of e-commerce and other new factors, which I will leave others to rehearse, it would be folly to destabilise a company such as Standard Life in pursuit of a one-off windfall. Even the most enthusiastic demutualiser must recognise the risk of diminishing the excellent performance of the company during a time of turbulence in investment patterns throughout the global economy. Demutualisation is probably a bad idea. I am certain that it is one whose time has not come. I urge members to fall in behind this motion and give support to the notion of Standard Life remaining a mutual company.

I have a simple question. Why has the minister not asked the chancellor about the licence auction money?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on whether the Parliament can expect a full account of the cost of moving to Glasgow, and a full explanation of why it should cost around £370,000 to deconstruct and then rebuild the chamber.

On a  point of order.

I will do what other folk have not done: I will ask a question. Will the minister explain exactly what the strategy is for the drugs action plan? As Richard Simpson pointed out, drug use is on the increase, and the £250 million that already goes into tackling drugs does not appear to be reaching whatever targets have been identified to date. Is the strategy to reduce drug use? Everything that the minister said today related to heroin. He did not talk about drug use in a wider sense. If we are to have a strategy, we must know which drugs we are talking about, who is using them, and why, where and when they are doing that. We must also have research and evidence that will provide the minister with the information on which to base his strategic objectives.

Can the minister say this week whether he is satisfied that the research and evidence that is produced for him and on which he builds his strategy is sufficient to enable him to identify the drugs that we are talking about?

I was.

I am grateful not to have missed the highlight of the highlights. I have been keeping in touch with what has been said and I am willing to put on record my total support for Alex Salmond in his fight for independence for Scotland. I have been disgusted by how many Labour members have been willing to say, "We're too poor. We're too stupid. We couldnae do it." That is what they said; they have wasted a whole afternoon talking like that. They could have saved that time and taken out an advert in the paper.

I endorse what Cathy Jamieson has just said and will come back to that, but I must deal first with the terrible trauma revealed from the Tory front bench. I had no idea that David Mundell had such a terrible PE teacher. If he had been in my class, I would have chosen him first and he would have had a completely different attitude to sport. Mr Mundell went on to be a bit skeich about synchronised swimming. As a wee girl I was so desperate to get into the Hamilton baths synchronised swimming team that I lied about my age. I have since changed that bad habit. When Cathy Jamieson spoke about the Cumnock outdoor pool a few folk tittered. I mind going there from Hamilton as a wee girl for inter-club galas. Sport never did me any harm; it made sure I did not get into trouble. It was only when I took up politics that trouble started. I endorse the sentiments expressed in the debate. Although there are amendments to the motion, it is generally agreed that sport is an essential component of getting people—particularly poorer and older people—out of their houses and into the community, and that is what matters. I want to address how we might do that and change the culture that Ian Jenkins referred to. It is great to wear a football shirt that identifies a person with Man United or whoever, but when young people are sitting watching television or some other screen, it is not so great. Young people used to spend hours playing heidie against a wall or out in the garden or the street learning how to trap a ball properly. That does not happen  any more and it should. I make a particular plea for the sort of people who, contrary to David Mundell's experience, can inspire and help people to reach the levels of attainment and fitness that they have to have to properly take part in sport and enjoy it. People only really enjoy sport if they do not always get gubbed. Ian Jenkins would have liked golf better if Lord James hadnae beaten him thon long time ago. We need more specialist PE teachers in schools and particularly in primary schools. I am sorry that the Minister for Children and Education is not here to hear me say, yet again, that unless we catch children young, we will not change the culture of watching rather than taking part in sport. I realise that this is a devolved Parliament and that we cannot spend all the money we might want to. I have ideas for that too, but I will not go into them just now. We could shift some of the education spending to specialist PE teachers coaching in schools and incorporate them into the sort of scheme that Fitness Scotland could introduce to train people in communities to be coaches and community sports leader. That would also start to redress the balance in terms of classroom assistants. Primary teachers do not have the time, nor do most of them have the motivation or the skill to coach and teach PE.

Thank you. I agree but I want more of them. I question the statistics that the minister gave that show 50 per cent of women taking part in sport. A huge number of younger women do not take part in sport because fashion takes over as soon as they reach their mid-teens, if they even stick with sport until then. I would be interested to look at those statistics. Before we can get people taking part in sport, we need coaches in the community. We need to find a way to use the facilities and organisations we have, such as Fitness Scotland, the teacher training colleges and the specialist PE teachers, to get people into the community to teach folk who will then teach younger people to get them into sport for life. The motion talks a good game, but Fiona McLeod's amendment puts the ball in the back of the net. I urge members to support the amendment.

Will David Mundell give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Only a second, Sir David.

In view of the Parliament's stated objective of achieving transparency and accountability in its dealings, I am interested to discover why—in light of today's news that the Holyrood project's sponsor will carry out her duties no longer—you ruled as inadmissible a question on her role as a civil servant, for which I believe the Scottish Executive is accountable?

As the minister widened the question from postcode  prescribing, I wonder whether I might ask what would happen if a health board were to do what she considered was less than a good job in looking after its own patch. There is an example from this patch, where, we are told, it is being suggested that the Lauriston building—a new building serving the Edinburgh royal infirmary—should be put up for sale, which would mean that we lost city-centre facilities. No one would have even contemplated that a year ago in Edinburgh. Will the minister consider telling Lothian Health Board and the trust concerned that under no circumstances should the Lauriston building be sold off?

Yes.

Susan widened the question in her answer.

Will the minister give way?

I draw the minister's attention once again to the meeting in February of the local arm of the British Medical Association, which said in its report: "We are particularly concerned regarding the role of social work, nursing homes and home nursing and whether there will be enough funding for the care of the chronic sick and aged persons, and particularly those outwith hospital beds, but so unwell as to be unable to be cared for in their own homes." I appreciate much of what the minister said about the mechanism that he means to put into effect, but here we have doctors concerned that the  funding might be inadequate. They also draw attention not to bed blocking, but to early discharge into communities where carers are not ready to take on board the caring that they will have to do.

In backing what Mary Scanlon has just said, I draw members' attention to a paper that was written by Dr Anthony Toft, the past president of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and submitted to the Lothian division of the British Medical Association in February. He discusses the climate of fear in the national health service, and says that it has spread from the management to the doctors. The sort of response that the Executive has frequently given in this Parliament is similar to that which was displayed by Lord Callaghan, who returned from a trip abroad and said, "Crisis? What crisis?" In fact, everything that Mary Scanlon said is borne out by that paper.

I wonder whether I should congratulate the minister on being more open in his attitude to new ideas,  wherever they come from. Is the minister prepared to undertake further research on why there is such drug use and abuse in Scotland, and on why drug abuse is still so misunderstood after all the time and money that has been spent on researching the matter, as indicated in the evidence that was given yesterday in the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee? Does he agree that the best way in which to find out who is using drugs, why they are using them and what drugs they are using might be to form a special commission? I have lodged a motion on that and have been asking for such a commission for a number of months.

Before I address myself to summing up, I note that the First Minister had almost 13 minutes for his speech and that Tavish Scott had almost seven, as did an earlier speaker. I am informed that, if I am lucky, I might have five minutes to refute the contents of those speeches. Therefore, I crave your indulgence, Presiding Officer. I also ask members in the chamber to listen to the people. I have with me a representative sample of the communications that I have received—by fax, letter, e-mail and telephone and from people stopping me in the street. Not one of those communications says, "Go ahead with the Holyrood project without proper examination". Anyone is welcome to examine them, because I am not in the business of copying Tavish Scott, who suggested that some people do this, some do that and others do the next thing. The names and addresses of the people who pay our wages and who will pay for this Parliament are here, and anyone is entitled to examine them. We must listen to the people and we must answer their questions, which is one of the issues that Donald Gorrie's amendment tries to address. One or two questions have arisen in the chamber today—for example, I have one. Who is in charge of design? Was the Edinburgh  Evening News correct—believe me, it was—when it said of Señor Miralles: "Colleagues at his practice in Barcelona said they did not know when he would be in Edinburgh again"? However, we know that he is lecturing in America. I will come back to that point shortly, because it begs another question. What happened to the request that I made of the Presiding Officer, when I wrote to him earlier this year and asked for an independent assessment of the project? I am happy to say that he agreed to appoint John Spencely. I also requested that Enric Miralles should be asked to keep the promise that he made to MSPs when he spoke to us last year. He said that he would be willing to come back and to discuss with us the progress of the project. Where is he? I would like to discuss progress with him. As Annabel Goldie said, we must rebuild the confidence of the people who are represented in these letters. We must convince them that we are spending their money—the Parliament's money—on a suitable building that offers the best value for that money. Our amendment will allow that to happen. Work would continue on the MSP block at Holyrood and a start could be made on repairing the damage done to Queensberry House. I will not  have time to go into the nefarious activities that have gone on in Queensberry House, but I am willing to talk about them outside the chamber, if anyone is willing to take me up on that.

You are on, Jamie. I emphasise Donald Gorrie's point. When we talk about studies on developing the Parliament's site, we are not talking about the temporary campus of this building and those across the road at George IV Bridge. We are talking about developing an area of land that reaches from Mylne's Court right up to Ramsay Lane. I believe that that site would be feasible, and we have time to consider whether it would provide a suitable Parliament at better value for money. Certainly, many people in Edinburgh think that it might. For around £20,000, we could obtain an immediate feasibility study, and if the site were not feasible, I would be the first to say, "Walk away from it". I think that we owe that to the people who are questioning what is happening to the project, its operation and the Holyrood design. We owe it to them to say that there may well be alternatives, and that we have considered them. Even people who are absolutely enamoured of the design envisaged for Holyrood would be in a much stronger position if they could say to people in Scotland that they have considered the alternatives and still recommend Holyrood. I appreciate that many members think that we should just go ahead with Holyrood, because it makes a statement about Scotland. Well, it sure does—we thought big and we built small on too small a site. I take issue with those who say that John Spencely said that there was nothing wrong with the site, because he said that this had nothing to do with the location of the site. We should not forget that he was not asked to consider the traffic implications and so on, nor did he comment on the size of the site, which is an issue that Donald Gorrie and I raised during the debate last year. We asked whether the Parliament would be able to expand on that site once it got into its stride. Yesterday, at the presentation, I asked the architects what room for expansion was still possible. I was told, "Perhaps 2,000 sq m." When I asked, "Where?", I was told, "On the tower". The First Minister spoke—quite movingly, I thought, as someone who now lives in Edinburgh—of the beautiful sweep of the architecture in total harmony with the natural development that has occurred over millions of years in that part of Edinburgh. However, the tower—it is no longer an upturned boat, but a tower—is higher than Queensberry House. According to the model that we saw yesterday, it is higher even than the new hotel that stands behind  what is envisaged as the MSPs' block. That goes against the grain for most of the people who think that Edinburgh should develop as a historic site and a place of architectural beauty and excellence. Señor Miralles's design has much to commend it, and I do not deny that. However, I question whether that is the best site for it in Edinburgh. In Edinburgh, the people who have written to me stop me in the street and say, "Dinnae put it there." They know fine that it is the last place in Edinburgh to put the Parliament. I do not know where the first place should be, but we now have a natural hiatus in which work can continue on the MSPs' block—and on the repairs to Queensberry House—while we look at the alternative sites, to report back to the people of Scotland by 8 June, in line with the time scale that was outlined by John Spencely. If Señor Miralles is ill, that gives us another week or two to play with—that was something else that we learned in the course of this debate. I appreciate what the other amendment seeks to do: it seeks to cap expenditure. People in Scotland cannot understand how we can start out with a proposed cost of £50 million and end up with a proposed cost of £200 million. However, I do not believe that a project of this sort can be capped. The First Minister told me that the SPCB does not believe in fixed contracts, but it has virtually tied itself into a fixed contract if it accepts that amendment. The target is £195 million, but what happens if the building does not reach the roof when the money runs out, because the designer is ill and cannot meet the targets that the SPCB has set for him? That amendment is all too restrictive. Our amendment is not restrictive. We must get this right; if we get it wrong, the whole Parliament will be diminished in the view of the people who wrote these letters to me. I urge all members to support our amendment.

Will the First Minister take information?

Will the member take a point of information?

Des mentioned his admiration for Señor Miralles's design. I have no doubt that there are many aspects of it that lots of us will like, but can he assure us, as a member of the SPCB, that Señor Miralles is still the designer? There seems to be some doubt about that.

We are getting used to talking to one another across the chamber about this matter. I would like to return to what Gordon Jackson said about the site. The choice of the site was all-important. It is absolutely true that Spencely said that the location was okay. He did not comment on the size, other than to say that any normal developer building on that site to the same density as the current plans would not receive planning permission. The site is overdeveloped. That has been caused by the design and by the fact that we need more room. That is not allocating blame; it is stating the obvious. Can we get the facts on the record?

Can Sir David tell us whether Enric Miralles was aware of the true state of repair of Queensberry House? How would he have tackled it differently? Presumably, when he outlined to the Parliament how it would be an integral part of the design, he did not believe it to be, as he now does, worse than a ruin and ready to be blown down by a gale.

I add my entreaties to those of Johann Lamont. Does the minister agree that a benchmark might be for each ear, nose and throat unit in Scotland to identify a qualified lip-reading tutor? The number of people who become deaf in later life is increasing. Rather than leave it to a local response, therefore, we should accept that we need a national strategy. Perhaps we could start by asking each ENT specialist to identify one lip-reading tutor.

On a point of order.

On a point of order.

With all due respect, Presiding  Officer, my point of order concerns the principle of the ruling that you gave this afternoon. You ruled out of order my colleague Michael Russell's request for a motion without notice, but that ruling was based on the premise of what you had already ruled in respect of my request that the Parliament, on a majority vote, could instruct the corporate body on the disposal of the Spencely report. You ruled that, because the corporate body had commissioned that report, my request was unreasonable, if not out of order. My contention—the reason why I question the ruling—is that the corporate body is always at the disposal of a majority vote of the Parliament.

On a point of order. Would it be in order to have a majority vote of members of the chamber to instruct the corporate body to make available to all members, at the same time, the Spencely report, on its publication?

In view of the reports that are built on leaks and spin in today's The Daily Telegraph , The Times and The Scotsman concerning the Holyrood project and the outcome of the Spencely report, will the Prime Minister join me in urging the Presiding Officer to make available to all members of this chamber Sir John's report when it is published? If that entails having an emergency meeting of the SPCB to decide that, will he join me in urging the Presiding Officer to call one?

Will the member accept an intervention?

I am sorry to upset the apple cart. Does Annabel Goldie realise that the choice is not between two different ways of choosing money but between a first-rate health service—which we had in the old Edinburgh royal infirmary—and a substandard one? At present, a grade G nurse has responsibility for 32 or 33 beds. I have just learned that in the new Edinburgh royal infirmary—which was started under the Tories and will be finished under Labour—a grade G nurse will have responsibility for 50 beds. The difference in quality of care that can be delivered by a PFI should be considered, not just how much it will cost to borrow the money.

In supporting Kenny MacAskill's motion, I must declare an interest—a member of my immediate family will join Lothian and Borders finest shortly. That is not the only reason that prompts me to support the motion and to ask the minister to find  the money to give Sir Roy Cameron a dedicated city-centre community policing force. As the minister knows perhaps better than I do, there are areas on the outskirts of Edinburgh from where—under the present arrangements—police are drawn during the summer for higher-profile policing in the city centre; that also happens, as Kenny MacAskill pointed out, during the winter festivals. That is not fair on those areas, which are often the ones that are under the most pressure. I am certain that the same is true outside the city. Bristow Muldoon made an excellent case in stating the obvious: because more and more people live in and around Lothian and Borders and more and more people are coming to visit us—thank goodness—we need more policemen. It is as simple as that. It will not require a lot of money and it will be great value for money. I heartily commend the motion to the minister.

Will the minister say on which days she was consulted by the MOD on the action that took place at Cape Wrath?

I wonder whether the minister will favour me with a response. With regard to the monitoring and control of the cost of our major capital project, the Holyrood project, is the suggested figure of £109 million the figure at which the Executive is prepared to see the cost level off? If so, can it say now what other facilities will have to be sacrificed to meet that cost? If that is not the figure for the cost, what criteria will be deployed to calculate what we should pay for the Holyrood project?

On a point of order. The Minister for Finance has just given straightforward information about the information that will be available to and decided upon by the members of this Parliament, and I thank him for that. I read today that a spokesman for the Parliament had refused to—

Does the First Minister agree with the sentiments that the Presiding Officer expressed to me in his letter of yesterday? We are sending one another daily letters now. That letter referred to figures that were being brandished in yesterday's press. Sir David suggested that those figures were hypothetical. Is the First Minister prepared to endorse that view? If so, does he agree that it is impossible at this stage to put a ceiling on what the Parliament building should cost, when we do not have the faintest idea how much has been spent so far? Further, could the First Minister brand as hypothetical the figures that have been allocated to the cost of leaving the current site? If all options are open, should Mr John Spencely's report suggest that the site is unsuitable, it may well also say how much we could raise in revenue from the site, considering the high price of land in Edinburgh.

I do not disagree with a word that the member has said about the use of some drugs by some people who are socially excluded. However, drug taking and drug abuse are not confined to poor people. People in universities and people who have a lot of money to spend use cocaine, for example.

I am glad to support Johann Lamont's motion. There can be no doubt about the effect that addiction to drugs—hard drugs in particular—has on families and communities. She spoke about it more eloquently than I could. We must give serious consideration to properly structured provision for the family support groups.  I realise that many sincere efforts have been made in the past, but perhaps those have not been structured enough. I hope that the minister will address that issue in his speech. I must question one aspect of the motion. It discusses drug addiction, but to which drugs does it refer? Who are the addicts? We must be more definitive. We must listen to people whose lives are being ruined now. However, to provide a drugs strategy, we must understand which drugs are being used by whom, why, where and when. I was disappointed when Keith Halliwell, on his visit here, suggested that the police should be left to decide which users of cannabis should be lifted and which should be left. Should it be young addicts, in desperately poor parts of Scotland, who use cannabis between hits of heroin, or should it be the 50-year-old professors in universities throughout Scotland who listen to a compact disc with a glass of red wine and roll up, as they probably have done since they were 17 or 18 years of age? To leave it to the police to decide who will have the law applied to them does not constitute part of a strategy towards coping with drug use. Although the motion is correct in so far as it goes, it is limited. What is the objective of the drugs strategy? Are we going to learn to live with drugs, as I do not think that there is a society in the world that does not live with mood-altering or mind-altering substances? We must decide what we will put up with and we must decide what is beyond the pale and put all our resources into preventing that. I do not want to put up with cigarettes and, believe it or not, I do not even want to put up with lots of hard drink, but I have to. We must consider the consumption of all drugs. I appreciate that Johann Lamont's concern is the effect of hard drug addiction on her constituency and the people whom she represents and I sympathise with her. However, when the minister replies, will he give us a hint that his thinking is wider than that?

On a point of order.

Let us share the contents with everybody, in the interest of open government. Are you in a position, Presiding Officer, to say whether you have reconsidered my request for an emergency question on the Holyrood project?

With all respect, Presiding Officer, that is only the start of that. There is a serious flaw in our procedures, if we cannot do that.

I apologise for the fact that I was not here for the start of question time. The original contract for the Holyrood site was signed by the First Minister when he was the Secretary of State for Scotland and party to the collective responsibility of the Westminster Cabinet. Can the First Minister therefore tell us whether the contract was undertaken on behalf of the Westminster Government? If that is the case, will the responsibility for any penalty clauses that might be incurred, should this disastrous folly be cancelled, be borne by this Parliament or the original contractor, the Westminster Government?

On a point of order. I am concerned about the people who are paying for the hole in the ground and the potential catastrophe at the foot of Holyrood Road.  That is why I am raising this point of order. It seems that our ability to discuss in the chamber what is relevant outside it is incomplete. I therefore ask you to reconsider your decision not to take the emergency question I lodged this morning at a quarter to 10, asking that an immediate independent assessment be instituted by experts recommended by the relevant professional bodies, of the management, feasibility, costs and advisability of proceeding with the Holyrood project. We owe that to the people we are supposed to represent. It is not good enough to say that we will wait for four weeks to find out what most of us already know.

With all due respect, Presiding Officer, you said that the experts will work in conjunction with the project team. I am questioning the management of the project and would prefer to have completely independent assessments made by completely independent experts. Can you deny the robust figures that appear in today's press?

I have another suggestion for Mr Swinney to make to the minister. Last night, at the briefing by the Confederation of British Industry on tourism in Scotland, we heard that the Malin Court hotel, in Ayrshire, has a website that received 2,000 hits in the past month. The Government could save businesses a lot of money on advertising and marketing if it got that man on screen to tell other small businessmen about it.

I want to pick up where Irene Oldfather left off, which is something I do quite frequently. There is a downside to e-commerce. Before I become the voice of doom and get everyone upset, I want to make David Mundell a happy man and quote from an article in The Guardian with the headline: "Universities forge alliance for global teaching on net". I am sure that that is getting everyone excited. The article says: "Four universities—Leeds, Sheffield, Southampton and York—are linking up with four research-led institutions—the university of California at San Diego, Pennsylvania state university, the university of Washington and the university of Wisconsin-Madison". I mention the article because Allan Wilson picked up the catchphrase "lifelong learning" and put it in its correct context. The article highlights the current meaning of "lifelong learning". I want to make a sensible suggestion, which Henry McLeish might decide to take on board. Why not use £1 million or £2 million from the new opportunities fund—or, mentioning no names, from the cancellation of a major capital project—to allow Scottish further education colleges to run a series of one-day or half-day courses on e-commerce for small and medium enterprises. The minister knows better than I do that such businesses are currently up against it. To stay in business, those businesspeople need to take some time off, go to college and learn how to get wired-up. I want to make another wee sensible suggestion that Alasdair Morgan mentioned. It is no use being  in the first wave of e-commerce if there is no proper telephone system. More fibre-optic cables need to be laid. Moreover, communication means both computer software and the hardware of roads and rail—there is no difference between them. I should apologise: I did not mean to ask for more money to be spent. As members know, there are plans to dig up Princes Street. We know that another useless big hole is already being dug in Edinburgh, so why are we doing the same thing to Princes Street to build yet more shops? Although e-commerce means that there will certainly be a growth in business and trading, traders will need warehousing more than the plethora of shops that have already been built outside the town and that are planned for beneath towns. Apart from that, traders will need only a portal on the internet and a nice wee shopfront to advertise the fact that customers can try there and will be posted their goods. That is the future of trading. So, the implications for planners and for—

Another quotation from David? Yes please.

Some of my colleagues thought that this would be an uninteresting debate. I wish they were here—we would not be able to contain them. I have one serious, final point on a potential downside to how we use the technology. A couple of days ago, when I was in West Lothian—where the council and the community have attacked this subject in a very impressive way—an example was proposed of how council services could be better delivered to the people who receive them. The imagination was going into overload. The example concerned the telephone and the social worker—or community worker, or occupational therapist, or whoever—who was visiting the person in their home. At present, the worker might take that person out for a wee dauner, or take them for their shopping, or something like that; instead, it was proposed, they could click up the shopping. That would mean that the person receiving the services would not be socialised. The important part of all the technology is that we must not allow it to make us Philistines. We must not forget about learning for the sake of learning. We must not apply our knowledge just to commerce. We must also ensure that we build  humanity into it. That is my concern.

Will the member give a red card to the Government, since, according to The Scotsman , "it has failed to harness the full potential of the internet"?

Wait for it; this will be good.

Can I tempt the minister to indulge in some creative thinking and, if necessary, some creative accounting to find extra money to offset the burden on businesses in Edinburgh, which are asked to pay the third highest business rates in the world? I am sure the minister agrees that that is not exactly a welcome to Scotland.

Through the hearings, we have a unique system of dealing with juveniles in Scotland, but we might find, after that system has been tested, that our law is incompatible with the convention. Does the First Minister think that there might still be room to have the convention come towards us, rather than us automatically having to ditch a system that is  part of the best of Scots law?

Will the member give way?

Not half as disappointed as I am in the deputy minister's. Will he give way?

David Davidson has described the objective. Does he agree that part of the strategy for achieving it is to persuade employers in Scotland that many people who are earning low wages and doing not very highly skilled jobs would benefit from lifelong learning? The Executive must show us how it intends to overcome that handicap.

Everything that Maureen Macmillan said is absolutely true. The people who established the UHI are to be congratulated on providing that access. A third of people who are employed have never had any further education since they left full-time school education. From Maureen Macmillan's point of view, as a teacher who worked in the Highlands, what is the missing link in persuading them to take advantage of this new technology?

I am happy to associate myself with almost every word the boilermaker who spoke before me said. I am glad that he said it, because my first thought, on reading the terms of today's motion, was, "Why?" It is not exactly what could be called a crowd puller—it is more like a time filler. It is a tribute to some of the folk in here today that we have managed to talk some sense, based on a nonsensical motion. It was a wee bit like ministerial motherhood and electronic apple pie. Much of what we have come to call the knowledge economy is cloaked in an impenetrable, obscure language. We talk about social inclusion—this makes people feel right outside the loop. Let us try to use language that people can relate to their everyday lives. I interpret the knowledge economy as meaning that most of the big money in the international market is now to be made from the sale of software designed to carry out or assist almost any traditional manufacturing or service work imaginable, rather than the construction of manufactured things, even if they are computers and telephones. So, we had better do everything we can through our various education channels to encourage Scots to use new technology. As others over here have said before me: dead obvious. As some of us used to say, what about the workers? What about the people who do not sit in front of a computer screen designing a software package for a medium-sized chain store group's stock control? What about the people whose part in the knowledge economy is to use the software  package to order the goods from whoever makes them, to stock the warehouse, to deliver the goods to the shop, to stock the shelves, to attract the customers and to sell the goods? Where do they fit into the knowledge economy? Lothian is perhaps the most successful part of the Scottish economy. People who work here can earn enough money to spend in the shops, the restaurants and so on, that make this a terrific city to live in. However, in the main they are not software designers. They work in shops, restaurants and small factories. They work in the caring services and the bureaucracies that glue a modern society together. How do we apply the precepts of the knowledge economy to how those people do their jobs? As a result of innovations in applied medical knowledge, people who work at normal jobs now live longer. That in itself produces the potential for economic growth—they need more, therefore they consume more. However, they also need more medical and support services in their old age. How do we ensure that the profit from all that knowledge and the economic growth that it produces is not consumed by the cost of looking after elderly people? That is where the knowledge economy begins to mean something to the people it is meant to serve: the workers. A motion such as this tends to obscure the simple truth that economic systems, and even task forces like the ones set up by the minister, are meant to serve human needs. They are not meant to bend people's lives to suit the marketplace. I was surprised to hear my colleague, Allan Wilson, say that we have to bend our skills to the needs of the economy. We must suit our skills to the needs of the economy—people's skills should not be bent to capitalist means. This morning, the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee heard evidence from Dr Andrew Goudie, who discussed the units of civil servants who are employed to stimulate the knowledge economy. He did not tell us what the measurement of their success would be. He did not say when we will know whether those units have stimulated the knowledge economy. David Mundell referred to the lack of clarity. I could not agree more. The knowledge economy means something only if it is part of an attitude and a programme for lifelong learning—another misunderstood catchphrase. Lifelong learning is not just about having our technical colleges and senior schools able to adapt their teaching programmes at the drop of a hat to provide a training course for people made redundant from businesses such as Continental Tyres. I can see Nick Johnston being upset about that. Lifelong learning is about much more than that. It is about  encouraging people to learn things, using new technology and old technology, such as libraries, books and teachers. That is how the economy will prosper. That is how the shop workers, the taxi drivers and the city guides in Edinburgh will have learned how to make visiting Scotland a great experience. I have one last point to make, with the workers in mind. Will the minister tell us whether any college in Scotland has yet introduced a course in e-commerce?

Will the minister talk to his senior colleague when she gets back from Dunkeld and impress upon her the  need to ensure that Lothian Health Board does not become the victim of the area's success in terms of population growth and of the number and quality of services that people have come to expect? The Arbuthnott report must be revisited and the amount of money that it will take out of health services in Lothian must be revised.

On a point of order. I crave your indulgence for some guidance, Presiding Officer. Which minister—it may be your own committee or bureau—is responsible for day-to-day expenditure on the Holyrood project? I find it extremely difficult to get anyone to own up to responsibility for the money that is being spent daily. Is that operational or financial?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

In Mr Brown's concluding remarks, he suggested that this chamber should let Westminster off the hook for the new Labour Government's continuation of the mistake made by the past Conservative Government in introducing tuition fees. We should not be in the business of letting Westminster off the hook. Instead, we should make it realise the folly of its ways and we will not do that if we accept the cobbled-together compromise in front of us. When Henry McLeish introduced this package of measures, he said that the parties differed in the margins. However, the Scottish National party does not differ in the margins; it differs fundamentally. We would not have endorsed or reintroduced tuition fees, because if we start from such a position of compromise, we simply add that layer upon layer of compromise to that position and produce an anomalous situation. Henry McLeish, who is a very decent man, was embarrassed when he tried to deny the link between tuition fees and endowment; what cannot be denied is that the latter is instituted as a  consequence of the former. We would not have produced such an anomalous scheme. We might have produced a scheme with which many people disagreed, but it would not have been as fundamentally flawed as this. We would not have had to preserve a coalition in the way that this coalition has had to be preserved, and that flaw has fed through to the quality of the legislation that we are about to pass. This is poor-quality legislation which reflects badly on the chamber at a time when we should be trying to raise aspirations and to demonstrate our ability to produce better-quality legislation.

With all due respect to Mike Rumbles, I will not give way because I do not have time. I have listened to everyone and agree with many of the comments that have been made. I am proud to associate myself with John McAllion's remarks, and I share the priorities that I think he and Pauline McNeill have. Furthermore, I appreciate that the compromise tries to reach areas that grants and loans have not reached in the past. However, the scheme is not equitable; there is too much indication of how difficult it will be for students who do not walk into good jobs immediately after graduation to repay their tuition fees. Many of us are concerned about that, because we feel that lifelong learning is an aspiration to which the legislation introduces all sorts of barriers. I regret that the Liberal Democrats—many of whom are friends of long standing—have departed from the principle that was enshrined in their submission to the Cubie inquiry. In it, they said:  "A majority of votes were cast for candidates supporting the abolition of tuition fees. The people of Scotland will expect the new Parliament to deliver on this issue." I appreciate that, in the sophistry of political debate, a case can be made for the compromise. However, outside this chamber, people will see that tuition fees have been retained, and we will be blamed for that. That is why I am opposed to the Executive proposal.

I am sorry, but I must carry on. When this anomalous legislation was produced, did anyone consider—

Proposed legislation—but because the coalition has to be preserved, it will unfortunately become legislation. The committee of which I am a member will be asked to clear up all the anomalies that we have already heard  outlined this morning. I have no doubt that we will hear more this afternoon. What about the position of students who, like me, come from homes which would normally have been awarded the maintenance grant, even as in the current Executive proposal, and who then get lucky after graduation and get very rich? They would not be asked to repay anything. What about the student who comes from a household that earns £24,000 per annum? That is not exactly a high-earning household. The student from that family would be expected to repay that fee once they had graduated—admittedly only £7.50 a month, as Elaine Murray reminded us. That sum might not represent all of their bus fares down to work at the call centre or at McDonald's, but it is a considerable amount of money to be repaid by someone who is already deeply in debt because of student loans, and now because of deferred tuition fees.

I am sorry, Nicol. I have a very short time. Are the Executive's proposals an equitable way to sort things out? Of course not. We have arrived at this situation because tuition fees have been kept by another name, and I greatly regret that.

Will the member give way?

I agree with what the member has said about students in FE colleges and so on. However, I was a student when the regulations changed. If I had been considering entering higher education at that point, I would not have done so. That is a personal testimony. I agree that we must change attitudes, but please do not move away from understanding that people from very low-income backgrounds will not take on debt unless they can be sure of repaying it.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Does the concept of giving money to students when they most need it apply to postgraduate students who are trying to meet loan repayments and pay off credit cards while working for poverty wages in McDonald's?

I realise that it is not my job to provide answers, but George Lyon asked for a legal settlement to Henry McLeish's dilemma. I have the answer—it is called independence. [Laughter.]

Please tell those bad boys to be quiet. They are terrible.

Can the minister explain which factors guided the Executive's decision to abandon Cubie's relatively fair idea that graduates should start paying back their tuition fees only once they could afford to do so, and instead to go for a scheme under which people earning poverty wages—working in McJobs—will be asked to start coughing up once they earn £10,000? Those people will already be paying for loans and having to meet the new demands of rent. Why did the minister go for a more unfair system?

Is the minister's strategic objective to eradicate all drug misuse in Scotland?

On that point, if the minister finds after consultation that, because of the pressure of work on members, the route that Keith Raffan has described is not the most advisable, will he consider having a commission outwith Parliament that could assume the work load and report to Parliament?

What David Mundell has just said illustrates perfectly a general point that SNP members are making—that we must consider the abuse of substances other than "drugs". Many more people cannot turn up for work on a Monday because they have been drinking.

Does Fiona Hyslop agree that the terminology that she used, with all due respect, can be confusing? The person who makes a profit from selling drugs is not someone whom we want anything to do with, except in terms of punishment. On the other hand, often the dealer is the user is the supplier. That is why we need to look clearly at who is taking drugs, why they are doing so, where they are taking them and when they are taking them. No longer is it enough to talk about dealer and user.

Does Mr Gorrie consider the use of cannabis to be  alongside the use—or misuse as I see it—of alcohol and nicotine?

I should perhaps declare an interest—I am a patron of the Scottish Breast Cancer Campaign. Will the minister work in partnership with that organisation, which can reach the women that very often official bodies cannot? That might prove a very cost-effective way of spreading the message.

rose  —

rose  —

Will the member give way?

I thank the member. On a point of information, such a service does operate. Perhaps that relates to what I have said about the ineffectiveness of some of the existing agencies.

I welcome the opportunity to have this debate. I am almost tempted to follow Richard Simpson's line and say that I would like to vote both for the Executive's motion and for my party's amendment. However, I am slightly concerned that, although tribute has been paid to the huge amount of voluntary agencies and drug action teams and so on, we are in danger—unless we start rationalising fundamentally—of creating a drugs-solving industry, similar to the poverty industry that we have been accused of having. For that reason, I reserve judgment on the Executive's motion until I hear more about how the new bodies will operate. What are the enormous financial and social resources tackling? Are we attempting to completely eradicate the use of drugs, including stimulants, opiates, tranquillisers, analgesics, nicotine, tobacco, cannabis, ecstasy, heroin and cocaine? Or does our approach to drug use uneasily acknowledge that drugs of some sort are used and abused by every society in the world? Today's debate seems to suggest the latter to be the case. Although much of what the minister said chimes with my thoughts on the matter, there was no definition of what was meant by the drug problem. Keith Raffan, whose attention to the issue I respect, talked about a serious drug problem. How do we define that? Which drugs create a serious drug problem? Does a problem become serious only when crime is involved? The Scottish National party's amendment acknowledges that the motion lacks definition. The amendment recognises that drug use and abuse is a multifaceted area for policy making. The minister described locally sensitive drugs strategies. Although nobody could disagree with the concept, we must ask how such a strategy would be operated in an area such as Lanarkshire. The drug action teams are under the aegis of the health board, which is not coterminous with the local authorities and the police authorities. How will the strategy work in a sensitive area when there is such a conflict in the boundaries of the agencies that are involved as well as a varying pattern of drug use? When Lyndsay McIntosh made her presentation,  she said that we should face up to our failures and be honest. When the minister talked about the audit process, it sounded as if that would happen. However, he also said that the Scotland Against Drugs campaign—which has no credibility with young people—would continue. I was one of the original people involved with Scotland Against Drugs. I set up Drugline. I am a former chair of the Scottish Drugs Forum. The relevance of many of the agencies that we have should be reconsidered—although the mapping exercise might turn out to be part of the drugs-solving industry. We require a fundamental examination of which drugs are used, by whom and why. We need to know more about the medical and social effects of the different types of drug use. We have to do that before we commit resources to rehabilitation, detoxification and preventive programmes. As legislators, we need to understand the effects of cannabis use as opposed to heroin use. We need to examine and evaluate more objectively and consistently the number of young people who are killed or whose lives are ruined by allergic reaction to ecstasy compared with addiction to alcohol, for example. Most important, because of the criminality inherent in the drugs business and young people's disrespect for the laws governing drug use, the Parliament must demonstrate its relevance to young people before it can hope to have more influence over the use and misuse of drugs than the siren voices of pals and pushers. Incidentally, we should remember that pals can be pushers as well as users. We need a commission. I promise that I will back Richard Simpson's motion if he will sign my motion for the establishment of a commission on cannabis. We could start there, and consider the difference between the use of that drug and the use of other drugs and how we might start tackling the problem in a way that chimes with the users of all drugs in Scotland.

I, too, come from Lanarkshire and appreciate Mr McMahon's concern, but I wonder whether we are well served by those statistics. For example, in the part of Lanarkshire that I come from, the preferred drug of choice is not heroin or cannabis but cocaine, which is being used not by young, high-flying, high-earning executives, but by young kids like we were.

Will the member give way?

Do locally sensitive drugs strategies include locally sensitive punitive measures, which might involve the criminal justice system? We should hear more about how that could be done.

rose—

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to a debate on a subject on which I am not an expert—having heard some of the speeches, I feel quite ashamed. I take small issue with the motion, which says that "having to face the threat of violence is not an acceptable feature of any profession." As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton pointed out, firemen and many other public servants who work on our behalf face the same hazards in the course of their duties. Would it be acceptable to Margaret Smith that the multidisciplinary task force should consider public sector workers, such as social workers, firemen and so on? The principle is agreed by everyone in the chamber, which is a development. We have hardly touched on the issue of resources. I accept that Scottish National party members are accused of whistling for resources that we cannot possibly afford, unless, of course, we cancel Trident—but we will not go into that now. However, I think that, in November, the Deputy Minister for Community Care admitted to my colleague Michael Matheson that there was a cut in resources of up to 26 per cent in expenditure and services for physically disabled people across Scotland. I suggest that that cut might contribute to the feelings of frustration and so on that can build up, not necessarily for the client but for their family, relatives and friends, when they realise that the client has to wait for up to a year for an assessment. Once that assessment has taken place, the client has to go on to a waiting list before the service can be delivered, because of such cuts and the lack of resources. I will not lecture people who know better than I do how frustrations build up, which can bring about the sort of violence of which we are too well aware. I make a plea to the minister to re-examine the resources and to pay heed to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's point about the excellent practice being developed in City of Edinburgh Council on the management of risk. Does it have implications for resources, and can those resources be fed into social work budgets? As much as the establishment of the Scottish social services council will encourage people to feel that their professionalism is being judged worthy of acknowledgement, they also need resources. If they need resources so that they can carry out their jobs more effectively, it is down to the minister to provide them.

My question, too, is about the management of NHS resources and about plans for recovery. I draw the Executive's attention to the headline in an excellent publication that can be purchased locally: "Cash plea as flu crisis wrecks waiting lists". That situation has arisen because of a combination of circumstances, none of which is helped by the minister's precipitate withdrawal of emergency winter payments to local hospital trusts. Will she now reinstate those payments?

If she does not reinstate them, will she resign on the ground that she is not managing the resources of the NHS?

It is the same all over.

I listened intently to the minister being interviewed on "Good Morning Scotland" this morning because I had not made much sense of the motion as it appeared in the business bulletin. I thought that I was listening to a snow warning because of the flurry of words that all seemed to run together. The words were reminiscent of the ones that are used in the chamber when members discuss the radical restructuring of the national health service in Scotland, which is what I think the minister was promising in her speech. What will be the difference between this radical restructuring and that introduced by Sam Galbraith when he was the Under-Secretary of State for Health? I think it was "Designed to Care" that he introduced. Much of the same terminology was used in the minister's speech today. My question concerns the radical restructuring of the NHS and the move away from old hospitals to what will presumably be bright, shiny, community-based service providers. Will they be provided by son of PFI? Is that where the money will come from? I see that Richard Simpson is as intrigued by this as I am. Richard, I am sure—I apologise, Presiding Officer, for speaking directly to the member. I am sure that we would all like to know whether any limit is to be put on the extent of PFI involvement in this new community service provision. None of us disagrees with that—we think that there should be a switch away from old and unsuitable hospitals—but what is the new service provision to be? We know, from what the minister and other members of the Executive have said, that there are cash limits on this brave new world. Unfortunately, those limits are not set by the minister in this chamber, but by her pal in London. But hey, that is the downside of devolution. People have got to take the budget they are handed and fit hospitals inside its parameters. If I am to believe what I am told by the Lothian Local Medical Committee, there is not a snowball's chance of their being able to bring about the quality of community-based service that all of us—including the minister, I am sure—would like, if they are also lumbered with having to implement  the radical restructuring of Arbuthnott. There has not been much reference to Arbuthnott today, and I hope that members will indulge me for a minute, because I represent Lothian and we are the losers. I heard the minister refer to what was to be spent on mental health and on people with learning disabilities and so on. I cannot but refer back to the effect of Arbuthnott on Lothian's spend. We will lose £5 million from the Lothian budget in terms of spending on older people and £5.5 million in terms of spending on mental health provision.

Bristow must excuse me. I am speaking for all of us, as I know that he is as worried about this as I am. We will lose more than 22 per cent of the spend in terms of people with learning disabilities in Lothian. Those are the community-based services that the Executive is trying to introduce. There is no investment in introducing the new plan. I have no quarrel with the plan itself, but if the Executive is going to invest properly, it should invest in development. I have not heard any recognition of the need for that investment in what has been said today.

I was not quoting Lothian Health officials, but referring to a letter I received from Dr Sandy Sutherland of the Lothian Local Medical Committee—one of Mr Simpson's colleagues, I am sure. He said: "Beyond a shadow of a doubt the implementation of Arbuthnott would make that change undeliverable." The change he is referring to is the change to community-based services. I am impressed by that, because he is a professional. Although I take very seriously what Cathy Jamieson said about concentrating on patients and seeing the issue from their point of view, we must also take into account the professionals. In summary, when the minister comes to reply, I hope that she will give us some definitive answers on where the development money will come from to introduce two such radical restructurings at the same time.

Just look who is standing behind you [Laughter.]  Many of us are genuinely concerned about this issue. We look to Robert Brown to define the debate, but he is not doing it. He should pick one point and flog it, rather than flog the SNP, because we are not the Administration.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what are the implications for its budget if the cost of the Holyrood project increases beyond that currently planned for. (S1O-892)

I know that the Minister for Finance cannot agree that he made a mistake in the first place in proceeding with the site, but I will ask him, in the spirit of the season, to make my Christmas happier by promising that Señor Miralles, the builders and the developers will not demolish Queensberry House simply because he has not managed to get enough money out of the  Treasury.

I apologise for missing most of the debate. Could we start at the beginning again?

I am also in the mood for a constructive discussion. I am concerned about the effects of the Arbuthnott report, too. Does the First Minister agree that, given the University of Bristol findings and the growth in population and obvious requirement for a greater health spend in Lothian, it is foolish to cut back expenditure in Lothian to make sure that areas of Glasgow that badly need health service spending get it?

Although my question may appear to be tangential, Presiding Officer— [Laughter.]

It concerns an area of discrimination. Will the First Minister tell us whether he has made representations to Her Majesty's Government—and in particular, to the Secretary of State for Scotland—on the reasons for the proposed changes to legislation covering the prevention of terrorism, including nationalists in Scotland?

Will the First Minister tell us whether, in his most recent—or indeed any—meeting with the Secretary of State for Scotland, John Reid told him why he will remove from the First Minister's powers and functions the ability to intercept telephone or mail communications? Instead of that ability residing with the First Minister, it has gone to the Home Secretary.

Will Mr Raffan give way?

In supporting the amendment in the name of my friend Mr Salmond, I am not—as some might think—breaking the habit of a lifetime. Rather, I am giving voice to an opinion that I formed almost 40 years ago, when I listened to the voices of the British establishment—the members on the front benches of the House of Commons—debating their duty to join the then Common Market, to see it through, to follow the path of righteousness and to do things the British way. At that time, the finest products of Eton and Oxbridge were wrong to think that the French and the Germans would simply stand aside and let them take over. Similarly, the camp followers of the Blair crusade to do it the third way are wrong and arrogant to assume that they can claim leadership of the EU. It is true that the Tories can claim some leadership. Mrs Thatcher, along with Mitterrand and Kohl, developed the single market. I know that the Tories will not thank me for reminding them of that, but she did, and they have to live with the consequences. Roy Jenkins went native in Brussels, when he was president of the Commission, and the Labour party went in a huff. I remember the opt-outs from the socialist manifestos for the European parliamentary elections in the 1980s and 1990s. I wonder whether Donald Dewar, as an old Jenkinsite, will thank me for asking whether he considers that record strong enough for the Executive to claim the right to lead the European Union. What does he think of the fact that the EU is moving ahead to consolidate its political development, now that the penultimate stage of its economic development—the euro—is in place, without the superior leadership qualities of the British Government? The motion shows that although the Brits may have lost an empire, they have still not found a role big enough for their delusions of grandeur. It would be much better for the people who live in Scotland, and in England for that matter, to be represented in Europe by Governments without delusions of grandeur, which would approach the EU nations in a spirit of equality and fraternity.  That would be unlike our own dear, gifted and sensitive Foreign Secretary, who urged people in Scotland to stick with the leadership and power of Britain in Europe, as a region, rather than join the smaller nations which—according to him—have no clout in the EU. Today, even Donald Dewar, a sensitive man who has visited Europe loads of times, stated that we would be leaving the strength of the big player behind us in going out on our own. We would not be going out on our own—we would be joining the other small nations of Europe. Perhaps when he sums up, the Deputy First Minister can tell us which small countries do not have the clout that Donald Dewar and Robin Cook want us to have. Is it Ireland, is it Finland, which currently has the presidency of the EU, or is it some of the applicant nations? Is the EU kidding on those nations that they will amount to anything if they join this club of the nations? As the amendment says, Scotland as an independent country can play a full and proper role in Europe. I urge members to support the amendment.

Some of us still love him! [Laughter.]

Speaking on behalf of my husband and I— [Laughter.]

My memory goes back even further than the First Minister's. I campaigned alongside my husband—although we were not then married—and Teddy Taylor. We campaigned as Scotland United, because we were opposed, for our different reasons, to entry to the EEC. I cannot remember what Jim wrote in a pamphlet, although if the First Minister sends me a copy, I will verify whether he has got it right.

However, I remember campaigning with the slogan "No voice, no entry", which is very similar to the position of the SNP today.

On a point of order.

Is it in order for a minister or any member of the Parliament to cast aspersions on the democratic legitimacy of any of the members here? Twice in the past three weeks, the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs has questioned the status of members elected from the lists rather than the constituencies.

I will take Mr McAllion's advice and keep cool. I want to address the part of the memorandum of understanding that covers international and EU relations. The First Minister should not get too worried, as I will not make independence the sole template for judging the memorandum. However, I will take advice from Des McNulty and take note of the fact that underlying the memorandum and the concordats is a fundamental set of principles. I hope, therefore, that I will be excused for addressing some of those principles. I refer first to the vision of the consultative steering group, set out in its report, "Shaping Scotland's Parliament". It states that the Parliament  "should adopt procedures and practices that people will understand, that will engage their interest, and that will encourage them to obtain information and to exchange views." I refer also to what appeared to be the First Minister's vision for this Parliament: that it should "find just the right solutions to Scotland's problems". I had hoped that we would set our sights a little higher than that. The CSG report goes on to record the cynicism about and disillusionment with the democratic process—with which all of us are becoming increasingly familiar. It urges that this Parliament "should set itself the highest standards" and states that its intention is "to achieve a Parliament whose elected Members the Scottish people will trust and respect, and a Parliament with which they will want to engage." Let us consider the matters on which people want to engage with the Parliament. They do not place artificial boundaries on how their humanity should be practised and expressed by this Parliament, or on how their international responsibilities should be enacted. The objectives of the CSG report are laudable, although I might quibble a wee bit with the narrow nationalism of the implication that this Parliament should seek the trust and respect only of the Scottish people. I want us to have the trust and respect of people outwith Scotland as well. However, it was still quite a good start. We cannot meet the report's objectives if we adopt the spirit and letter of these concordats. They place an artificial barrier on the views that are expressed and exchanged by Scots outside and through the Parliament about our relationship with the citizens of the EU and our wider citizenship of the world. We have a stake in those issues, and we should not be able only to talk about them—we should be able to act on our conclusions. In the section dealing with how Scotland will engage with people and their Governments outwith Scotland, it is made perfectly clear that Scots will be able to lobby, as we can at present, but unable to act, even on matters that have direct, day-to-day relevance to affairs in Scotland. At the next EU intergovernmental conference, for example, which is due to be held in a couple of years' time, the treaties will be reviewed. Further political integration and the expansion of EU membership will be on the table. Under the terms of the memorandum, this Parliament will be able to discuss with Euskadi—the Basque country—Bavaria and Wallonia what we think about those matters that impact directly on Scotland, such as  structural funds, fishing policy and employment policy. However, when it comes to acting on the thoughts and priorities that we may evolve, either ourselves or with other Governments, we will have to lobby Westminster as usual, albeit through the joint ministerial committee. We will just have to hope that Westminster's thoughts and priorities are in tune with ours. That is not a situation calculated to re-engage the interest and energy of Scots in the democratic process. The principles underlying this document, as outlined by Des McNulty, have been undermined. I will provide another, more sharply focused, instance of how the constraints of the document militate against engaging Scots with their Parliament. I believe that Pinochet came to Scotland once. Let us imagine that another Pinochet were to come here and the Spanish Government said that it would like him to be extradited. If the Westminster Parliament did not want to comply with that request—which is not unheard of—would the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs allow the Lord Advocate, within his internationally recognised jurisdiction, to carry through the express policy of this Parliament and, perhaps, the Executive, if it were of a difficult political persuasion from the Government in London? We all know that that would not be possible. I want to mention an important marker of how we will exercise our humanity, our priorities as the Scottish nation and our supposed new democracy as the world enters the 21 st century. Will we be able to act on decisions of the Labour party conference, the Scottish National party conference, the general assembly of the Church of Scotland, the conference of bishops of the Catholic Church, the Scottish Green party and the Scottish Socialist party—and on, I think, a majority of Liberal Democrat decisions—and say no to Trident? We will be able to say it, but will we be able to do it? These concordats hold us firm inside what Westminster believes to be the United Kingdom position. If the Scottish position is obviously different, we can do nothing about that. If the First Minister will permit me, that is the answer to the taunt—repeated by Murray Tosh—that my colleague Margaret Ewing voted for the Scotland Act 1998. Even if she had said no, we would have been stuck with it. That is the situation that this Parliament was meant to remedy. That is what was claimed throughout the referendum campaign. This memorandum serves Scotland and her Parliament ill. It means that we cannot be all that we should be and cannot do everything that we should do. We cannot accept the responsibilities  of nationhood, which we claim. In short, like this Parliament, it will not do.

I very much agree with the notion of mutual respect in concordats—it is essential. Does the member agree with Alex Neil's suggestion of a rotating chairmanship of the ministerial council, with different lead ministers from the different Administrations within the British Isles?

Will Mr Lyon give way?

Interceptions? [Laughter.]

Will the First Minister give way?

Will the minister think again about what should be reserved information? I have it on the best possible authority that the three independent reports to which he referred all recommended Edinburgh royal. We do not question the clinical assessment that there is a need for only one centre of excellence, but we question the minister's refusal to make the reports public. There is no issue of commercial confidentiality in this case or anything like that. One of my colleagues from the Health and Community Care Committee, Margaret Smith, has added her voice to mine, and those of the BMA and David McLetchie, in asking to see the reports. In the spirit of the freedom of information legislation that will be introduced, can we see those reports now?

I am concerned that, although the minister and I would agree on the general approach that is needed continuously to modernise education and teaching methods, not one of the manifesto points that he mentioned will make life easier for teachers. It appears to teachers that the offer that they have been made simply adds salt to the wounds that have been inflicted by the innovations that the minister mentioned.

Murray Tosh is absolutely right—the offer made by COSLA is not enough. It is not enough to prove to teachers that the Government values them. COSLA made the offer, but it is the Scottish Executive that will carry the can for the disappointment and bitterness that will result from this situation, which comes in the wake of a new Labour Prime Minister who promised so much for education and devolved so little power to the Scottish Executive. I do not believe that Sam Galbraith wants to defend the indefensible offer that has been made, but he has been left with no choice. Murray Tosh eloquently described the bottleneck in career development, promotion and management that would arise in schools under the arrangement proposed by COSLA. Sam Galbraith knows that that can only damage children and education. I believe that the minister also knows that the percentage increase in salary that he is offering, compared with that offered to other professions, is no motivation for young people to enter teaching. We need younger people in teaching for no other reason than to take up the slack that has been left by the experienced older teachers who are being forced out of the profession early because they cannot take any more. We talked yesterday about the need for a highly educated, flexible work force. Where will that come from, without teachers? Without teachers, there is only ignorance. It is an insult to teachers to try to compare them with other professionals, as previous Conservative Governments did. With their partisan pecking order, those Governments are to blame for much of the disappointment that has been visited on the SJNC. The Conservative Government wanted to ensure that it paid policemen—it did no harm to policemen. It wanted to pay people in the armed services—it did no harm to them, either. However, teachers paid the price for that. As a young teacher, more than 30 years ago, with my first pay packet I was able to buy my mother a three-piece suite. I know that it is anecdotal, but it happened. No young teacher leaving a training college or university now can walk into the Co-operative store, as I did, and put their money down to buy a suite. I am sorry if that sounds homespun, but a lot of teaching is homespun: that is how we have asked teachers to be over the past 30 years. As we have been cutting their status and their purchasing power relative to other professions, we have asked them to buttress the breakdown of the family unit. We  have asked them to buttress the effects of horrible poverty in schools, amid the plenty that children see on television. We have asked teachers to make good all the gaps that have been left by the social changes of the past 30 years—and how have we rewarded them? I regret, as I think that the minister is a decent man, that he is having to pursue a policy of further reducing the status of teachers. I will not repeat the arguments in favour of the diminution of career development paths, which is what that policy will do. I have a letter from someone who teaches in a school in Lothian, asking me whether I know of any comparable professional team that suffers the same percentage of nervous breakdowns during its work. Among teachers in that school, the figure has been 17 per cent over the past five years. That is what teaching is about. If we value teachers, we will not take away the only protection that they have, which is the statutory role of the SJNC. That body has disappointed people—much of what Jamie Stone said was correct—but teachers know that they would lose a great deal if they lost the means to enforce the results of an objective review of their salaries and conditions. The representation of their interests would have only the status of a pay review board, and we know what Governments have done with the salary recommendations of pay review boards. We are asking teachers to give up far too much, and I am asking the Government to think again. I am asking it to think about arbitration, and about whether the Education, Culture and Sport Committee of this Parliament can contribute more. Sam is shaking his head, but he is writing down this Parliament and its responsibility for education, and I am sure that he does not want to do that.

As John Swinney said, it is impossible to take issue with motherhood and apple pie, so I will take issue with what the motion leaves out, which is that the Parliament believes that a vibrant speech from Henry McLeish on a rapid response unit is a good enough excuse for filling, or half filling, the chamber. The fact that the chamber is half full indicates that a lot of us have more sense than I had given us credit for. The minister missed out one thing, which we may get in his closing speech. He talked about the improved intelligence gathering that we will require if there is to be a strategy for the maintenance of the manufacturing sector and the growth of the Scottish economy in general. One thing that has emerged from this debate is that there are still a lot of shibboleths around, and not a lot of new thinking. Normally John McAllion and I agree on just about everything, but I have to take issue with something that I think he was implying. Henry McLeish and Bristow Muldoon both alluded to it too, when they talked about the split—the demarcation line—between manufacturing and service industries. These days, there is practically no demarcation. The motion refers to manufacturing; is manufacturing about things made from girders, or is it about the software packages made by the Scottish Council for Educational Technology in partnership with  Microsoft? Those packages are manufactured products and export products. It is only fair that we should ask the Executive how it defines those sectors of the Scottish economy so that we can evaluate its strategy. We should not talk ourselves down just because of the way in which things are now done. For example, someone working in the kitchens at Digital in Ayrshire 20 years ago would have been counted as part of the manufacturing sector. But there is now a lot of outsourcing—to use another jargon term—which means that a catering company will no doubt be supplying the food to the people who work in that manufacturing industry, and their employees will be counted as part of the service sector. We could do a lot more to give ourselves better statistics on which to dream our dreams and build our schemes. We should all have regard for what Christine Grahame said. We have a centre of excellence in the Borders. It is still producing much better stuff to wear than most other places in the world, but it is supplying a niche market. Although I regret it, it is true that the big growth area will be in the newer technologies, in places such as the Dundee Centre for Medical Education; in Cadence Design Systems in Livingston for leading-edge software; or in Heriot-Watt University for laser technology. I could name an awful lot more. We must not talk down the importance of what to those of us who did not grow up in this part of the century are rather airy-fairy sounding industries. We grew up with men pittin overalls on and going to their work and if they did not do that we wondered what they were doing wi their time. [Laughter.] Members laugh? There are some folk out there who know that that is the truth. We need much more of the new technology. We should replicate what happened in Austin, Texas. The city was going down the tubes so it turned itself into the brains capital of the United States of America. Why should Scotland not become the brains capital of Europe? We have the potential—it is there in our universities. One thing that is lacking from this strategy is a connection between the creation of the knowledge economy in our universities and our companies that are still involved with manufacturing. I hope that the minister will tell us that he will consider that. Someone once said that it was education, education, education into the next millennium. I think it is also investment, investment, investment. Gordon Brown has saved up a big war chest. Can we get our share now, please, and can we invest it in our economy?

Does the Executive consider that the block grant will be sufficient to ensure that people who are referred this month to the dermatology clinic at the royal infirmary in Edinburgh will be seen before August 2000? If it does not consider the block grant large enough to meet that objective—as was suggested in the document that we looked at two weeks ago—which member of the Executive will feel obliged to resign?

It is about the block grant.

rose—

I add my congratulations to the minister on addressing this issue just in time. I sincerely hope that he will tell the gentleman who will arrive from Germany exactly what we feel about the decisions that have been made.  I accept that the closure is a done deal, but I will take members forward, if I may. As a member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, along with Nick, I am concerned that although the training programme is perhaps better than we first feared, it might have been put in place a bit earlier. Margaret Smith referred to the number of times she has spoken with the management over a considerable period of time. Why, then, was the local enterprise company not aware that there was a possibility that the employment prospects at Newbridge would change? If it had been aware of that, we would not have had 300 blokes waiting to go on a forklift truck driving course knowing that the likelihood of still being employed at Newbridge while the course was open to them was very low indeed. I regret the fact that the jobs are to be lost and I regret the circumstances in which that will happen. I sincerely hope that the minister will get the money that the blokes are due. However, I also hope that we will learn something from this and that the rapid response unit, which the minister promised to the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee, will be put into effect pronto.

Like  Trish Godman, I expect to hold the Executive to account. I have found a gem in the document—I will comment on content rather than style. It says: "Increase the number of doctors and recruit more nurses and introduce more family-friendly policies as part of our overall commitment to retain and to value all NHS staff". I could not have put it better myself. I congratulate Susan Deacon—I am glad to see that she takes the comment in good spirit, because I want to measure those words against the reality of the decision that she has to make on the provision of paediatric cardiac services. I am aware of the professional advice that is likely to have been given and of the fact that there are only 50 miles between the two existing units. The best practice that the professionals would like us to adopt is for a unit to serve a radius of territory that encompasses about 10 million people—in some parts of the world, particularly north America, where a one-centre system of excellence is operated, those areas can often be more than 50 miles in diameter. When you are making that decision, minister, do not be held fast by the professionals. You say that you want more family-friendly policies. It will not be friendly to any of the families whose children have, unfortunately, been admitted either to the royal hospital for sick children at Yorkhill or to the Edinburgh sick children's hospital if you have to close one unit. I do not underestimate the difficulty of the decision that has to be made and I share your concern that there should be no turf wars, because we should have the best possible service. Mr Reid, I apologise for speaking directly to the minister, but she has the responsibility for ensuring that we have a quality service and that that service is dictated not by the professionals but by need and by what we already have. We have two centres, each with an excellent record and each with competing claims that are very difficult to judge between. In the case of Edinburgh's unit, we know that, if we lose the paediatric cardiac service, we may lose the whole intensive care unit. That is a huge price to pay. I do not imagine that any of my colleagues from Glasgow would want to be forced to take the decision that you, minister, are going to have to take if, as is said, you have already conceded the case for there being only one centre. I hope that you have not conceded that case. The document makes a pledge: "Increase the number of doctors and recruit more nurses". I fail to see how that pledge will be met by cutting one unit.

To ask the Scottish Executive if it is aware of new employment opportunities identified by the local enterprise companies covering the Forth valley, Fife and Lothian areas. (S1W-245)

I, too, am delighted to hear about the Quintiles announcement. I also welcome what Henry McLeish said at the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee meeting yesterday about the rapid response unit that has to be established.  I also very much approved of the improved intelligence gathering-

I am flattering Henry, with all due respect. [Laughter.]  Is Nicol Stephen able to share with us the result of any discussions between public agencies within his ministerial domain and the management of Babcock at Rosyth about the future size of its work force?

Babcock, please.

On a point of order. I did ask about Babcock, and although I am highly delighted about Motorola and the rest, there is such an enormous work force and such a huge element of the Scottish economy represented at Babcock that I should have an answer on that.

There are discussions?

That is what I said.

Will Mr Galbraith give way?

I think that we are agreed on one point. This is too serious a matter to brandish about without a route out of what is still a huge dilemma. Let us not bother about how huge it is; it is a big dilemma. I did not go through the list of six points in the letter because there was not enough time, but Mr Galbraith will agree that the whole contract needs further examination.  During the election campaign, Mr Galbraith was big enough to say that he would look again at the question of pensions, and it looks as though he succeeded in that. Can we have some sort of retrospective look at this contract, particularly at the land deals? We know that there is another land deal coming up at Lauriston.

rose-

I will take Jack McConnell's invitation at face value and put campaign rhetoric behind me; I will ignore the fact that Keith Raffan called me an unreconstructed Jurassic park socialist.  Having got that out of the way, I apologise for not tackling the huge issues-the ideological issues-that are implicit in the private ownership of public services; PFIs involve a partnership, which implies ownership. I will also put aside the unkind jibes that I made about where we might find an alternative source of funding-by getting rid of nuclear weapons-and address myself to the situation here in Edinburgh.  I have an urgent reason for bringing the chamber's attention to the reality of PFI. Although I welcome a sinner who has repented, and what Jack McConnell said today about making wee improvements at the margins, I fear that, for some aspects of the Edinburgh royal infirmary contract that has already been signed, and for the contract  that is waiting to be signed, that may be too late.  There is a second PFI at the Edinburgh royal infirmary-for equipment. Before the election, I was concerned because every piece of advice that I had received-from the British Medical Association, from the people who work in the area that will be covered by the second PFI and, of course, from Unison-suggested that it would, almost certainly, lead to a lowering of the standard of clinical care. The equipment PFI covers equipment that is patient-critical. The equipment is operated by a health team that is made up of the same people who purchase, install and maintain it, and who train the staff in how to use it. They are an integrated part of the medical care. Under the equipment PFI, they would be split off from the rest of the clinicians and nursing staff.  I was also very concerned about the total absence of British health care companies from the companies that tendered for this PFI, because I do not want the bedside bookkeeping of the American health care companies in Edinburgh's new royal infirmary. I am sure that Mr McConnell does not want that either.  I have a compelling third reason for revisiting the PFI. When the minister sums up, I want him to give us an assurance that the Executive will re-examine the books for the Edinburgh PFI. I have here a letter dated 31 May. It is addressed to the executive directors of the Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust, and is from the heads of service and business managers at the royal infirmary. It says that "effective planning of and communication about the entire project has ground to a halt" and that "plans for equipment specification and purchase are causing deep anxiety."  Most worrying of all for the people who will use the privatised new infirmary at Little France, the letter states that few of the service heads and managers "have gained confidence about the level of service they will be able to provide after going through this process."  During the election campaign, some new Labour spokespeople brushed aside criticisms that I was making. I was, if members will excuse their phrase, "a troublemaker". Angus Mackay, a very nice boy-

I apologise to Jack McConnell, but I do not have the time to take interventions. We will talk about it at the Audit Committee, I hope.  Angus Mackay went so far as to say that the medical staff at the royal infirmary were very  pleased with the PFI plans. They are not. Here it is in their letter dated 31 May. They are anything but pleased; they are very concerned. They have lost all confidence in the matter being handled properly. Did it cross Angus's mind, when he spoke the words that he was given at the press conference, that there had to be a reason for the showpiece PFI being unable to attract and keep a chief executive or a director of nursing services? There is something wrong with the whole contract. I ask the minister to re-examine the matter.  I apologise, but I will return to the election campaign. It looked as though Sam won the heavyweight contest with Donald Dewar. Sam said that he could reopen the books and renegotiate the part of the contract that referred to the Unison members who will lose their pension rights, a matter which he mentioned today. Donald Dewar said that the contract could not be reopened. I take it, then, that Sam won that argument. I am therefore asking that we re-examine the contract, and that we certainly stop the second PFI contract until we are convinced that there is value for money and that the BMA was not right when it stated that the medical services and the quality of services will be reduced in the new hospital.

rose-

I just want Mr McNulty to take me seriously. He will forgive me for using high-falutin' rhetoric when I say that the Government could afford the schemes if it were willing to scrap nuclear weapons. However, that is by the bye. Let us return to the issue of the Edinburgh royal infirmary. Can Mr McNulty explain what plans are in hand for the so-called surplus land at Lauriston,  which I consider to be publicly owned land and which should remain in the public province?

The ancillary staff of the Edinburgh royal infirmary have been transferred to the employ of Haden Young. Haden Young's pension scheme does not equate with the NHS scheme. Can Mr McConnell explain how the scheme is to be funded? Has he renegotiated the contract with Haden Young, or will the Health Service Executive pick up the bill for that group of workers who will lose their pension rights?

Will the minister give way?

I am delighted to hear that the wind-tunnel tests are in hand, although I am surprised that they were not in hand a bit earlier. What happens if the tests fail?

Can I confirm that I have seven minutes?

I will attempt to summarise the debate and I will try hard to disregard John McAllion's friendly advice that we should all just keep quiet in our opposition. I do not mean to keep quiet, not because-I say this to Mr Watson-I am being opportunist, but because I was elected by people in this area.  Just like Cathie Craigie, the member for Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, I feel a sense of civic responsibility and public responsibility. I have direct contact with the people who meet me going down the High Street-I do not mind meeting Edinburgh folk going down the High Street-and who say, "I hope you're going to do something about this. What are we spending all this money for?" Then they detail all the things that they would choose to spend money on before spending it on a Parliament.  So far, whether we like it or not, we have not necessarily made the best case for making the Parliament the priority for public spending. I make no apology for asking for a delay, as I think that we would use that delay constructively. We need  to argue that we should have the very best building that Scotland can afford, as we have yet to convince all the people who elected us-and that goes for all of us.  I see Cathie Craigie shaking her head. She said that people in her constituency voted for the Parliament. The question that I wanted to ask her was whether her constituents voted for a £90 million Parliament or for a £50 million Parliament. The people who voted for me did not vote for a Parliament where the costs appear to be escalating outwith control.

I will certainly give way; I have better manners.

I think that that is true, but it is also true that neither her constituents nor mine make a habit of reading Hansard . [Laughter.] However, I will move on.  Several factors influenced this amendment. There is the concern that the Holyrood site is not the most suitable. I know that we are past the time when the then Scottish secretary was advised against choosing other than Calton hill. I accept that time has moved on, that the General Post Office building is not available and that other considerations will have to be taken into account. The amendment asks for those other considerations to be taken into account.  In the time that has elapsed, we have also found that the four-acre site at Holyrood, which was judged to be adequate, is probably not adequate. When any of the local authority people in this chamber were building big, they would usually have a wee bit of land for contingency expansion, but no contingency expansion has been built into this grand design.  However, there is a site that has not yet been built on; I think that it has been procured by Teague Homes (Scotland) Ltd. If we use the time that the amendment asks for productively, perhaps we could revisit that decision. Do the builders need all that land? Could we do a bit of business with them? We need some land for expansion purposes, as the site has already expanded from 16,000 sq m to 23,000 sq m. I am not arguing about that-we may well need the extra support staff to cope with the expansion. However, before the people-who pay for everything-see how the Parliament benefits the quality of decision making in Scotland, they will ask "What do you need all those staff for?"  I appeal directly to the First Minister for time to sell our idea to the people who elected us. There  is no doubt about the site's shortcomings. I am not talking about the design of the building, but about how the site is hemmed in and cannot expand without going into Holyrood park. I think that Patricia Ferguson said that such an expansion might enhance and bring life to the park. However, we do not want too much life in the park; we like it as it is. Furthermore, we do not want the kind of office-block accommodation that we have at the moment.  There is another important point that members did not raise, perhaps because Robin Harper has a specialist interest in these matters. When I first expressed an interest in this issue, I was contacted-before the election-by many architects, two or three of whom advised me that no wind-tunnel test had been done. At least, we have not seen any results of a wind-tunnel test. Perhaps when Mr McLeish sums up, he can tell us whether such a test has been carried out and, if not, whether there are plans to have one. We also have to ask what would happen if the plans were to fail that test.  Frank MacAveety suggested that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body could do everything that I am asking for. However, if the site is not big enough and if an independent assessor's estimate shows that extra land is needed, will the SPCB be entitled to go ahead with its plans? We have been told that the Executive has full responsibility for the configuration of roads around the site. Who will be responsible for the recalibration-which is referred to in documents that I have-that the site will probably need? The amendment seeks time for us to find answers to such questions.  Traffic is the big concern in Edinburgh. Too many people are trying to get to work from Newington or by using London Road. Most members may not be familiar with Edinburgh's traffic problems, which are becoming intolerable. Those problems are operating against the city's best interests and the question is too serious to leave to the SPCB to decide in our interest. The interests are much wider than that.  When members come to vote, they should remember that we are not saying that Holyrood should not go ahead, but that too many questions remain unanswered. We plead for time to find adequate answers to those questions and to find a building for this Parliament of which we can be proud.

May I ask for a point of information?

Will Johann Lamont give way?

Will Mrs Mulligan give way?

On a point of order, Mr Deputy Presiding Officer. Could you give me some advice on procedural matters? They arise out of the message from the Presiding Officer in business bulletin No 7. According to that very thoughtful message-I am not sucking up-Mr Gorrie's motion on the Holyrood Parliament site is unlikely to be taken until after the Parliamentary Bureau has met. I ask the First Minister, or the person who is sitting in his chair, for an assurance that no more public contracts will be signed until the Parliament has had the chance to see a review of the current position.