3. To ask the Scottish Government how many of the 33 recommendations in the Justice 2 Sub-Committee report on managing registered sex offenders have been carried out since 10 May 2007. (S4O-02799)

The committee’s recommendation 20 refers to a requirement being placed on registered sex offenders to disclose the information that they are registered sex offenders during the housing application process. The cabinet secretary advises that he has received ECHR legal guidance on the matter. Is he willing to provide that information in public?

I thank all the members who have supported my members’ business motion and welcome the fact that it has received support from all the parties that are represented in the chamber. On Friday 18 October last year, eight-year-old Broagan McCuaig suffered horrendous injuries when she was attacked by two American bulldogs in the back court of her home in the Garthamlock area of my constituency. Were it not for the bravery of a local passer-by, Broagan might not be alive today to tell her tale. The physical and psychological wounds that Broagan suffered will take a long time to heal. She missed part of her education as she underwent a series of painful operations and skin grafts to repair the damage to her face and other injuries that many of us would consider extremely concerning. Thousands of similar incidents involving out-of-control dogs have been recorded over the past five years in Scotland. Over that period, there has been a 17 per cent increase in the number of such incidents. Too many children have suffered because of the current dog laws and action must be taken. Last month, I arranged a meeting with the First Minister and a number of mothers whose children have been the victims of dog attacks: Veronica Lynch, whose daughter, Kellie, was killed by two Rottweilers in 1989; Zoe Hall, whose four-year-old daughter, Sophia Bell, was seriously injured by a Labrador; and Broagan’s mother, Tracy Cox. The accounts that we heard were harrowing. The Daily Record has printed a number of pictures of children who have suffered from dog attacks. They do not make comfortable viewing, but they tell the real story of the anguish that many families have experienced as a result of serious dog attacks. So, what can we do? As a result of last month’s meeting involving the First Minister, the Scottish Government has launched a consultation document. I welcome that and the extremely positive discussions that took place during that meeting with the First Minister. I also welcome the First Minister’s commitment to a summit to discuss how we take the issue forward and to look at how to promote responsible dog ownership. I hope that that will allow further debate on the issue and that we will consider putting in place robust measures to develop responsible dog ownership. I put on the record the fact that I am strongly in favour of compulsory microchipping. We must look at using that method to promote responsible dog ownership. A lack of compulsory microchipping or any mandatory licensing suggests that we are not serious about ensuring responsible dog ownership. Proper enforcement of those control measures, combined with the regular maintenance of a central database, would be integral to their success. We would have to put in place the necessary resources to make a compulsory database a success. Another measure that might be worth considering is the introduction of a restricted breeds list that is similar to the Irish model. The Irish list includes two breeds that are banned in the United Kingdom and large breeds such as Rhodesian ridgebacks, German shepherds and Rottweilers. Those animals or crosses of them must be muzzled in public places and walked on short leads by people who are no younger than 16. Those dogs earned their place on that list not because they are perceived to be more dangerous than other dogs or more aggressive than Jack Russells or Yorkshire terriers but because of their physical attributes. Their weight, height and jaw strength make them possibly dangerous dogs in public. Broagan McCuaig was attacked for six minutes while she was being rescued by a grown man who punched and kicked the dogs that were mauling her. As I said, if it was not for that bravery, she would not be here to tell her story. Following such attacks, it often transpires that the owners were not fit to be owners. If a restricted breeds list was put in place, perhaps we could prevent such individuals from being owners. More focus should be placed on assessing owners and considering the environments that dogs are kept in. When a family wish to rehome a dog from an animal charity such as the Dogs Trust, they are often required to undergo a home assessment. There is scope to introduce such measures for the ownership of dangerous dogs. In the comfort zone of the debating chamber, it would be easy for us to play it safe and not consider introducing muzzling, licensing, microchipping or a restricted breeds list. However, we owe it to Broagan McCuaig and all the other victims to take robust action in a way that will make a genuine difference.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve childcare provision in the Glasgow Provan constituency. (S4O-02755)

The minister’s response may have sounded comprehensive, but it missed out childcare for school-age children. What provisions will the Government introduce, perhaps in its independence white paper or in future legislation—I know that it is missing from the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill—to deal with childcare provision specifically for school-age children?

I rise on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party to oppose the business motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau. Members will note that, next Tuesday, after great debate, there will be a statement on the independence white paper. However, the sting in the tale is that the Scottish Government will arrange for an inspired parliamentary question next Tuesday morning so that it can launch the white paper at an event in the Glasgow science centre, clearly sidelining the role of the Scottish Parliament. The arrogance and contempt that the Scottish Government displays for the Parliament is beyond belief. It makes no sense to anyone other than the Scottish Government that, on the very day that it will apparently set out its vision for the future of Scotland, it will sideline the role of the Parliament. I will make clear our position, which I understand is the position of the other main parties that are represented on the Parliamentary Bureau. Next Tuesday, there should be a statement to the Parliament first—[Interruption.]

There should be a statement to the Parliament first, with the white paper being launched and released to the Parliament at the same time. It is the Government’s business if the First Minister wants to massage his already inflated ego by then presenting the white paper to a very carefully selected audience in the Glasgow science centre.

The chamber is not the Government’s selected audience; it is elected democratically by the Scottish people. The principles that we stand for are written on the parliamentary mace before you, Presiding Officer: wisdom, justice, compassion and integrity. What we see before us in the business programme ensures that the Government has no respect for those words. We oppose the business motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick.

On Friday 18 October, eight-year-old Broagan McCuaig was attacked by two American bulldogs in the Garthamlock area of my constituency. I am sure that all members will want to wish Broagan a speedy recovery, but there is much more that we in this Parliament could do. Does the First Minister agree that there needs to be more effective legislation in place to deal with dangerous dogs? Will he agree to meet me and other interested parties to discuss the matter further?

On the Scottish Labour Party’s behalf, I oppose the business motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau. At a bureau meeting, I requested on the Labour Party’s behalf a statement on a number of questions that remain unanswered in connection with the Glasgow airport rail link. The Scottish Government has confirmed that it has no intention of agreeing to a statement and it appears to have nothing further to say on the matter. It is a sad day in Parliament if the Government cancels a project at a cost of £30 million to the public purse and does not believe that it has a responsibility to answer to the Parliament. All of us agree that the Parliament hears many statements. Many of us have views on whether those statements have been effective at providing answers from the Government. Afterwards, it is for all of us—including the public—to make judgments on the statements. The Government has not proposed to answer to us on this occasion. The only conclusion that we can reach in that respect is that the Scottish Government has something to hide and is not willing to come to Parliament—[Interruption.]

It has nothing to say. It does not want to come forward and it has something to hide. I oppose the business motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve child protection services. (S4O-02436)

I have here a copy of the serious case review in respect of Daniel Pelka. Has the minister had the chance to read the review? What action is the Government taking to put in place every possible safeguard to ensure that, in Scotland, we minimise the risk of another case similar to that of Daniel Pelka?

2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief constable of Police Scotland and what matters were discussed. (S4O-02363)

Following the cabinet secretary’s discussions with the chief constable, can he advise me how many registered sex offenders remain unaccounted for in Scotland?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact is on employment of the reported increase in the use of zero-hours contracts. (S4O-02331)

Would the cabinet secretary consider writing to every non-departmental public body in Scotland to request that they take steps to ensure that they do not employ anyone directly on a zero-hours contract?

I rise to oppose the motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick, on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau, that proposes that the recess dates should be amended to allow for the Parliament to be closed down from 23 August until 21 September 2014 inclusive. The Government advises that it is concerned that, during the 28-day period in the run-up to the referendum, it could be accused of abusing its position. [Interruption.]

I have never known the Government to be so sensitive. Is this the Government that has used its position in power to expend large sums of public money on legal cases to prevent information from being disclosed? Is this the Government that has abused its majority in committees to prevent proper scrutiny? [Interruption.]

There are many examples that could be amplified clearly in the chamber. We have been clear from the outset that the Parliament should remain open for business as usual. As a possible compromise, we considered the possibility of the final week of the referendum campaign being an area for negotiation, but the Government discounted that from the outset of the discussions. The excuse from the Government is that the way in which the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill has been drafted would make it difficult for the Parliament to operate during that period. That point has been made on a number of occasions via the Government’s business manager. I can understand the concerns that the Government has raised, and I consider myself a fair-minded individual. [Interruption.]

In the spirit of being constructive, I have sought to find a solution to the challenges that the Government faces. Indeed, I have received written advice from the parliamentary clerks, who advise that it is perfectly possible for amendments to the bill to be lodged that would allow the Parliament to continue meeting up until and beyond the referendum date.

I will give way in a moment. Even at this late stage, I call on the Government to suspend the decision to allow it to lodge amendments to the referendum bill. I give way to Patrick Harvie.

We have made a number of constructive and reasonable proposals to the Government. We call on it to suspend the decision today and ensure that it lodges amendments to the referendum bill.

6. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what matters were discussed. (S4O-02220)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of Audit Scotland’s findings on health inequalities, which highlight the lack of clarity and focus among health boards and local partners on targeting areas of greatest need. What action has the Government been taking in respect of that report?

I thank colleagues for their support in allowing the debate to be brought to the chamber. It should be noted that, apart from the Scottish National Party, four of the political groupings in the Parliament supported the motion. I welcome to the public gallery representatives from the various community-based housing associations throughout Scotland, including committee members and staff. They are here because they believe in the future of their communities. They will expect from the minister not warm words of encouragement or a carefully crafted speech written by civil servants, nor lame excuses, but a commitment to reverse the cuts that affect the future of their housing associations and make it impossible for those associations to continue the regeneration of our communities that has gone on for decades. The motion was written on behalf of those housing associations, to amplify some of their concerns and frustrations. They want to know why they no longer receive the funding that would allow them to continue the regeneration of their communities.

Like me, John Mason will receive every single day many requests from constituents who want to be rehoused by many of the community-based housing associations that are represented in the public gallery. I do not want to hear excuses; I want to hear commitments to ensure that the housing associations’ work can continue. Since the 1970s, CBHAs have played a crucial role in regenerating our communities, particularly in Glasgow. There are many communities that would not exist today were it not for the vision, tenacity and determination of CBHAs. I can name many such communities, and the long list would include the Gorbals area, the Springburn area where I was brought up, south Dennistoun and the tenement properties in the area that John Mason represents. Those communities would not exist if it were not for the CBHAs’ determination. Not only did the CBHAs build houses; they brought forward projects to support the people in them. They built community facilities and used their expertise in development and attracting funding from various sources, including the lottery. They have been a boon for local employment, have strengthened local economies and have allowed social enterprises to flourish. All those social and economic achievements were led by community-based housing association tenants and owners who were members of management committees. That model has a proven track record of success. What is clear from every piece of evidence that has been presented to the Parliament and from what we can see on the ground is that the community-based housing association model works. Yes, it requires public subsidy and support from the Government, and it might not be the cheapest option, but we get what we pay for. We got the cheapest option when we built housing estates such as the Red Road and Sighthill ones. They were described in their day as being cost-effective solutions to providing housing, but a lack of infrastructure and proper management has meant that those houses are being torn down as we speak. Had there been the community control there that we have had in the areas that I referred to, I am sure that those estates would have stood the test of time. My motion refers to what is happening in the real world. Although demand for social housing is increasing rapidly, the Scottish Government is cutting the grant levels that are available to local housing associations for their development work to continue. The graphs on the piece of paper that I am holding up, which was provided to every member in the chamber, illustrate clearly the challenges that housing associations face. One graph shows that, when Labour left office in April 2007, the grant per new build unit was just over £76,000. The SNP Government has cut that to the present rate, which is just over £44,000 per unit, resulting in CBHAs across Scotland withdrawing from development. They are doing so because they need Government financial support that will allow them to ensure that schemes stack up. Those cuts are putting at risk the very existence of our community-based housing association movement. The current funding environment has led to the growth of housing organisations masquerading as housing associations when, in fact, they are big businesses that operate from outside Scotland. I am afraid that their interests are not the interests of our communities as seen in the community-based housing association movement; their interests are to ensure that they make a fast buck out of their investment. They might be able to come in to build the houses and meet the targets that the Government has set—they can do that as cheap as chips. However, they will not be able to do it in the effective manner in which our CBHA movement has done it for many years. My call to the Scottish Government is clear: reverse the cuts that have been placed on our local housing associations and let them get on with the job of regenerating our communities and protecting the investment that has been in place for nearly four decades. That will ensure that many of our communities are able to provide good and ample social housing for people to live in.

Will the member give way?

Does it concern Jim Eadie that community-based housing associations are withdrawing from development because of the lack of grant subsidy?

Does the member accept that the graph that I provided—the graph that he has received a copy of—clarifies that the grant level that is provided to the community housing associations to which he referred has reduced from £74,000 to £34,000 during the tenure of the Scottish Government since 2007? Does he accept that figure?

The minister refers to housing associations. I will pose a question that they posed to me. Will you reverse the cut in the housing association grant from £74,000 to £34,000?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to prevent tenants and landlords from being exploited by unregulated letting agents. (S4O-02124)

I am sure that the minister will be aware of the increase in the number of constituents throughout Scotland who have experienced significant difficulties through being exploited by unregulated letting agents. Has the Government considered the possibility of putting a more effective regime in place to regulate the industry and ensure that the exploitation of tenants and landlords is addressed?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how many quad bikes have been seized by police under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. (S4O-02058)

I draw the minister’s attention to the large number of complaints that I have received in my constituency concerning off-road quad bikes. I recognise the challenges that the police face in detecting the individuals who use them. Will the minister consider introducing an off-road quad bike register, which would assist the police in detecting the individuals who own the bikes and help to deal with the concerns that a number of community members have raised with me in connection with the antisocial use of quad bikes?

The minister is aware of the concerns that Margaret Watson, who is one of my constituents, has raised. Although Margaret Watson would welcome some of the comments that the minister has made, she has proposed to the Parliament that there should be a legal backdrop, through which action could be taken on behalf of the deceased in circumstances in which they have been defamed.

I rise on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party to oppose the business motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick. The motion refers to a Scottish Government debate next Tuesday entitled “10 Years on from the Invasion of Iraq” and, on the Wednesday, a debate on Trident. The proposed programme is designed to stifle debate on the real issues that face families throughout Scotland and to turn the Parliament into a university debating society. Why are we not debating the many unanswered questions about hidden waiting lists throughout Scotland or the reasons for accident and emergency waiting time targets not being met for more than three years? There remain many unanswered questions that the Government could bring to the Parliament for debate. Those include why the number of college students has reduced since 2008 by more than 120,000, and why the Government does not introduce legislation, which it does not seem keen on. The Scottish Government wants to avoid debating the real issues that face families throughout Scotland. Our elected position as members of the Scottish Parliament affords us the opportunity to debate, legislate and take forward issues on behalf of our constituents. It is our responsibility to the Parliament to take those issues seriously and not to allow the Parliament to be used as a talking shop by the majority Government. We on the Labour benches call on the Government, even at this late stage, to provide us with real vision for the future of Scotland and to take responsibility for the issues for which it has responsibility rather than being concerned about those for which it does not have responsibility. We oppose the business motion in the name of Joe FitzPatrick.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to tackle unemployment in the Glasgow Provan constituency. (S4O-01712)

The minister will be aware of a number of schemes throughout Scotland that are designed to regenerate derelict land and at the same time create employment. Would he agree to meet me to discuss how we could take forward such a scheme in the Easterhouse area of my constituency?

Amendment 12 seeks to clarify the range of bodies that are covered by the 2002 act and which will be covered by the provisions in the legislation before us today by requiring the Scottish Information Commissioner to update and maintain a list of all organisations that are subject to the 2002 act. I note the commissioner’s comment that she already maintains a partial list, but I have to say that I find it unacceptable that the commissioner, of all people, should be placed in a position in which she is able to maintain only a partial list. If we are serious about improving the public’s experience of seeking information from the Information Commissioner and indeed from many of the Government bodies that have been referred to, it should not be beyond the Government to keep and update an accurate and comprehensive list. I move amendment 12.

I have listened carefully to what the cabinet secretary has said, and I remain unconvinced. We should recognise that the maintenance and updating of a list cannot be the most challenging proposal to have been put before the Parliament. For example, we have passed legislation on a register of tartans, which I recognise may be somewhat different from the updating of a list, but a similar principle applies. There are many other examples of Government bodies that are required to maintain lists. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs maintains the national lists of agriculture and vegetable crops, including amateur varieties. If it is good enough for DEFRA to face the challenge of maintaining such lists, surely it is not beyond the Scottish Information Commissioner to ensure that a comprehensive list is made available to ensure that we improve the public’s experience of seeking to access public information. I press amendment 12.

It is fair to recognise that this has been a robust debate in many respects. A consensual approach for the future has been offered. However, we should recognise that this is—we have made the point at stages 1 and 3—a missed opportunity to introduce more comprehensive freedom of information legislation and to improve on what was built in Parliament in 2002. We are disappointed that the Government has used its majority to vote down all but one of the Labour amendments. It must be recognised that many of the amendments were lodged after significant consultation of external organisations, including the Campaign for Freedom of Information, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Unison. I had expected that many of the amendments, particularly the one that was lodged by Iain Gray, would have received support from Scottish National Party back benchers. In particular, I refer to Bob Doris, who is quoted on the SNP website as having said in 2009: “The Glasgow Housing Association must come into line with FOI. An organisation of such significance to the public life of the city needs to be transparent and accountable, as other public bodies currently are.” That is a pretty strong and comprehensive statement. I am sure that John Mason has made similar comments. I do not know whether he wants the opportunity to respond, but I would welcome his view on whether that remains his position, and why he voted against Iain Gray’s amendment.

First, I confirm that the bill is considerably different from the 2002 act—it is only four pages long. [Interruption.] I am responding to John Mason’s question. If the Government were to interrogate the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, that would take considerably less time than the 2002 act. To be fair to GHA, we should recognise that—as Iain Gray said—it has complied with the spirit of FOI legislation, which I welcome. However, it is simply not good enough for the minister to advise members that the housing charter is in some way an able replacement for the FOI legislation. That is unacceptable. The minister should recognise that the housing charter and other voluntary schemes are not enforceable by law. That point has been made by a number of bodies, including the Campaign for Freedom of Information. Elaine Murray lodged a number of perfectly reasonable amendments. Amendment 9 sought to ensure that arm’s-length external organisations are not used as a vehicle to deprive the public of their enforceable right to access information. I expected that many members would see that as a reasonable approach to ensuring that the public are not deprived—as has happened in the past—of that opportunity and their right to know, which is set out in the 2002 act. To return to amendment 12, which is my amendment, I reiterate the point that maintaining and updating a register is hardly the Scottish Parliament’s Dyson moment. Every day, people in public bodies and private companies maintain registers. Such a proposal is hardly ground breaking.

If we are serious about delivering the FOI legislation that Parliament passed in 2002, we must be serious about providing comprehensive and accurate information. I say with the greatest respect to the Scottish Information Commissioner that it concerns me that she is providing information on her website that, technically, could perfectly possibly be inaccurate. We must ensure that the commissioner is provided with the necessary resources for her to provide accurate information. In addition, I think that the potential costs have been overblown. Many organisations, some of which I have referred to today, provide comprehensive lists of the organisations for which they are responsible, so I see no reason why the commissioner could not emulate that. I confirm that we will, despite our differences with the Government, support the bill at decision time, although we recognise that the minister continues to face significant challenges—particularly in respect of section 5 referrals under the 2002 act. We want to ensure that she delivers those, so we will give her the opportunity to do so by voting for the bill to be passed, at decision time.

I recognise that a great deal has already been said by a number of contributors in response to the Leveson inquiry. For me, what is compelling is the fact that we have talked the talk for more than seven decades, but now is the right time for us to take a once-in-a-generation opportunity to finally move on and move the issue forward. It is recognised that the Leveson inquiry highlighted the experiences of many victims who suffered at the hands of journalists who abused their power and hacked mobile phones and bank accounts. They did so without giving any consideration to the impact of their actions on their victims. The inquiry heard from my constituents Margaret and Jim Watson, whose daughter Diane was stabbed in a school playground by Barbara Glover in April 1991. In December 1992, their son Alan committed suicide. Alan was deeply hurt by what was said about Diane in newspaper articles, and newspaper articles were found in his possession when he was found dead. The articles were written by Jack McLean on behalf of the Glasgow Herald and Meg Henderson on behalf of Marie Claire magazine. Jack McLean and Meg Henderson wrote articles that bore no resemblance to the truth about Diane. Their articles about her murder were written without any proper research, and they made the nastiest remarks in connection with her character. They should be ashamed of their contributions. All the comments that they made in connection with Diane’s character were completely without foundation; they were simply made up to ensure that the newspaper column for the particular day was filled. A lot of what Jack McLean and Meg Henderson said about Diane would, of course, have been said in the knowledge that the family members were not in a position to take defamation action against those journalists on behalf of the deceased family member. Margaret and Jim Watson have campaigned for a number of years to bring forward legal remedies on behalf of bereaved families to challenge inaccurate and defamatory information that has been written about deceased family members. I understand that the Scottish Government has completed its consultation exercise on the possible options for legal remedies that may be available to family members. I ask the First Minister to comment in his concluding remarks on how the Government wishes to bring them forward following the Leveson inquiry. We have a job to do to protect the free press, but not at the expense of innocent people, such as Margaret and Jim Watson. I have known them for more than 20 years and have long admired their determination to get justice on behalf of their children and in their children’s memory. That said, we should continue to remind ourselves that Margaret, Jim, Alan and Diane did not choose to be in the public arena. They should not have been placed in a position to have to be judged by the likes of Jack McLean and Meg Henderson. They found themselves to be victims. We have a job in the Parliament to ensure that we protect such victims from some of the challenges that they face in the media. The inquiry also heard from the First Minister, who advised us that he believed that an Observer journalist had hacked into his bank account. He raised the matter with that newspaper but failed to report it to the police. I have been an elected representative for nearly 19 years. During that time, I have attended a number of public forums and have sought to ensure that members of the public report every crime. I ensure that they are aware of the fact that unreported crime is not the way forward for their communities. I ask the First Minister to explain in his concluding remarks—I would be happy to accept an intervention—why he did not report that matter to the police. The most senior politician in Scotland should set a good example by ensuring that unreported crime is reported at every possible opportunity. This is a consensual debate—we recognise that and we recognise some of the challenges that face us. However, we want the Government to recognise that various challenges face us in Scotland as regards regulation of the press in the future. We ask the Government to have a genuinely open mind as to how we go forward and to reflect on the fact that victims such as Margaret and Jim Watson, their families and others should not be placed in the position that they were placed in.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how many of the 33 recommendations in the Justice 2 Sub-Committee’s report, “Justice System (Child-Sex Offenders)”, on managing registered sex offenders have been delivered since 10 May 2007. (S4O-01517)

For the purposes of the Official Report, can I ask the minister to advise me whether recommendation 10 has been fully implemented?

On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I commend the committee for its robust and constructive interrogation of the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. The committee raised a number of important points, on which I will touch later in my speech. We should acknowledge the history of the FOI legislation and the significant step forward that it represented in making the business of Government and the public agencies connected to it more accountable. For me, as a representative of the Scottish Labour Party, it is also important to recognise that the Labour-led coalition in the Scottish Parliament and the Labour Government at Westminster introduced the legislation in the first place. The bill should have been an opportunity for us to reflect on how effective the FOI legislation has been and to consider what could be done to ensure that public bodies are made more accountable, transparent and open. It should have been an opportunity to ensure that the public feel confident that their requests for information are dealt with within the legal framework that was set out in the 2002 act. In reality, however, the bill is a feeble attempt to make it look like the Government is doing something. It lacks ambition. The Labour Party shares the disappointment that was expressed by a number of those who provided written evidence to, or appeared before, the Finance Committee. The committee has invited the cabinet secretary to remove the section that allows exemption for correspondence with members of the royal family. The Scottish Labour Party agrees with the committee on that, but the cabinet secretary argues for parity across the United Kingdom.

The absolute clarity that I would give on that point is that the Scottish Parliament considers legislation in the context of the devolved settlement, which allows us to examine how effective it can be in the Scottish context. It is interesting for a minister who promotes separation to argue for parity across the United Kingdom. The cabinet secretary may wish to elaborate on that in her closing speech. The argument should be about whether we accept the principle of absolute exemption for the royal family. It is clear that all the evidence that the committee received on the issue points towards retaining the status quo. In the evidence that she gave on behalf of the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland, Carole Ewart provided a reasonable explanation of why the existing legislation has served us well. There is no evidence to suggest that the current system has been abused. I ask the cabinet secretary to reflect on the written and oral evidence that has been given. I welcome her earlier comment that she will do that. A number of respondents to the consultation on the bill raised concerns about what is not included in the bill. Particular concerns were raised in connection with arm’s-length organisations and housing associations, and I would like to reflect on my experience of dealing with housing associations as a constituency MSP. In general terms, I have found community-based housing associations to be more than willing to provide information to members of the public. In my experience, they are usually well managed by local management committees, which ensure that they are transparent and open. However, my experience in requesting information from national housing associations such as Link Housing Association has been more disappointing. Although such associations are recipients of significant sums of public money, my experience is that they operate on the basis not of the public having a right to know but of what they think that the public should know. The 2002 act provides a legal framework for members of the public, including MSPs, to know what to expect from certain public organisations when they submit a request for information. It is clear from my experience of dealing with the Link Group that the absence of any legislative framework means that it is in control of how and when information is released to me, as the local MSP. There are opportunities for organisations to consider how they can provide information proactively on the web, so that the public can access it rather than have to request it, but resources are a challenge in that respect. Although I am convinced that that is not the case for larger housing organisations, resources are a particular challenge for smaller housing organisations, and research must be carried out to ensure that smaller organisations are not adversely affected. I note that the Scottish Information Commissioner suggested that the Government could legislate for a routine review of which bodies should be included within the realms of the FOI act, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on that. We think that such an approach should be given further consideration.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s constructive approach and look forward to scrutinising such an amendment at stage 2, to ensure that it will be effective. It is disappointing that the Government has attached so little priority to openness and the provision of accessible information. For the Parliament and our democracy to be credible, we must ensure that the information that requires to be provided to us is provided on a right-to-know basis. The law must not be on the side of a secretive Government that drip-feeds information for media management purposes. That is clearly unacceptable. We would like to lodge a number of amendments at stage 2. We will support the bill at stage 1 on the basis that significant amendments will be lodged by the Government or Opposition parties and will be accepted.

Let me say first that I consider myself a fair-minded person, perhaps the kind of fair-minded person that Nicola Sturgeon referred to last week. Let me confirm my absolute clarity on that by congratulating the minister on securing the Edinburgh agreement last week. Of course we want to have a discussion and a debate on Scotland’s future, but the very question that I have raised is this: how can we possibly have a debate on Scotland’s future if the Scottish Government withholds information from the Scottish Parliament? How can we do so if the First Minister fails to appear before the Scottish Parliament to give us the opportunity to raise those questions so that we can move forward? What is becoming very clear is that the Government either does not have the answers or makes them up as it goes along. Yes, that is the case. Again we have heard the First Minister playing fast and loose with his answers on the future of Scotland, and that is unacceptable. One thing that we should keep in mind is that it is easy for us to have this debate in the comfort zone of the debating chamber but, for families whose futures and livelihoods depend on the decisions that we take here, it is unacceptable that many of these questions have not been answered to date. It also appears that many of them will not be answered for the future. As far as I am concerned, the Deputy First Minister was right in what she said last week about how any fair-minded person would interpret what the First Minister said in his interview with Andrew Neil.

I will in one second. Here is how I see it. Right-minded people across Scotland can see that the First Minister has been caught out. He wanted to create the impression that he had done his homework and that, on EU membership, he had all the necessary legal tests. Instead of being honest, he blustered his way to the end of the interview and used £12,000 worth of public money to cover his tracks in court. The First Minister should pay back every penny of the public money that he wasted on that court action to defend the legal advice that never was.

I stand by any comments that I have made outside the chamber. Members such as Jamie Hepburn have become experts in providing a defence for the First Minister. They should get used to it, because we will probe the First Minister at every possible opportunity. Maybe those members will have to come back to the chamber and defend their First Minister—that is an issue between them and him. After the First Minister’s shambolic attempts to cover his tracks last week, he agreed to refer himself for investigation on whether he broke the ministerial code. To use Nicola Sturgeon’s term, it is “unfortunate” that the ministerial code does not cover interviews with BBC journalists. Alex Salmond has picked who will decide and who will be the judge and jury in the process. That is far from the objective process that we should have. There should be an objective process in prosecuting the future challenges that face us, and the First Minister has a role in that. The argument that Lord Fraser should be excluded from the case because he is a former law officer is absolutely ridiculous. That is like saying that Alex Salmond should exclude former Presiding Officers because they cannot be trusted to make impartial judgments on the conduct of ministers in Parliament. We know exactly why Lord Fraser has been excluded from the process. The First Minister has shown contempt for the Parliament in his appointments. He is well aware that the inquiry is perceived as a fix and that it will be as pointless as Pinocchio doing a lie-detector test. As I have said, there should be a full and open judicial inquiry. All aspects of this fiasco should be interrogated at every possible opportunity. All the documents that were made available to ministers, including the legal advice that Jackie Baillie sought earlier, should be provided to the judicial inquiry. The First Minister should not drip-feed information to the Parliament. We should have an objective inquiry that ensures that every aspect of the process is interrogated properly. Scotland faces the most important decision in living memory. It is not for the Government to play fast and loose with the future of our communities and constituencies. We must move forward in a positive manner, and we will do that. I support Johann Lamont’s amendment.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what value of assets has been recovered from criminals as a result of crimes in Glasgow Provan under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 in each of the last five years. (S4O-01386)

I pose the following question to the minister. Should the communities that are most affected by drugs crime receive a significant share of the proceeds, which are very effectively collected by the courts?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I take the opportunity not to retract the statement that I made earlier today. I also ask you, Presiding Officer, to ask the Government to take an early opportunity for a full and frank debate on the issue, and for the Government to reveal all the information that will allow a full and frank debate to take place. I look forward to that debate taking place at the earliest possible opportunity—possibly this week.

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will support the building of a railway station in the Robroyston area of Glasgow. (S4O-01268)

Given the importance of encouraging local committees to use public transport, and the fact that the developer is willing to provide the necessary funding to ensure the development of Robroyston railway station, I would welcome a more detailed reply from the minister to advise whether the Government will ensure that that particular project is taken forward.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what instructions the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy has given NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde in relation to reinstating services at Lightburn hospital. (S4O-01181)

The cabinet secretary and I agree on one thing, which is that Lightburn hospital has a future. However, those warm words mean nothing when local campaigners such as Gerry McCann advise us that the only progress that has been made at Lightburn hospital is the installation of a vending machine following the closure of the canteen. When can we expect real progress at Lightburn hospital?

Like others, I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on raising an important issue that faces many constituencies throughout Scotland. This might not be the consensual debate that would be within the comfort zone of some of the members opposite, but it is an important debate because the issue faces many communities throughout Scotland. One of the challenges that we face in our constituencies lies in ensuring that we have good local colleges that can deliver the training programmes that people need to get out of unemployment. That is crucial to communities. The constituency that I represent, Glasgow Provan, has been well served by both John Wheatley College and North Glasgow College. I considered it a great privilege to be involved with both of those colleges when they invested more than £80 million in a capital programme to build three new colleges. They were commissioned and built during the years of the Labour-led Executive from 1999. Those iconic buildings were built in areas where working-class communities face some of the most severe challenges in respect of unemployment. I remind the minister of the differences that exist in Scotland. Unemployment in my constituency, Glasgow Provan, is double that in the constituency of the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. To me, that represents some of the severe challenges that we face in our communities and the need for money to be invested in those communities to ensure that we deal with some of those challenges. In respect of positive solutions, of course we are united in the Parliament in forming an alliance to deal with youth unemployment and indeed adult unemployment. I do not think that there is one member who does not want to tackle unemployment. However, it is surely perverse, in the economic position that we find ourselves in, that we are not investing in the opportunities that can exist in colleges to get us out of the recession. I ask the Government to consider the lack of parity that exists between higher education and further education in Scotland. I was appalled to hear the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning tell a group of John Wheatley College students that he was very firm in his view that parity did not exist and that his commitment was to higher rather than further education. The challenge that faces this Parliament is ensuring that that lack of parity does not exist in future and that we give every student in Scotland, no matter whether they are in further or higher education, a genuinely equal chance to prosper in their local community and a proper opportunity to improve their educational attainment.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. For the Official Report, I did not make the comment that the minister said that I did. I made absolutely clear that the cabinet secretary had stated that there would be a lack of parity and that his commitment was to higher rather than further education.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Bank of England regarding representation on its monetary policy committee for a Scotland separated from the rest of the United Kingdom. (S4O-01106)

I am afraid that the minister has evaded the question. I will make the question clear: has the minister had any discussions with the MPC about the break-up of the United Kingdom, and will he provide a public record of any exchanges that have taken place?

On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I advise members that we will support Dave Thompson’s motion on behalf of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee. However, while we support the principles of the committee report as the convener set them out, I would like to highlight a number of issues that we believe require further consideration by the Parliament. First, the committee’s recommendation that the Parliament plenary sessions take place on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons—the committee referred to it as the remodelling of the parliamentary week—sounds good and laudable, but the extension of plenary sessions should ensure that the Scottish Government is, in fact, held to account. It is not often that I would look to Westminster for inspiration on parliamentary reform, but I would like to highlight how quickly Westminster was able to have a chamber statement from Jeremy Hunt, the Secretary of State for Culture, following the Rupert Murdoch story. Within hours of his aide resigning, we saw Jeremy Hunt giving an urgent statement to the House of Commons. In this Parliament, we still await a statement from the Government on the Murdoch issue, and any scrutiny that has taken place has been during First Minister’s question time.

That sounds to me like something from John Mason’s database of excuses for why Governments cannot be held to account. Governments should be held to account, and we should take cognisance of the example that Westminster has set. We are considering some parliamentary reforms that have not taken place at Westminster, but we should also look at areas in which it has tended to get things right. In the case of the Murdoch story, the fact that Jeremy Hunt was before the Westminster Parliament within hours sets an example to this Parliament, as does the scrutiny that the Prime Minister found himself under.

I will let Margo MacDonald in in a moment. We also welcome the proposal for topical questions, which we see as a good opportunity for members to press the Government on issues that have seen significant coverage in the public arena. However, the Government of the day will need to ensure that ministers fulfil their responsibility to answer the topical questions that are put to them. Hugh Henry was right to make the point that it is important that ministers answer questions. That challenge has been put to the current Government, but it was put to previous Governments as well. We should learn from the experience that we have from the time of the previous coalition Governments. They did not always answer questions. I remember being on the receiving end of that on many occasions. We should approach the issue maturely and ensure that members are given respect when they ask questions in Parliament. The remodelling of the parliamentary week will see us move away from Thursday mornings in the chamber, which have traditionally been set aside for Opposition business, so that the business lands in the middle of the parliamentary week. We are concerned that the new arrangements raise the possibility of a majority Government dictating that Opposition business should be placed at the end of the parliamentary week. On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I make it clear that we will oppose any attempt to place Opposition business at the end of the parliamentary week. We will do that not just because of the current challenges that we face, but for the benefit of future Opposition parties that find themselves in the same position. I will take Margo MacDonald’s intervention.

Margo MacDonald’s points are well made, and they are issues for further consideration by the committee. We heard from the convener of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee a commitment to review the effectiveness of the reforms. I welcome that. We need to recognise that we have not been effective at reviewing earlier parliamentary reforms. Let us put down a marker that we will review the reforms that we are discussing today to ensure that they are effective in helping us to hold Governments to account. We might also wish to consider the possibility of an independent report, so that we have an effective audit of the delivery of the reforms. We welcome the committee’s work and the fact that various external stakeholders were involved in the debate. I finish by stressing the importance of ensuring that Governments are held to account. We must ensure that the parliamentary reforms that we are discussing today are effective in ensuring that accountability.

Does the minister recognise that, except on eight occasions, Opposition business has been held on Thursday mornings? Does he accept that there should be consistency in when Opposition business is held and that it should not be at the end of the week?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to widen access to services for victims of domestic abuse in Glasgow. (S4O-00943)

Does the minister realise that as a result of the rule changes concerning violence against women funding in Glasgow, a number of overheads of Glasgow East Women’s Aid have not been covered by the project? Will the minister meet me to discuss the issue further and to hear at first hand from Glasgow East Women’s Aid about the challenges that it faces in respect of the funding package that is being provided to it?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

This afternoon, the First Minister, as he has done before, dismissed reports of patients in national health service hospitals having to sleep without blankets as being scare stories and untrue. Then he met 92-year-old Helen Macbeth and 65-year-old Jack Barr, who both had to sleep without blankets during recent stays in hospital. They confirmed that their stories are true and, indeed, there are many more. The First Minister’s press spokesperson has confirmed that the First Minister did not apologise to Helen and Jack for what he said about them, but I ask the First Minister whether he will come back to the chamber and take the opportunity to apologise to members for misleading Parliament during First Minister’s question time today.

I congratulate Humza Yousaf on bringing this important debate to the chamber. Like him, I welcome the parents who have joined us this afternoon. It is important that we recognise that, for more than a year now, the parents at Gadburn school have sought to play a major part in shaping the future of their children’s education. I would not fault them for being—on many occasions—robust, outspoken or difficult in order to ensure that their children’s complex needs are met. In my dealings with Isabel Kelly and Sandra Martin—she is not a relative of mine—I have found their arguments to be cohesive, intelligent and robust. I am afraid that the same cannot be said of the education officials in Glasgow City Council. They have failed on a number of occasions to recognise the scale of the parents’ concerns, and they are unwilling to negotiate with the parents on an equal basis. It is another David and Goliath story—one that has highlighted a number of poor practices that exist throughout Scotland with regard to how education authorities consult parents. We need to be clear that the decision is one for Glasgow City Council, regardless of the minister’s decision on whether to call it in. I welcome the fact that—as Humza Yousaf said—we have taken a cross-party approach in representing the parents at Gadburn. Councillor Leonard and Councillor Davidson, who are Labour councillors, have been working closely with Councillor Thoms, who is a local SNP councillor. The councillors have met with education officials on numerous occasions to try to resolve the various differences that exist. For many of the parents, the main issue—as Humza Yousaf highlighted—is that they no longer have confidence in mainstream education. Their children been poorly supported during the whole process, leading to some of the issues that have been raised, such as children being bullied and parents finding it difficult to feel sure that their children will be able to continue in mainstream education. I have met the parents on a number of occasions and advised them that I am an advocate of ensuring that children are given a fair chance to access mainstream education—an ethos with which I think many members in the chamber would agree. I have learned from the Gadburn parents that, as Humza Yousaf suggested, the issue is not as straightforward as it seems. Given the parents’ preference for special needs provision, the proposed move to Barmulloch primary school is perhaps the way forward. Of course, the parents’ first preference is for Gadburn school to remain open. However, if possible, they want a separate educational establishment at Barmulloch, given the possibility that the establishments could consider integrating in future. The parents’ requests are not unreasonable, given the circumstances in which the parents find themselves. We must consider their requests alongside the request from members today for the minister to call in the decision. We in this Parliament should show leadership. We should call on the education officials to work closely with the local elected members to ensure that the interests of the parents—and, more important, the interests of the children—are paramount in making progress on the issue. [Applause.]

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to regulate bus services. (S4O-00704)

FirstBus wrote to me last week to advise me that there would be significant increases in fares and a reduction in bus services in Glasgow. Does the minister agree that now is the time for full regulation of buses to ensure that, instead of profits being put before services, our communities are served by bus services?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy last met members of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what matters were discussed. (S4O-00631)

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s decision to reject the plans by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde to close Lightburn hospital. However, she may be aware that while the consultation process was taking place, a number of services were withdrawn from Lightburn hospital or were scaled down. I seek an unequivocal assurance from the minister that she will ensure that those services are reinstated to the hospital.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Today the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell, made a statement to the Parliament on higher and further education governance reports. I draw your attention to an article in the most recent edition of the Sunday Herald, which contained a large number of specific proposals that the cabinet secretary announced today. I seek your assistance in ensuring that we condemn such unacceptable practice and discourtesy to the Parliament, and I would be grateful for an assurance from the cabinet secretary that the proposals were not leaked prior to today’s statement being made.

I disagreed with almost every aspect of Alex Johnstone’s speech, but I agreed with him that the Parliament has not contributed effectively to the debate on bus services and the concerns of communities throughout Scotland about the serious issues that face them in connection with those services. Even though we have conducted various inquiries into local government and transport in parliamentary committees, we have not considered the fact that something has to be done about the bus deregulation legislation that was passed in 1985. As a result of that legislation, we have seen our local communities being abandoned by bus companies that care little about their needs, despite the fact that those communities and their local authorities have been going out of their way to build an infrastructure that assists bus companies in dealing with the challenges that they face in delivering bus services, for example in areas such as traffic congestion. Indeed, I cannot help but observe that, in a perverse way, we appear to be encouraging the big bus companies to cherry pick in the first place by providing bus lanes, sometimes to the detriment to the needs of local people, who also need services delivered in their communities. The time is right for the Parliament to take action to protect our communities from the cherry-picking activities of bus companies throughout Scotland. I do not know what world Alex Johnstone lives in, but I ask him to pay attention to the concerns of my constituents in the Glasgow Provan constituency. In Cranhill, they face serious challenges in accessing bus services. In the Dennistoun community, people face challenges with bus companies cherry picking routes. That is the real world of the challenges that our constituents face throughout Scotland. As Elaine Smith mentioned, we also need to recognise the impact that the withdrawal of bus services has on vulnerable communities, in Glasgow in particular. In Glasgow, where the car ownership rate is among the lowest in Scotland, people depend on bus services as a lifeline to get them to employment opportunities and hospital appointments. Not to take action would be an attack on those local communities and the most vulnerable in our society. For many of those people, as Elaine Smith said, it is not a lifestyle choice to take the bus. Being able to attend a hospital appointment or an employment opportunity is a necessity. I believe that we are elected to the Parliament to ensure that the vulnerable are represented. That is why I sought election in 1999 and that is why I believe that we need to put in place a more robust system to deal with bus companies and to bring forward proposals to regulate them. If regulation is good enough for the bankers, it is good enough for the greedy bus companies. Let me clear about this: bus companies need no protection. Stagecoach had half-year profits of almost £80 million and those of First reached just under £60 million, so I hope that the Scottish Government will not seek to protect those companies. I say once again that it is becoming clear that the time is now right for real action, not just talk about partnerships. We have sought to engage through partnerships for many years. The time is right for those bus companies to recognise that the current legislation favours the cherry picking that has been done for many years. I welcome the minister’s commitment to community transport. I hope that he will commit himself to community transport associations such as the North Area Transport Association, which covers my constituency, and I hope that we can continue to develop such associations. I call on members to support the motion in the name of Elaine Murray.

I have no concern about bus lanes, which we should encourage, but that should not be to the detriment of local communities if services are not delivered in their areas. There should be a quid pro quo—if services are delivered for bus services, they should also be delivered for local communities that are affected by the cuts.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken recently to tackle unemployment in Glasgow Provan. (S4O-00599)

I refer the minister to the opportunities for all scheme, to which he referred in his answer. It offers a learning or training place to all 16 to 19-year-olds who are not already in work. I recently met a young constituent who is 17 years old, is not in employment and has been unable to access a learning or training place. What advice would the minister give to that young constituent and what action should he take?

I pay tribute to Patricia Ferguson for bringing forward this important members’ business debate, and to the Evening Times campaign for highlighting a serious issue that faces people in Glasgow in connection with the threat to their train services. I will perhaps take the Bob Doris approach—something that I do not do often—and play the defensive role for a station in my constituency that is threatened, which is Duke Street station. I will outline the reason why closing that station would be completely wrong. I understand that Duke Street station is the only station in the area that has disabled access. Both Bellgrove station and Alexander Parade station are not easily adapted, so the potential costs of developing our stations with disabled adaptation would provide serious challenges for Transport Scotland. Duke Street station is also a vital link for those who live in, work in and visit the east end of Glasgow. The station’s close proximity to several venues that will be used during the Glasgow Commonwealth games should also be recognised. We should consider how to improve the station—not provide fact sheets to ensure that the consultation process can result in the possibility of closure. We should also recognise that the station sees more than 74,000 journeys per annum—leaving and arriving—which is a more than 400 per cent increase in the past 10 years. The station is not staffed, so it should be recognised that the station has minimal outlays and overheads. Closing Duke Street station would mean that fewer passengers would use the service and the amount of money that is received from the service would plummet. It would be a false economy if Duke Street station were to be closed in order to save money. I would welcome an unequivocal commitment from the minister that there will be no threat to the future of Duke Street station.

I would welcome a commitment from the minister; I was not aware that Humza Yousaf is a minister. I would welcome a commitment from the minister that there will not be a defensive approach to the case for Duke Street station.

At the start of the process, the minister gave us the commitment that there are no closure plans in place and he defended the consultation process. All that I have done today is seek clarity from the minister that Duke Street train station is not under threat. That is a perfectly reasonable approach. The minister has qualified the consultation exercise by publishing a fact sheet and saying that it is not a proposal to close stations. I have asked a very simple question, but the minister failed to answer it. What is lacking in the consultation document is the opportunity to develop new stations. Further to a meeting that we had recently, I ask the minister once again to consider the possibility of new stations such as the Robroyston station that has been proposed on a number of occasions and for which the funding is in place.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council will provide indicative funding levels for colleges. (S4O-00460)

I am sure that the minister will understand the concerns that there are about the Government’s proposed savage cuts in colleges throughout Scotland. Will he write to principals and advise them that they should ensure that, where at all possible, there are no compulsory redundancies?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how much it is reducing capital investment by over the budget period. (S4O-00431)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply, which was robust if somewhat inaccurate, based on the information that I have received. In respect of the challenges that construction workers in Scotland face, I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that the £100 million of reprofiling in 2011-12 is to be welcomed, but does he take on board the fact that, even allowing for that money, capital spending will be cut by more than 21 per cent in Scotland compared with 11 per cent in the UK?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the most effective way of dealing with the issue once and for all would be to introduce legislation that ensures free car parking at all NHS hospitals throughout Scotland?

I rise on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party to oppose, again, the business motion in the name of the Scottish National Party Scottish Government, in respect of the business that is proposed for Wednesday 30 November. Members will be aware that the motion proposes that the Parliament debate public sector pensions on the proposed day of action. It must concern the people who will take action throughout the country that a Con-Dem-SNP pact has been formed today to manufacture such a debate, perhaps as a ploy to give SNP members dispensation to attend the Parliament on that day. Members: Rubbish!

Presiding Officer, can I say to SNP members: “Dream on”? They might have staked their claim to be supporting men and women during the recent Scottish Parliament elections, but next Wednesday their hypocrisy will be exposed. The failure of SNP members to oppose the erosion of workers’ rights will never be forgotten. As I said last week, we continue to hope that the dispute can be resolved. I repeat what I said last week: the SNP Government has a role in dealing with the dispute; it has a role in looking at ways in which it can resolve it. I repeat that Mr Swinney is in a position to reverse increases in the employee contributions to national health service, teachers’, police and firefighters’ pensions. Again as I said last week, the dispute is on a scale that has never been seen before in this country. Union members took their decision after a great deal of consideration and negotiation. It is now time to decide whose side they will be on on 30 November—[Interruption.]

We will support the men and women throughout the country and we will be fighting to protect their conditions. We make no apologies for that. I ask members to oppose the business motion in the name of the Scottish Government.

On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I oppose the business motion in the name of the Scottish Government, and I do so in respect of the business that is being proposed for 30 November. Members will, of course, be aware of the action that is proposed for that day. They should be aware that the planned day of action has been supported by trade unions throughout the country. The action will be on a scale that has never been seen in the history of this Parliament. Nearly 3 million public sector workers across 20 trade unions will exercise their right to withhold their labour and to demonstrate against the injustices that are being brought against them, their families, their workmates and their communities. It is unacceptable that those public service workers are being asked to pay the price for a crisis that is not of their making. Instead of taxing the bankers, the United Kingdom Government is taking the decision to attack the hard-earned conditions of workers such as cleaners, teachers, nurses and many more people. Women workers, who are so often the poorest paid and in the most vulnerable jobs, will bear the worst of the pain across the UK. Labour members believe that now is the time for us to take action in support of Scottish workers. The UK Government has had ample time to negotiate a meaningful settlement. It has chosen not to do so, and the labour movement now steps forward to take action for the rights of working people throughout Scotland. The Scottish Labour Party makes no apologies for standing shoulder to shoulder with workers across Scotland. We continue to hope that the dispute can be resolved. The SNP Government has claimed that it has the role of bystander in the dispute, despite the fact that it has chosen to impose detrimental changes to local government pensions, which are entirely within its control. [Interruption.]

I am told that many SNP members are trade union members. Perhaps Mr Swinney is in that category. I know—[Interruption.]

I know that we already have the support of the Green party, but on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party I ask all trade unionists in the Parliament to join the labour movement on this day of action, to show their solidarity with and to stand up for the working people of Scotland by opposing the Government’s business motion.

15. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps have been taken to support students in further education. (S4O-00322)

Can the minister unequivocally confirm today that there will be no compulsory redundancies in the further education sector?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to support kinship carers. (S4O-00268)

The services are all very well, but funding has to be available in the first place to deal with the serious challenges that kinship carers throughout Scotland face. There are more than 15,000 of them. Does the Government agree that the time is right for consistency between councils to ensure that a more consistent approach is in place to support kinship carers?

I thank those members who have supported my motion and I welcome the save Lightburn hospital campaigners who join us in the public gallery. The debate also gives me an important opportunity to pay tribute to Gerry McCann, who has led the community campaign for Lightburn hospital’s future in the east end community. Those members who are not familiar with the east end of Glasgow where Lightburn hospital is located will have heard on numerous occasions about the horrendous health challenges that the east end of Glasgow faces, which health professionals, academics, the press and the media have often advised us of. For example, 32 per cent of people who live there are more likely to die from heart disease, 36 per cent of them are more likely to have their health classified as not good and 40 per cent of them are more likely to die from lung cancer. Taking that background into consideration, it seems astonishing that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board proposes to accelerate the deterioration of those health figures by closing the very health facility that could assist in their improvement. For 65 years, Lightburn has been a lifeline facility for many of its users. Its 75 beds have been used by patients who require intensive support, such as those with Parkinson’s. I pay tribute to the valued service that staff at Lightburn have provided over those years. I do not doubt for a minute that we are all united in our aspiration to improve public health. That should go without saying. I would have expected the same of Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board but, during its consultation on Lightburn’s future, it has displayed little concern for those people who will have to spend an additional 90 minutes on bus journeys to visit relatives or to attend day appointments. The board has been unable to deal with the many arguments that have been put to it in connection with public transport, and it has failed to provide evidence that the proposed changes would improve public health, which should be the aspiration of any health board. Its arrogance towards, and lack of concern for, those people who use Lightburn was displayed recently when it evicted the Parkinson’s group from the facility that has assisted its members’ rehabilitation for many years. That is clearly unacceptable. It is clear from my dealings with the health board over the years that a trend of running down health facilities that are earmarked for closure has prevailed for many years. It is the job of this elected chamber to stand up to that unacceptable practice of running down services before decisions have been taken by the relevant minister, and it is time that we did so. In moving forward, I call on the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy—who, it must be noted, has unfortunately not attended the debate; I would welcome an explanation of why that is the case from the Minister for Public Health—to reject the recommendation that the health board has put to her. I do so for a number of reasons, which I included in my submission to the consultation process, but let me specify two of them. First, the health board has again presided over a flawed consultation process in which, from the outset, it has promoted its own agenda by advising us of its preferred option. The process was so flawed that much of the information that was provided requires further clarification. I will elaborate. The board reports in its transport needs assessment that more than 80 per cent of those who attend the day hospital at Lightburn use an ambulance or patient transport and that less than 20 per cent of them travel by car. I note that the document says that none of them uses bus or train to travel to Lightburn hospital. To suggest in that document that everyone from the east end has access to a car or patient transport shows clearly how out of touch the health board is with the reality of the local situation. Car ownership in the east end is among the lowest in the United Kingdom. It must be recognised that many of my constituents will have to use public transport—limited as it is, given the challenges that we face in the bus industry. That is a flaw in the consultation document proposals. Secondly, and most important of all, I ask the minister to recognise the negative impact that such changes will have on the community and to take into consideration the fact that poor public transport links to the other sites will ensure that the residents of the east end of Glasgow face genuine challenges every day. We need to recognise that east-end residents will simply give up on visiting a relative who needs a visit in hospital, or give up on the much longer journey to an important day patient appointment. I would think that the minister would have preferred an objective process that allowed for a genuine discussion on the hospital’s future, not a carefully crafted consultation document that pointed towards the response that the health board would welcome. I do not doubt that the decision will be difficult for the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy, Nicola Sturgeon. We acknowledge that she must take the decision based on the facts that are placed before her. However, this case is the first test of the Government’s stated presumption against centralisation. It is the first opportunity that the cabinet secretary has had this session to put that policy into action, and I call on her to act on it. The cabinet secretary will have to consider all the facts. I ask her to reflect on the fact that closing a facility that has been part of the community for 65 years would condemn the east end’s residents to more of the health inequalities that we have witnessed over a number of years. I call on members to support the motion in my name.

We should always welcome politicians showing humility. I have here the charter that Gordon Matheson, the leader of Glasgow City Council, signed. He listened to the campaigners and elected members and took the decision that his council would not accept the flawed consultation. Does George Adam accept that that is an example of a politician showing humility and that we should welcome that?

Can we now accept that we need to move forward in this debate, given that the council leader has accepted the arguments put to him by the protesters? Will the member now join the campaign?

As the member is so committed to the future of Lightburn hospital, why has he not signed my motion, which is about retaining Lightburn hospital? That is a perfectly legitimate question.

Will the minister dissociate himself from the views of John Mason, who suggested in a letter to the social work director that Lightburn hospital was a possible site for the relocation of the social work call centre?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to extend the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 to include registered social landlords. (S4O-00182)

In my experience, the Link Group has lacked transparency and consistency in its dealings with the Robroyston community in my constituency. Will the minister meet me to discuss that further?

13. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00104)

Has the minister discussed with national health service Greater Glasgow and Clyde the future of Lightburn hospital and its proposed closure? When will she take a decision in respect of the report that the health board will provide to her by the end of August? Did she also receive the 10,000-signature petition on the hospital’s closure? Finally, does she share my concerns that the hospital provides a valuable service and that we should take every opportunity to ensure that those services are protected?

I rise on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party to oppose the motion in the name of Roseanna Cunningham. I make it clear that the Scottish Labour Party deplores any form of sectarianism. Of course we support the introduction of legislation to tackle the root of that very serious issue, but we must recognise the Parliament’s role in interrogating whether proposed legislation will be effective and will stand up to scrutiny. Proposals should be tested at every possible opportunity. The way in which the Government introduced the legislation is unacceptable. We are concerned that we are not being afforded the opportunity to produce effective legislation. Is the Government suggesting that wider Scotland should not be given the opportunity to interrogate the legislation at every opportunity? The Government must realise that this is not its Parliament—it is the people’s Parliament. People in wider Scotland deserve their say and to be afforded that opportunity. Given the importance of the issue, we propose using the recess period to give additional opportunities to scrutinise the proposals and to allow for proper consideration of the bill. That would enter into the spirit of what the Government’s business manager, Bruce Crawford, suggested in a recent article in the Sunday Herald, in which he called for more focused opportunities for pre and post-legislative scrutiny and committee inquiries. The Government should enter into the spirit of what it has proposed in press articles.

We need to focus on the issues and major challenges that we face in Scotland. There should be opportunities for people in wider Scotland to contribute to what is an important debate. The process that the Government is following will not give the people’s Parliament that opportunity. For once, I agreed with the First Minister when he said in his victory speech that the Scottish National Party does not hold a “monopoly on wisdom”. That was confirmed following the appearance of the Minister for Community Safety and Legal Affairs at the Justice Committee on Tuesday. It is time for the Government to recognise that this is the people’s Parliament and to give the people of Scotland the opportunity to contribute to this important debate.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in a justice debate. Unlike others who have made speeches over the past couple of weeks, this is not my maiden speech. Indeed, the subject that I will focus on—how best to manage registered sex offenders—is one that I have covered on many occasions, but I make no apologies for that. On 24 June 2004, Mark Cummings, aged eight, was murdered by registered sex offender Stuart Leggate. Members will recall the campaign that Margaret Ann Cummings brought to this Parliament, following that tragic event, for better management of sex offenders. Her public petition ensured that the Parliament formed its first ever justice sub-committee, the Justice 2 Sub-Committee, which the current Cabinet Secretary for Justice was a member of, along with others. The sub-committee made 33 recommendations, the vast majority of which have been taken forward. We should be encouraged by that, as we sometimes hear criticisms of the effectiveness of the Justice Committee and other committees in the Parliament, but we should recognise that during that process we set aside our political differences to protect our communities from the most dangerous individuals on our planet. I say that in the context that the vast majority of adults in Scotland have a decent and honest relationship with young people and interact positively with them. However, we need to recognise that sex offenders, in particular, find ways to evade being monitored, and we should take every measure possible in this Parliament to deal with that. There have been many recent well-publicised examples, which is why it concerns me that, of the 33 recommendations, the one issue that remains outstanding—with which the cabinet secretary will be familiar—is the fact that sex offenders are not required to disclose their background to prospective housing providers. That is an issue for both the social rented sector and the private housing sector. Following the murder of Mark Cummings, I contacted the local housing provider and was astonished to learn that he had no knowledge of Stuart Leggate’s background when he allocated him a property in the Charles Street area of my constituency, within a multistorey development with closed-circuit television monitoring. As protocols stand at the moment, housing providers do not require that information to be disclosed to them, although other information requires to be provided, such as information relating to an individual’s background—for example, whether they have been involved in antisocial behaviour and whether an antisocial behaviour order has been served on them. I welcome such questioning, but we should not exclude disclosure of information about sex offenders from housing application forms. I ask the cabinet secretary to address the matter in his concluding remarks and to consider it in further detail. I hope that the Government will take forward challenges that were brought to us in Professor Irving’s report. I am sure that those of us who are familiar with his report recognise that he amplified several serious issues about how best to manage and monitor registered sex offenders—particularly the issue of social profiling, which I hope that the Government will progress. We need to consider how we categorise offenders. Simply placing sex offenders on the register without properly assessing risk is not good enough. We must consider how best to develop that. There are 3,258 registered sex offenders in Scotland, 2,591 of whom live in our communities. What concerns me about the statistics from police forces throughout Scotland is that 26 offenders are missing or abroad. The information that I can examine and interrogate shows that those individuals have been missing for the past five months. I seek an assurance from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice that the appropriate resources have been put in place to monitor those individuals. Does he find it acceptable that they have remained missing or abroad for the past five months? That is a challenge for the Government, which it should consider taking forward. Johann Lamont talked about parliamentary scrutiny of the legislation to which Christine Grahame referred. On several occasions, I have heard politicians refer to the need not to have a knee-jerk reaction. Following the World’s End case, the First Minister said that politicians should not have a knee-jerk reaction. If that was good enough following that case, surely we should consider it in the context of what Christine Grahame, as the Justice Committee’s convener, has said. I hope that the cabinet secretary will deal with some of the issues that I have raised. I hope that we can move forward, particularly following the sad anniversary of the tragic murder of Mark Cummings.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Minister for Transport and Infrastructure has now been absent from the chamber for more than three minutes. Is that not unacceptable and disrespectful to the subject?

I commend, as others have, the work of the Public Petitions Committee not only this session but since 1999. A number of members have already illustrated the committee’s successes during that period. I also pay tribute to the committee members for their hard work. It is recognised that being a member of the Public Petitions Committee does not offer the same headline-grabbing opportunities that other committees do, but the role is crucial in ensuring that members of the public have an opportunity to raise local and national issues of importance, and in monitoring petitions to ensure that the public get the engagement that they deserve from the process. I have never been a member of the committee, but I have made representations on a number of occasions on behalf of constituents who have submitted petitions. I recall a petition that was raised some time ago by my constituent Margaret Ann Cummings, whose son Mark Cummings was tragically murdered by the registered sex offender Stuart Leggate. In submitting her petition, Margaret Ann Cummings made some powerful and constructive points in respect of managing sex offenders. It was a very successful petition as, for the first time ever, the Parliament set up a sub-committee—of the Justice 2 Committee, in that case—which made more than 33 recommendations. That made a genuine difference to how the previous and current Governments formed their points of view about how to manage registered sex offenders. Margaret Ann Cummings and other petitioners, including Margaret Watson, who is another constituent of mine, have commented on the respect that they felt they received at the committee and the genuine way in which the committee worked on a cross-party basis to consider their petitions. We should welcome that example of good practice. I also welcome the committee’s public outreach programme, which involves visiting various parts of Scotland. As the convener pointed out, there are parts of Scotland that we would not have been able to reach if it was not for the process in which the committee engaged. Of course, we should never be complacent, as Parliament sometimes can be. The committee has shown us, through its own level of best practice, the best ways to ensure that we engage with people throughout Scotland. I am mindful of the fact that the committee is sometimes viewed as a last port of call for members of the public, who may have dealt with a number of authorities and now see the committee as a way of solving their concerns. We need to consider that, but we also need to think about why members of the public arrive at the petitions process in the first place. There may be some constructive work for the committee in the future in considering why members of the public are not being treated fairly by the authorities to which they have been referred. In my experience of petitions, that is particularly the case with the quango health boards throughout Scotland, which on many occasions have not listened to the concerns of local members of the public, who end up submitting a petition. We need to examine that process. I look forward to the rest of the debate. Some powerful points have been made already, and I look forward to making some concluding remarks in my closing speech.

Like other members, I note that the committee’s convener, its deputy convener and Robin Harper are stepping down at the next election, so what they said sounded a bit like retirement speeches. I wish those members the very best. I doubt very much whether we have seen the last of John Farquhar Munro—he will probably return as a petitioner on the crofting community’s behalf. Members across party divides made powerful speeches. On behalf of his constituent Julie Love, Bob Doris made the important point that the committee allows the opportunity for issues to be debated and for members to consider whether to introduce a member’s bill. I was in the same position in connection with hospital car parking charges. The petitions process provides an opportunity for members to ensure that an issue is debated and that evidence is gathered. I, too, pay tribute to Ryan McLaughlin, who is a credit to his mother and to other people on whose behalf he spoke. We should recognise that other parliamentary systems would not afford him and others the opportunity to make their case, which is sometimes passionate and personal. Petitioners should never apologise for speaking about their personal experiences and for ensuring that we take matters forward. Members highlighted several petitions. The petition from John Muir was the first to create an opportunity for a debate in the chamber, among people with various views on knife crime, who considered the issues and challenges that face the Parliament in connection with knife crime. From speaking to John Muir and others who participated in that event, I know that they welcomed the opportunity to engage with politicians and felt that they were treated with respect and genuinely influenced the process. The more petitioners can be afforded the opportunity that John Muir was given to have an event, the better the Parliament’s reputation will be. I say well done to the committee’s members for giving John Muir that opportunity. How we engage with young people was mentioned several times in the debate. All Saints secondary school in my constituency hosted the committee meeting at which the 1,000th petition to be lodged was considered. Young people were engaged in that. We need to consider how we engage with them on their terms, rather than on parliamentary terms, as in the past. Perhaps we should use the best experience to improve that. I say well done to the committee again. I hope that we can learn from its experiences for the next parliamentary session.

Like other members, I commend Johann Lamont on securing this evening's members' business debate. Along with other representatives in the Parliament, she has championed this cause for many years. The member referred to the common cliché that we hear from professionals who are involved with the issue—that it is complex and presents them with many challenges. I remind them that it is all very well for them to make that point in their comfort zone, from the headquarters of whatever authority they serve; the issue is also complex for carers, who find themselves—sometimes unexpectedly—having to provide care for the young people they champion. I champion them for making that provision. We should reflect on the casework that many of us have dealt with and which represent some challenges that kinship carers face. Over the years, I have learned that the commitment of kinship carers to ensuring that children are in a loving environment that gives them a future is a clear feature. I will mention one person whom it is important to recognise—she will not mind me mentioning her name. She is my constituent Jessie Harvey, who  has been involved in the Poverty Truth Commission. She has been involved in several exchanges with elected representatives and she has been keen to speak her mind several times. We need that in today's debate—not just clear thinking but clear talking about how we can take the issue forward. We should recognise the point that Jessie Harvey has made several times—that if it were not for the intervention of kinship carers such as her, where would we be and where would local authorities be? We can talk about the costs of child care and of full-time care and about a number of other challenges that would face the children involved if it were not for the interventions. We do not spend time on debating some of those challenges. One challenge that faces us is the lack of a co-ordinated approach from local authorities when kinship carers take on their role. On many occasions, the approach is informal and the formality that should be attached is not present to ensure that kinship carers receive the support that they should have. Over the years, a number of kinship carers have made the point that they want a charter to be in place to ensure that they receive proper support when they decide to undertake kinship caring. In my experience, the fact that kinship carers will care for the children is never in question. I have not yet met a kinship carer who said that they did not want to care for the young people and give them a future. However, kinship carers want authorities to give them effective support in the process. They also want to be treated with respect. Kinship carers are not respected when they are given promises of support in the process of taking on the role but that support does not transpire. We do not debate kinship care enough, which must be a major disappointment to kinship carers. We all need to take responsibility for the fact that we have not debated the issue as often as we should. Let us learn that lesson from today. I hope that we can move forward with a more effective dialogue to make progress.

Like other members, I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on introducing her bill and getting it to stage 1. She should be commended for her hard work and diligence on a highly complex issue. I vouch for the fact that she was determined to reach the chamber today—I shared the train journey with her. The phrase "husky dogs" was mentioned a  number of times, in case we could not get on that dreaded train. We are here, anyway. The committee has provided a comprehensive analysis of the various challenges that we face in considering the bill. Patricia Ferguson has shown a mature attitude to taking on a number of those challenges, showing humility where required and ensuring that the issues will be dealt with at stage 2. I am convinced that the bill will give consumers protection from the unscrupulous and unacceptable practices of many property factors. I understand that more than 200 factors are unregistered under the current regime, which is unacceptable. Part 1, which deals with the registration of property factors, will require Scottish ministers to prepare and maintain a public register of all property factors. In the information age that we live in, it is perfectly reasonable to require such information to be provided on the internet. That requirement should not be seen as cumbersome; it should have been in place already. It should not be difficult to provide people with that sort of opportunity. Part 1 will allow Scottish ministers to refuse or deregister a property factor, and to remove them from the register of factors. I welcome the inclusion of that provision in Patricia Ferguson's bill. When we discuss the issues and challenges that we could face if we were to deregister a factor, we should take into account some of the challenges that other professions face when people have to be deregistered. I do not remember anyone advising me that we could not deregister a dentist because he had a number of clients—that is like saying that we should not challenge the very principle of whether he should be a dentist in the first place, because of the chaotic circumstances that would ensue. As part of the principle of the issue, it should be accepted that, where a factor is not performing its duties, it should not be in place. However, I appreciate the challenges of dealing with title conditions and so on, and I hope that the minister can address some of those challenges. A further challenge is the very principle of whether to regulate. As a number of witnesses stated at committee, the feature of regulation appears in a number of professions and has done for many years. It is a proven case, and David McLetchie amplified that point. The voluntary approach has simply not worked and, as has been stated by many people in the industry—from the profession itself—the rogue factors would simply opt out of the scheme if it was voluntary. What Patricia Ferguson proposes will provide clarity for all concerned, including reputable factors in the  industry. There are many such factors, but the rogue factors make it difficult to acknowledge that. A number of members, including me, deal with cases that concern property factors. As I said, many factors try their best to provide a service, sometimes in difficult circumstances, for example when owners—often absentee landlords—show no interest in investing in their properties. However, the issue is that there is not a level playing field. Consumers are being exposed to unscrupulous activity on the part of factors, particularly when they dispute bills. It is common for consumers to dispute invoices—I have done so many times and I am sure that many members have done likewise. A constituent of mine disputed a bill for £8 from Walker Sandford Property Management, which turned into a bill for £1,200, because of the charges for the reminder letters that were sent to him. I appreciate some of the challenges that Walker Sandford and other property managers face in collecting invoice returns, but it is unacceptable that the people whom they serve—our constituents—should be charged £15 per letter or that a bill should accumulate to more than £1,200. I hope and am convinced that Patricia Ferguson's bill will deal with such unacceptable practice and that the provisions on dispute resolution will ensure that there is a level playing field for everyone. I commend the bill and I hope that it will be passed at stage 3.

A number of powerful speeches have been made this afternoon, none more so than the one from George Foulkes. I say that not because he congratulated Bob Doris on his speech, which I  know will do him no good in his constituency party, but because he forensically examined a number of the challenges that we will face throughout Scotland and a number of practical considerations for electioneering on election day next year, if the bill is passed. I declare an interest in this issue. I hope that, if the AV referendum is held, it results in a massive no vote. I am sure that that comes as no surprise to the likes of Mike Rumbles, Iain Smith and Nicol Stephen—at least I am clear about my position. I would like to see the issue put to bed once and for all. I do not see it as a priority—in fact, it is a total waste of good public money. I can think of better things to do with millions of pounds. That said, if we are going to go to the trouble of holding a referendum, it should be done properly, not in the sloppy and rushed way that the Con-Dem Government has done it. Given that the Con-Dem Government feels so strongly about this important issue—Robert Brown referred to it as that—I find it alarming that it seeks to bring forward the referendum at any cost, no matter whom it affects. Let us be clear: holding the referendum on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections will cause confusion throughout Scotland.

It is a fact that the proposal was included in the Labour Party's manifesto, which contained a number of commitments. However, we do not see it as a priority in the current climate, given the challenges that many people in our communities face. An issue for the debate is the timing of the referendum and the contempt that the Con-Dem Government is showing the Scottish Parliament. In the stage 3 debate on the Scottish Local Government (Elections) Bill on 17 June last year, David McLetchie said: "local authority elections deserve to have their own day in the sun so that there can be a greater focus on local issues in determining the outcome."— [ Official Report , 17 June 2009; c 18461.]  I will pose a question to him, which he can answer in an intervention if he likes. If local councils should have their day in the sun, why is that principle not accepted for the AV referendum?

I will bring in David McLetchie if he is willing to answer my question.

Conservative members are again unconvincing. They fail to mention the challenges that we face. David McLetchie is concerned to make potential savings by holding the referendum on the same day as the elections. Did he deliver that principle when he argued against holding council elections on the same day as the Scottish Parliament elections? Holding those elections on the same day would make savings. He made a different argument on council elections last year. The Gould report is one of the most comprehensive reports ever to be presented to the Parliament. Its recommendations were robust, it did not hold back on criticism and it took input from several parties. On combined elections, the report said: "we are convinced that combined elections are not only a disservice to the local councils and candidates but also to the electorate as well." If that principle is accepted for combined Scottish Parliament elections and local council elections, why should the referendum be treated differently? The principle is stated several times. If the referendum has the X-factor that Nick Clegg believes that it has, why should it not be given the prominence of a stand-alone referendum debate? He could tour the country and attend mass public meetings at which I have no doubt there would be standing room only. The airwaves would be taken up with chat about the future of our voting system, and pubs and clubs would buzz with excitement. Let us be honest—as Conservative and Liberal Democrat members know fine well, the issue would have been a damp squib at the polls. Conflating the polls has provided cover for the commitment to spend an astronomical amount of public funds in these difficult times. Few of us can turn on Sky News or the other news channels without seeing George Osborne advising us of the difficult economic times that we face, yet we are willing to spend £120 million of good public money on a waste of time. Several members have talked about respect. Annabel Goldie has said:  "We will build an agenda of mutual respect between Scotland's two Parliaments and Governments, because Scotland needs co-operation, not confrontation."— [ Official Report , 27 May 2010; c 26626.]  Today—some months later—we have that confrontation.

The challenge in the motion is the timing, which the members opposite have failed to deal with. When the referendum issue arose, they forgot or did not consider that the so-called respect agenda is worth following. I do not think that they considered that issue as carefully as they should have. I do not know how many statements I have heard from David Cameron and Annabel Goldie since the UK elections on the so-called respect agenda. They have had the opportunity to consider this Parliament's concerns—Duncan McNeil made a powerful point when he referred to the opportunities that were afforded to the Con-Dem Government—but they have failed on a number of occasions to grasp the opportunity to show that they have respect for the Parliament. The members opposite have failed on a number of occasions to deal with that point. A number of powerful points have been made by SNP—I do not say that very often—and Labour members. It has been shown once again that the members opposite have failed to respect the processes of the Parliament. I call on the Parliament to support the motion in the name of Jim Mather.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many of the 33  recommendations in the Justice 2 Sub Committee's 2006 report on managing child sex offenders have been delivered since 10 May 2007 and on what date these were or are expected to be implemented. (S3O-11903)

Six years after the tragic murder of Mark Cummings by the convicted sex offender Stuart Leggate, we have moved on. I welcome the cross-party consensus on the issue. I am not convinced that there is an argument against registered sex offenders providing that information when they make a housing application. I acknowledge some of the challenges that we face regarding ECHR compliance, but does the minister agree that it is unacceptable, particularly when we consider the history of the issue, that a registered sex offender does not have to provide that information to a housing organisation when making an application for rehousing? In the case of Mark Cummings, it was clear that Stuart Leggate did not provide that information. That crucial information should have been provided to the housing provider, which would have allowed Stuart Leggate to be monitored.

I commend the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee for its diligence in preparing the draft revised code of practice, which is before us today. The current consultation is on the first revision to the code of practice since 2005 and it is intended to reflect the experience of the code since we last revised it. It also follows the introduction of the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner's equalities strategy, "Diversity Delivers", in 2008. I am sure that a number of my colleagues are away preparing their amendments for the item of business after this one, but I can say on behalf of the Labour Party that the approach that has been taken in revising the code is to be welcomed. It is a step forward to move away from the detailed chronological approach of the current code to a format that sets out the requirements that should be met at each stage. In the short time that is available to me, I will refer to one particular area: the alternative application methods. I recognise that the current code anticipates that every applicant will complete an application form, the content of which will determine whether they are selected for interview. I agree with the commissioner, who has observed that that process appears to favour applicants who carefully orchestrate and complete application forms. She recognises that that is a barrier to people from underrepresented groups. That view was reinforced by a number of stakeholders, including chairs of public bodies. I welcome the revision in that regard. The proposed code will allow a selection panel to choose any fair, open and transparent method of selection for interview that it considers appropriate, given the position to be filled and the people to attract. I will highlight some exchanges between the commissioner and members of the committee. Robert Brown referred to the "magic circle" of applicants who become serial applicants to public bodies. That is a well-chosen phrase and I concur with his view. I have noted over the years those who have become well-kent faces on the quango boards. Many people serve our quango boards well, but I have to say that many of them have been recycled from other elements of public life. We should recognise that those who play a crucial role in community organisations in our constituencies, such as housing associations, community councils—dare I say it?—and tenants and residents associations seem to be underrepresented on quango boards. The approach that has been taken is to be welcomed and the draft revised code of practice is to be welcomed, but more important is that we  look forward to ensuring that it is taken forward in practice.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I appreciate that there might be discrepancies in what has been heard. However, we know that audio recordings are taken of proceedings in the chamber. I think that it would be helpful to have an adjournment to allow the audio tapes to be interrogated to clarify whether the Minister for Environment did, in fact, say no in respect of the amendment. We have been able to interrogate tapes in the past in that respect.

The minister talks about what is necessary. I refer back to the debate that we had at stage 2 of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill. The reason why I raised the matter is that constituents in the Ruchazie part of my constituency were concerned that, when they made representations in connection with an application, they and the licensing authority were advised by the police that there was nothing to report, yet they learned at a later stage that the police had made 212 calls to the premises. I argue that that is incompetent and inconsistent. The only way in which to ensure that our police authorities consistently provide accurate information is to ensure that they do that in the form of antisocial behaviour reports. We should not leave the matter to police officers' discretion. We have heard from the Government many times today that police authorities know best and that communities should do as they are told. I do not accept that philosophy. Communities are entitled to be sure that, when applications are submitted, there is a proper interrogation of the antisocial behaviour that has taken place surrounding the premises. Robert Brown makes the powerful point that, as we will now have perpetual licences, the licensing authorities' workload will be significantly reduced, as will the workload of police officers and the bureaucracy that he mentioned. I press my amendment 164.

By way of background, it is important to recognise that the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 placed a requirement on all chief constables in Scotland to provide antisocial behaviour reports in a recognised manner for all new applications. That provision was included as a result of an amendment that I lodged during the passage of the bill. My amendment was intended to ensure consistency in respect of the information that is provided in connection with antisocial behaviour around licensed premises, with police officers and police authorities providing robust information in a consistent manner. I was disappointed to learn that the Government intended to use the legislation that we are discussing today to amend the 2005 act and to place the provision of antisocial behaviour reports at the discretion of chief constables and licensing authorities. The experience of my colleagues throughout Scotland will be that information that is provided to licensing authorities by police authorities is, indeed, inconsistent. A number of my constituents have raised concerns about the inconsistency of such information when they have made representations to licensing authorities. My amendments will ensure that the situation reverts to the status quo of the 2005 act, which places a requirement on all chief constables to provide information in a consistent manner. I move amendment 164.

What has struck me in the contributions from Labour members so far is that they speak on behalf of the victims of crime and not on behalf of those who commit the crimes. We make no apologies for that. When Sandra White talks about headline grabbing, I hope that she is not referring to people such as John Muir. I am sure that John would rather be at home with his son Damian than be here in the Parliament. The focus of the amendments from Kenny MacAskill's supporters, with their carefully scripted speeches, has been on the great success of community sentences in their local areas. I am not convinced that many of those who have been subject to such sentences in the past have complied with or feared them. If the sentences are so successful, why were 2,000 people injured and more than 50 people killed last year as a result of knife crime? Labour is clear that doing nothing is not an option. It is time for Parliament, and the members opposite, to stand up for the victims of crime, some of whom are here in Parliament today.

This short debate has provoked very little disagreement. Many members may say that that is a new form of coalition in the debating chamber, although I am not sure why Mr Purvis did not want to contribute in that spirit, given his party's history in coalitions.  One thing on which we have agreed is our aim of increased efficiency. As I said in the previous debate, we need to be cautious in our approach to that. Efficiency should not be sought at the cost of the service that we wish to deliver. That is the challenge that faces many of us as we try to ensure that the services that our commissioners deliver are accessible and transparent. There is absolutely no point in having the sort of one-stop shop that we have debated today when no one understands what it is or even realises its existence. How then can it help them in their everyday lives? It would be a problem for us all if the bodies that deal with complaints responded only to those who shouted the loudest or articulated their complaint most efficiently. We cannot empower only some people. Doing that would result in those who lack confidence failing to make their views known to commissioners. As Jamie Hepburn said, there are issues for commissioners to consider in looking at how to communicate with our local communities. For example, I am not convinced that the constituents in the Blackhill area of my constituency know exactly what the commissioner for children and young people or the Scottish Human Rights Commission can do for them. Members of the Scottish Parliament have a role to play in ensuring that the commissioners are supported to do their job properly in our local communities and that their roles are understood beyond the debating chamber. As members have said during the three stages of the bill, it is important that the Parliament has the opportunity to scrutinise the commissioners, but also to look at how we can work closely with the commissioners on behalf of our constituents. I have to be fair to the commissioners. In my experience, they have shown a genuine willingness to work with the committees of the Parliament. Indeed, their input has been invaluable to the committees over the years. At times, I have disagreed with their contribution, but their relationship with the Parliament during the passage of the bill has ensured clarity; there is goodwill on the part of commissioners in that relationship. The passing of the bill will draw a line in the sand. It will ensure that we provide absolute clarity on the process. The debate has been reasonable, albeit that it has lacked the sort of turbulence that we see in chamber debates at times, although that is to be welcomed. On behalf of the Scottish Labour party, I commend the passage of the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill.

On behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate and record that we will support the passing of the bill at decision time. During the stage 1 debate, we agreed that the public gallery would probably not be crammed full of members of the public to view the bill's successful passage, but I assure the school party that has just arrived and taken the trouble to attend this afternoon that the bill will have some impact on their lives, albeit at some point in the future. The minister referred to the new mechanisms for parliamentary accountability, and the bill's benefits come from the Parliament's ability to ensure, for the first time, that consistent standards apply to all parliamentary bodies. This legislation is being developed for the right reasons and in our constituents' best interests. Indeed, in this Parliament we do not revise legislation as often as we should, and we should take that fact into consideration. We have heard in recent days, and will no doubt hear more in future, about the economic challenges that face us. Given that the SPCB-supported bodies are responsible for expenditure of more than £7.5 million, we should take every step to improve their governance arrangements, and the bill provides for that. Although, as Trish Godman said in the stage 1 debate, the start-up costs for the new commission for ethical standards in public life in Scotland, for example, will be considerable, there will in future years be savings compared with the cost of running three separate bodies. Also, I noted that in that debate it was estimated that accommodation costs would fall by between £18,000 and £25,000, and that a further £10,000 in savings would be made by merging the chief investigating officer  and the Scottish Parliamentary Standards Commissioner. I also believe that, in the first full year, other savings will amount to £163,000. Given the current economic climate, we should welcome that, and I welcome the minister's commitment to ensure not only that we deliver effective services but that we are open to considering how best our Scottish commissions and commissioners might deliver those services. However, we must ensure that at every step along the way the Parliament is involved in discussing and interrogating the whole process. Finally, I pay tribute to the hard work of Trish Godman and the other members of the Review of SPCB Supported Bodies Committee. Members of such committees realise that their work is not always the subject of headlines or mentioned in the Press Association cuttings that we all receive, but I am sure that I speak for every member in paying tribute to Trish Godman and the members of such committees. Their work is important in the Parliament and it should continue. On behalf of the Labour Party, I call on the Parliament to support the passage of the Scottish Parliamentary Commissions and Commissioners etc Bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to promote the development of waste management infrastructure. (S3O-10755)

Given that food waste and other organic matter is 34 per cent of what we throw away, I am sure that the cabinet secretary agrees that such infrastructure is crucial. However, many of my constituents who live in tenemental properties and flats have nowhere suitable for the type of recycling that I am sure the Scottish Government would like to promote. Will the Scottish Government look at a joined-up approach with local authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and other agencies to ensure that the problem is not thrown on the scrap heap?

rose—

Will the member give way on that point?

I thank Kenny Gibson for giving way. He is concerned about the Labour Party's support for PFI. I remind him that his minister is signing new PPP projects, one being in my constituency, at Stobhill hospital. The minister has recently signed an extension to the PPP project there. Does he defend the minster on that?

Will the member give way?

Many of the contributions from Tory and Liberal members of the new coalition have lectured us about the importance of welcoming a positive and constructive relationship with the Westminster Government. Are those members suggesting that they have a monopoly on co-operating with devolved Governments? There is more to working  with devolved Governments than the Prime Minister's ministerial vehicle arriving outside the Scottish Parliament building. I remind those members of the old saying that actions speak louder than words. As George Foulkes said, we are the party who, within a year of being in Government, introduced the legislation that formed the Scottish Parliament, and we provided the Parliament with record funding year after year, so I make no apologies for saying that we will not take lectures from any other parties on holding Governments and this Parliament to account where necessary. I also remind the Conservative party that, in the past, it covertly and overtly opposed the Scottish Parliament and the Calman commission. I only have to quote a well-informed article written by the one and only Alan Cochrane of The Daily Telegraph , who reported last year that "Official Tory backing for the extra powers provoked Lord (Michael) Forsyth of Drumlean, the former Scottish Secretary, to attack as 'appeasement' the actions of those Unionists who gave their support to Calman." I am more than happy to give way to any Tory member who wants to correct Lord Forsyth and oppose that very well developed argument on the split within the Tory party.

That was an easy opportunity to refute totally what Lord Forsyth said, and Derek Brownlee missed it. The recent election results highlighted the public's support for the principles of devolution and its rejection of the SNP's separatist agenda. Pauline McNeill was correct to mention the minimum wage, and the Scottish Labour Party and the Labour Party in the UK make no apologies for delivering it. I recall security guards in my constituency working for 60 pence an hour. We brought in the minimum wage to ensure that such abuse of people's employment conditions did not take place. We make no apologies for that. In essence, our amendment to Annabel Goldie's motion call for the Calman commission's recommendations to be implemented. The Calman commission report is common sense in many areas and provides clarity. Members from the other parties have referred to the co-operative agenda on a number of occasions, and I refer them to recommendation 4.7, which refers to what would be expected of UK and Scottish ministers. They  "should commit to respond positively to requests to appear before committees of the others' Parliament." It also refers to the First Minister appearing before the Westminster Parliament. So when we talk about the co-operative agenda, the template for that is already set out in the Calman commission report.

The Calman commission report is probably the most comprehensive report that has ever been brought before the Scottish Parliament, and it came from the Calman commission's interrogation at every opportunity of the evidence that was placed before it. Many of Calman's recommendations, including that to devolve the regulation of air-guns to the Scottish Parliament, have been the subject of MSP campaigns. I know that Margaret Curran campaigned for such regulation to be allowed for in the Scottish Parliament. We agree that the Scottish Parliament elections should be administered by the Scottish Parliament. However, I hope that we can do that on a cross-party basis and not in the style that prevails in Westminster, where members have secured themselves a five-year term. That is the kind of co-operative and forward-thinking agenda that is being adopted by the new Westminster Government.

Presiding Officer, I do not have time. I am usually more than happy to give way to Margo MacDonald. The task was to find out how the Scottish Parliament might better serve the people of Scotland and improve the quality of their lives, and to find out how Scotland might become more financially accountable. Our amendment makes clear our position on the way forward. I call on members to support Pauline McNeill's amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. (S3O-10467)

In response to a previous question the cabinet secretary referred to increased funds being made available to NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. She also referred to ministerial approval. Has she given ministerial approval for the redundancy notices that have been served on porters at Stobhill hospital, in my constituency?

What was so stable about January 2009, when the First Minister advised us that he would not be blackmailed by the Green party on the budget?

Will the member accept an intervention?

We have not heard Bruce Crawford—or any other member—use the word "electorate". Is he suggesting that STV should be introduced for Scottish Parliament elections?

I have not been convinced by Robin Harper's arguments—he might not be surprised to hear that. I noted that, in his contribution, he did not use the word "constituent" or "electorate", which is telling. There was no evidence in his contribution that STV would ensure that representatives are more accountable to their constituents than to their party leaders. Robin Harper's contribution was flawed in that respect. In the amendment in my name, we state clearly our position, which is that we should continue to maintain the constituency link. There are arguments for and against us in that respect, and the first-past-the-post system has many challenges, but we cannot move away from the fact that it has successfully provided an opportunity for communities to elect and deselect representatives on many occasions, sometimes to the detriment of members of this chamber. Local examples include Dennis Canavan and Jean Turner, in respect of whom communities in Falkirk West and Strathkelvin and Bearsden had an opportunity that would not have been afforded to them under the STV system.

I would not disagree with Robert Brown on the fact that we unfortunately had Margaret Thatcher for that period. There is no evidence that the use of STV in local government has increased voter turnout. We have raised that issue in the chamber on a number of occasions. It is a fixation of the media that we have not been able to increase voter turnout, and during the recent local government elections there was no evidence that the introduction of the single transferable vote system had enabled us to increase voter turnout. I also note that STV for local government has created comfort zones in many multimember wards throughout Scotland. I cannot see how the electorate have benefited since we introduced the system for local government in 2007. I am not one for defending the minority Scottish National Party Government, and I will not start this morning, but I cannot help but observe what the so-called proportionality of this Parliament has created. I ask members to recall the events of last year's budget, when the Green party had such a disproportionate effect on the outcome of the minority Government's budget. It should be noted that 4 per cent of the regional votes were cast in favour of the Green party, and nearly 1 per cent for Margo MacDonald. It was clear from the budget negotiations that those who were elected with the fewest votes were able to make their demands of the minority Government.

It is a mathematical fact that more than 10,000 votes were cast in favour of me in my constituency of Glasgow Springburn, while 10,000 votes were cast in favour of Patrick Harvie in the whole of the Glasgow region. Considering that, I think that the effect that Patrick Harvie had was disproportionate. Patrick Harvie referred to The Spectator , so I refer him to an article in it by Fraser Nelson that is headlined, "The pitfalls of a minority government". He states: "The Greens were bribing" the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, "asking for £22 million for some home insulation scheme, then upping it to £33 million. As always with the PR system, the tail wags the dog."  I could not have put it better myself. I do not fault members for seeking to negotiate the position to their advantage; I simply point out that every system, including proportional representation, has its flaws. Surely it is unacceptable that those in the chamber who received the fewest votes can command such power during budget negotiations. I note from today's Business Bulletin that the SNP is silent on the issue. SNP members may argue for a more proportional system—we will hear from them—and they may argue against the first-past-the-post system, but I must ask why so many SNP members seek the prize of the constituency MSP position. Many of them shadow constituency MSPs, and many have sought the prize successfully—Nicola Sturgeon and Bruce Crawford among them. They had such enthusiasm for seeking constituency representation during the previous session that they will surely continue to support that constituency link and the first-past-the-post system. In conclusion, as I have said, there is no perfect system, but we need to be clear about the fact that we wish to retain the constituency link. We should reflect on the fact that the STV system is flawed and serves up many anomalies. I ask members to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-6215.2, to leave out from "the current" to end and insert: "there is no perfect electoral system, with each having advantages, disadvantages and the potential to produce anomalous outcomes; acknowledges the value of the constituency link in promoting and preserving accountability and the service of elected representatives; believes that democratic reform should encompass far greater change than simply potential changes to the system of election, and welcomes the significant progress in this regard, including devolution in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and London, the ending of hereditary peerages in the House of Lords and the enactment of the Human Rights and Freedom of Information Acts."

Your kindness overwhelms me, Presiding Officer. We have all recognised the importance of what has been a highly technical bill. I have said before that it is important legislation and that the subject has been debated since the birth of the Parliament way back in 1999. We have debated the issues and challenges surrounding the delivery of SSIs throughout the subject committees. Like others, I pay tribute to the Subordinate Legislation Committee for its hard work and diligence. Their hard work is tedious and it requires experience and considerable diligence. I commend the committee and the clerks for their hard work on the bill. I will deal with a myth that is peddled in the Parliament—that business managers select members for the Subordinate Legislation Committee to punish them for past endeavours. I assure members that Helen Eadie, Rhoda Grant and Margaret Curran were not appointed to the committee as a punishment; their membership is in recognition of their vast experience in the Parliament and in interrogating important bills that must be passed. The Scottish Labour Party congratulates those members and I hope that they will have many more years of enjoying the committee's endeavours.

A reference has been made from a sedentary position to Margaret Curran. I assure members that she, too, is a diligent member of the committee. I wish her good luck in the years to come and in—I hope—a new role. In the stage 1 debate, I raised issues about the publication and accessibility of acts. The committee acknowledged that "legislation is ... most readily accessed online and accepts that print copies of Scottish legislation should no longer be the primary means for making legislation available." However, members might recall that I agreed with the committee's statement that "the provisions of the Bill as introduced appear to fall short in terms of preservation of Scottish legislation." I am delighted that the Government lodged stage 2 amendments to deal with that and I am satisfied that we have found a way forward that will preserve legislation for the future. We have heard from Helen Eadie—I am glad that she arrived in time for the debate—who presented several challenges to the minister. To be fair to him, when I examined the Official Report , it became clear that he was looking for a way forward. The increase from 21 to 28 days to which Helen Eadie referred involved a positive exchange and is most welcome to Labour members. I advise  the minister that it is important that we continue to examine the system, to ensure that committees are given ample opportunity to interrogate bills and SSIs. I commend the minister for the comfort that he has provided on that point. We all agree, and I repeat, that the bill is of course highly technical. The debate has not been highly addictive for those who queued for tickets to the public gallery, but the bill is important and deals with arrangements that we have called several times for a review of. We will support the motion to pass the bill at decision time.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve oral health in children. (S3O-10082)

A young person in my constituency recently had 10 tooth extractions, which is unacceptable, and there are many other such cases throughout Scotland. What action has been taken to inform parents, to ensure that they take responsibility for their children's oral health? What action is taken to deal with parents who do not accept the message that they must ensure that their children have good oral health?

I extend to Bruce Crawford best wishes for the rest of his big day. May there be many more, at least until 2011; I hope that there will not be many more after that. It is clear to me, having read the many reports that have been part of the process, that we are developing this legislation for the right reasons and in the best interests of our constituents who use the commissioner services that we are debating today. The bill is an example of the Parliament revisiting legislation that has been passed previously; perhaps we do not do that enough. Today I am taking the opportunity to interrogate such legislation. In a recent debate on the subject, my colleague Johann Lamont stated: "I am entirely sceptical towards most things about life, I was equally sceptical about the role of commissioners, and I was open minded about the options that were identified by the corporate body". I reassure Johann Lamont that she is in good company, as being sceptical is the norm in the Parliament. On a serious note, there is no room for complacency. We should make no apologies for seeking to improve the role of our commissioners in our local communities. Given the current economic climate, it is important that we recognise that the SPCB-supported bodies are responsible for expending £7.5 million a year, so we should take every step possible to improve the governance arrangements. The bill provides the foundations for us to improve the arrangements and is a step in the right direction.  The bill will allow the SPCB to direct the public bodies or office-holders to share premises, staff, services or other resources. That will allow the SPCB to rationalise the number of premises that the bodies use. There are opportunities to identify ways in which services such as human resources, payroll and finance can be shared. The approach will provide many opportunities to make best use of resources and to consider ways in which we can improve service delivery to members of the public. During the debate and other recent debates on the issue, many colleagues have recognised the need for commissioners to be operationally independent. However, several colleagues have made the fair point that that should be balanced by ensuring that the Parliament's interests are considered. As members have said, we cannot be seen to be writing a blank cheque. The bill will provide the opportunity for scrutiny. As many members have alluded to, the process of holding commissions and commissioners to account will not dilute their independence. The opportunity for parliamentary committees to play a more prominent role in that is an important step. The process will provide a public record of the commissioners' role in our communities. There will be opportunities for commissioners to be held to account in a useful and constructive way that will allow them to provide more information. This stage 1 debate is not a headline-grabbing debate such as the budget debate that is taking place in another place. However, it is a useful contribution to the discussion that has taken place for several years on the role of commissioners. The bill provides a useful foundation to allow us to make our commissioners more effective and accountable.

I am sure that the First Minister and all members in the chamber will join me in expressing the deepest sympathy to the family of the Russian asylum seekers who tragically committed suicide in the Red Road area of my constituency. Will the First Minister look into the tragic circumstances of those sad deaths and take the necessary steps to ensure that proper resources have been, and will continue to be, put in place, and that we learn lessons for what future resources should be provided to deliver the services that are required to support not only asylum seekers in our communities but the communities in my constituency that have supported for so many years those who seek refuge in Scotland?

Has the Deputy First Minister received any representations from Mr Rauf's solicitor or any other third party in connection with Mr Rauf's case?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Section 8.1.1 of the code of conduct for members of the Scottish Parliament states: "It is expected that each member will take on a case when approached although it is recognised that there may be legitimate reasons for a member to decline a constituent's case in certain circumstances". The code then gives some examples of such circumstances, but it is stressed that it is not an exhaustive list. This morning, the First Minister interpreted that rule as placing MSPs under an "absolute obligation" to take on constituents' cases. That statement is grossly inaccurate.

The rule seems very clear: there are circumstances in which MSPs are entitled to act according to the code of conduct. As the Presiding Officer, you are aware of the debate on section 8.1.1 this morning and how the First Minister interpreted it. Will you give a ruling for our guidance to ensure that we are able to carry out our duties as members of the Scottish Parliament?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Given your clear ruling on the issue, I refer you to the Scottish ministerial code—

Presiding Officer, you have reiterated standing orders and I ask to be allowed to continue with the point of order. Other members have been given the opportunity to make points of order today and I wish to be afforded the same opportunity. The ministerial code states: "It is of paramount importance that Ministers give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament, correcting any inadvertent error at the earliest opportunity." Given your clarity on the standing orders, which rule that the First Minister's statement was incorrect when he paraphrased the standing orders earlier today, will you ask him to correct his statement "at the earliest opportunity"?

I rise to support the Parliamentary Bureau motion in the name of Mike Rumbles. I am particularly delighted to submit the names of Cathy Peattie  and Helen Eadie to serve on the ad hoc committee that is being proposed. Everyone in the chamber will know that both members are recognised for their diligence and fairness when considering legislation, and I can assure anyone who asks that both members have no fixed views on Margo MacDonald's bill. When the Parliamentary Bureau considered the bill, it was very clear that the proposals in the bill did not fit within the remit of any particular committee. There is a case for both the Health and Sport Committee and the Justice Committee to be considered as the committee to which the bill should be referred. On those facts, we proposed the formation of an ad hoc committee. It is important to point out that the bill will receive the same stage 1 scrutiny that every other member's bill receives when it is considered by Parliament. The ad hoc committee will receive evidence at stage 1, and witnesses will be given the opportunity to provide written and oral evidence to the committee. During the Parliamentary Bureau's discussions of the issue, the case was clearly made for an ad hoc committee. I believe that it will have the opportunity to develop some of the issues that were debated during the consultation process. The same opportunity might not have been afforded during the Health and Sport Committee's considerations. I call on the Parliament to support the motion, taking into consideration the issues that I have raised.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Throughout the day, concern has been raised about a report in The Herald today that the First Minister raised £9,000 for the Scottish National Party by auctioning a lunch with himself in the Parliament's restaurant. That raises serious questions about the abuse of the resources of the Parliament and, indeed, the office of the First Minister. Those questions must be answered. In the interest of maintaining the standards that the people of Scotland expect of us, will you, on behalf of the chamber, ask the First Minister to make an emergency statement to clear up the matter as a matter of urgency?

Yesterday, in broad daylight, a man was shot dead outside one of Scotland's busiest supermarkets in the Robroyston area of my constituency. Does the First Minister agree that the time is now right for the Parliament to show leadership by standing up to such unacceptable gangland activities? Will he arrange for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to meet me and anyone else who has an interest in the issue to discuss how we can take the most effective action to deal with the unacceptable activities of the gangland networks?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps have been taken to prevent prisoners from benefiting financially from their period in prison. (S3O-9116)

It was reported in the Daily Record  on 4 January that Ashok Kalyanjee has been able to claim a £50 car tax refund from his prison cell and has discussed the possibility of selling his diary. The cabinet secretary might be aware that that is the gentleman who brutally murdered his two young sons. Will the cabinet secretary agree to a full inquiry into the circumstances that have allowed Mr Kalyanjee to claim a car tax refund and discuss selling his prison diary?

I have never been a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee—

Yes, there might be time. Punishment sometimes comes late. I have taken time to peruse the stage 1 report. I pay tribute to the committee's hard work, particularly that of Helen Eadie, who is a long-serving member. It should be recognised that the committee is not afforded the headline-grabbing opportunities that other committees have but, as we have said on many occasions, its work is crucial to the workings of Parliament. I commend the committee for its work. I will touch on a couple of issues that have been raised during the debate and during the committee's consideration of the bill at stage 1. Part 3 raises important issues about accessibility, publication and the preservation of acts of the Scottish Parliament and Scottish statutory instruments. In relation to publication and accessibility, the committee acknowledges that legislation is now most readily accessed online and accepts that print copies should no longer be the primary means of making available Scottish legislation. I note that we have made progress. The Scottish Government has given a commitment to make clear the requirement to publish all SSIs online. That must be welcomed, but I agree with the committee that the "provisions of the Bill as introduced appear to fall short in terms of preservation of Scottish legislation." The minister commented on that earlier, which is to be welcomed, but further consideration of the provisions is required. I make those comments as someone who fully supports the digital revolution. I practise what I preach, as I run a paperless constituency office. However, the argument is not about the modernising agenda, but about how we preserve digital material. There is great merit in the committee's point that "in the absence of an internationally agreed standard for preservation of digital material, there should be a statutory duty on the face of this Bill for the Queen's Printer for Scotland to deposit printed copies of all ASPs ... with the National Library". I welcome the commitment from the minister to make progress on that. We should pay particular attention to the details and give careful consideration to preservation of digital material for future generations. In evidence to the committee, issues were raised relating to the implementation of Scottish Law Commission reports. In particular, I refer to  the powerful evidence from Mr Iain Jamieson, particularly his reference to a statement from the chairman of the Scottish Law Commission, who said that there is a "danger ... that Scots law will fall behind the rest of the world's legal systems in responding to the challenges of an era marked by rapid technological and economic change." We should take such concerns seriously and consider how to make progress. Given the significant public resource that is invested in the preparation of Scottish Law Commission reports, we believe that it is imperative that a logical approach be taken to ensure that the Government considers them properly. As the committee said, there seems to be merit in the system that has been adopted at Westminster when Law Commission reports are considered. A wide range of comments have been made. As Bob Doris said, the debate is not the most addictive viewing for people in the public gallery or for our constituents in Glasgow. However, the technical nature of the bill requires us to consider the issues seriously. I hope that in the minister's closing remarks he will continue the constructive tone that has been set so far and refer to some of the issues that have been raised. I look forward to supporting the bill at stage 1, with the proviso that at stage 2 we will have to consider carefully the issues that have been raised.

Since May 2007, I have made a number of front-bench speeches on justice issues on behalf of the Labour Party. I would not call this an exciting comeback to the front benches, but it is important to recognise, as members do, that the bill is fiercely technical. To be serious, it is extremely important. Its proposals have been debated over many years—those debates are available for scrutiny in the Official Report . As a member of the Justice Committee, I remember being concerned about the volume of SSIs, in particular, that were debated at the committee—there always seemed to be concerns about the lack of full and proper scrutiny. I also felt that a large number of SSIs were considered prior to the recess. Today's debate affords us an opportunity to make progress in a practical sense. However, it is important for us to recognise that the Subordinate Legislation Committee has highlighted a number of important issues. As the minister said, we have regulated those matters under the three transitional orders that were made under the Scotland Act 1998. The minister was right when he told the committee on 3 November that, 10 years on, it is the right time for us to move on. I note that the Crown will now be bound by the terms of an act of the Scottish Parliament or instruments under such acts, unless it is expressly exempted. I suppose that that move is considered to be part of the modernising agenda. However, it is important to highlight the concerns that have been expressed by the judiciary, advocates and the Scottish Law Commission. On behalf of the Labour Party, I share the Subordinate Legislation Committee's concerns about some of the challenges that may be faced in connection with the future drafting of acts of the Scottish  Parliament and Scottish statutory instruments. A constructive tone from the minister would be welcome, to ensure that further consideration is given to those concerns and to provide reassurances on how they can be addressed. As the minister indicated, in paragraph 157 of its report the committee welcomed section 28, which will extend from 21 to 28 days the minimum period before an instrument that is subject to the negative procedure can come into force. That move is to be welcomed, but I understand the concerns that the committee expressed on the issue. Although the committee recognised the validity of the minister's concern that extending the period further could lead to delays in the lawmaking process, it made the point that he was painting a worst-case scenario that included the summer recess. It is not unprecedented for politicians in the chamber to paint the worst-case scenario. I do not necessarily criticise the minister for doing so, but it would be welcome for objective consideration to be given to other scenarios. Perhaps the Scottish Parliament information centre could provide that information. Jamie Stone made the point that the hand of the Parliament should be much stronger and that members should be afforded more opportunity to scrutinise instruments. In the limited time available, I have been able to highlight only a couple of issues. However, I have been afforded the fortunate position of being allocated the closing slot in today's debate, so I will have an opportunity to raise other issues on behalf of the Labour Party, which will be helpful.

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last met the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S3O-8703)

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to the original concept of the new Stobhill hospital, which included the delivery of chemotherapy services. Does the minister share my concern that the latest design of the hospital does not include the delivery of such services? Will she make representations to the chief executive of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, so that it may reconsider its position in respect of the latest design?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many of the 236 new or refurbished schools mentioned in its press release of 8 October 2009 as completed were commissioned under the previous Administration. (S3O-8592)

I thought that the Parliament's standing orders required ministers to answer the questions that are asked. My very clear question was about the number of new and refurbished schools that have been delivered by this Government. Will the minister clarify that All Saints secondary school, Smithycroft secondary school, Springburn academy, St Roch's secondary school, Whitehill secondary school and, for that matter, Wallacewell primary school, all of which are in my constituency, were either rebuilt or refurbished by the previous Labour-led Government? How many schools in my constituency have been rebuilt by the current Scottish National Party Government?

Like other members, I congratulate Bill Butler on his excellent speech. He showed not only that he cares about ensuring that Glasgow gets a fair deal, but that he is not willing to stand aside and let the city continue to be ripped off by this SNP Government. This might be a habit of my new role as shadow business manager but I note that, this evening, eight of the nine Labour MSPs who represent Glasgow's constituencies are present in the chamber, and Pauline McNeill has provided medical certification to clarify why she cannot attend. That says something for those Glasgow members who, even when they were in government, were unwilling to stand aside and kept making the case for Glasgow.

I am very happy to give way to Sandra White or any other SNP member.

I thought that it would be helpful to refer to members' speeches. Indeed, Sandra  White herself mentioned the Glasgow Evening Times . The fact is that sometimes the truth hurts. We need to remember that the same things were said not only by the journalists who wrote the Evening Times articles, but by those who contributed to blogs and letters pages and the many other people in Glasgow who are concerned about this SNP Government.

It would be fair to say that, over the years, Glasgow has faced—

I will follow your guidance, Presiding Officer. Members have already raised a number of points and, in his summing up, John Swinney has to clarify why he was unwilling to get round the table with the various stakeholders that Charlie Gordon and others have mentioned. Perhaps he will also confirm my understanding that Councillor Steven Purcell was willing to provide additional funding to allow the project to go forward, because that would have been a very important move for GARL. As members throughout the years have argued in this chamber, a good transport infrastructure is crucial to tackling many of the economic challenges that the city of Glasgow faces. The Glasgow City Council briefing confirms the possibility of more than 1,300 job losses. Some SNP members might find that amusing, but it is not amusing for the men, women and children who will be affected by the Government's decisions and the issues that face us. It is clear that the SNP Government has its priorities wrong. If members really want to make the case and stand up for Glasgow, they should get behind the motion in the name of Bill Butler.

I am stating the obvious when I say that it is clear from  today's debate that the Gill review has presented us with many challenges. Those challenges have been created by many years of custom and practice that, as members have indicated, have not always served the best interests of those who seek fairness in our courts. In their speeches today, members have made clear that the status quo is not an option. We were right to embark on the review back in February 2007, to identify ways of improving how the courts work. Lord Gill's report should be seen in a positive light, but that does not mean that we agree with all the recommendations that he has set out. It is important that we have a constructive dialogue to move the issue forward. I will highlight a number of issues that the report raises. Like other members, I do not profess to have read every page of the documents that are before us, but I have had an opportunity to peruse them and to highlight some of the issues that are important in taking forward the review. Like other members, I commend those who served on the Gill review group for their hard work and diligence over a protracted period; I recognise their efforts. However, on a less positive note, I was disappointed that the group did not include trade union representation. The STUC's response to the review made the important point that, as major users of the civil courts, with experience of representing their members, the trade unions would have been a useful addition to the group. The report refers to overreliance on temporary or part-time resources. I concur with the many respondents to the consultation who pointed out that, in any working environment, a lack of experience or commitment can lead to poor decision making and case management. On the face of it, there is a conflict of interest in having a solicitor or advocate who appears in a court sit in the same court in a judicial capacity on a part-time basis. We need to investigate that issue and to take further evidence on whether there is such a conflict of interest. We should examine how we can take forward Lord Gill's recommendation that part-time sheriffs be used mainly to cover leave, illness and emergencies. However, like other members, I recognise that they are a useful resource and play a crucial role in providing cover throughout our court system. The report contains a useful set of recommendations in respect of information technology advancements in our court system. I have visited courts, toured procurator fiscal offices and visited legal establishments on many occasions and have become increasingly aware of the fact that a badge of honour seems to be attached to having volumes of paperwork on one's desk; I wonder whether Lord Gill had a similar experience in a previous life. The report confirms  that the management of paper files ties up important resources that could be invested elsewhere. The development of an e-filing system like the one in Singapore must be taken forward. As David Whitton and Bill Aitken mentioned, the report refers in detail to the benefits of conference calls in case management and to the positive effect of their use in commercial procedure in Glasgow sheriff court. The report highlights some of the significant defences that exist in the civil court system. However, it does not go far enough when it says that we should encourage the use of IT systems. That could lead to patchy application of policy across the courts. Rather than encouraging the use of e-mails as a system of communicating with the courts—I am not convinced that that would work—we should consider making the use of IT systems compulsory. Chapter 8 of the report refers to facilitating settlement and provides useful information on the current arrangements for the four pre-action protocols that exist in Scotland. The Digby Brown consultation response highlights the fact that the voluntary protocols that are currently in place have failed to address concerns about unrealistic pre-litigation offers. There can be no doubt that pre-action protocols are valuable and have a place in our justice system. We need all parties concerned to be willing to engage, but we also need to deal with those who do not display a willingness to enter into the general principles of pre-action protocols. The report will have its critics and its plaudits. It is important that the Government shows leadership in pursuing reform, and we have committed to taking that forward with it. We should also ensure that there is balance in understanding the concerns that have been raised by those who are sceptical about the process. Members will have received an e-mail from the Unite union, and I put it on record that I am a member. It raises concerns about the future of civil justice and seeks assurances in respect of access for workers. It would be useful for the Minister for Community Safety to provide clarification today that he is willing to continue engaging with stakeholders. I call on the Parliament to support the addendum in the name of Richard Baker.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S3O-7871)

Will the minister join me in recognising the hard work of the Women's Royal Voluntary Service facility at Stobhill hospital? Does she agree that the new hospital at Stobhill should include a facility that will enable the WRVS volunteers to continue their hard work?

To ask the Scottish Executive when ministers last  met representatives of the renewables industry and what issues were discussed. (S3O-7754)

Like me, the minister no doubt looks forward to the boost in the microrenewables industry that will result from the council tax discount incentive that all parties voted for in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. What steps is the Scottish Government taking to ensure that the renewables industry is well placed to make the most of that job creation opportunity? Is he confident that training is available to maximise the resulting employment opportunities?

I concur with the minister's remarks in respect of the late Ewan Williamson, and on behalf of my party I send our condolences to his family during this difficult time. The Scottish Labour Party welcomes the debate and the opportunity to recognise the crucial role that fire and rescue services play in our communities. I can think of many examples in my constituency of the integration of the fire service into the local community—I am sure that members can think of examples in their areas. I was delighted to attend the Springburn fire station open day a couple of weeks ago, and I commend the service for giving the community access to its local fire station and for providing the all-important home safety advice to which the minister referred. We are debating the draft fire and rescue framework because the Government has a legal requirement under the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 to report to the Parliament and to advise on relevant authorities who are acting in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1). We will support the motion. We have lodged an amendment to the motion, and we will also support the amendment in the name of Robert Brown. It is of fundamental importance that the Government has an open mind on issues that have been raised by stakeholders who have an interest in the framework. The Fire Brigades Union  provided a helpful briefing, which sets out a number of issues. First, on governance and structures, many words have been said over the years about the need for local fire services whose priorities are set locally. We should embrace that principle, but we should acknowledge that on occasions the setting of national priorities will have an effect on our ability to deliver local services. The FBU made a fair point when it said that ministers must be in a position to set national standards when that is required. It would be helpful if we could hear feedback from the minister on that point. The 2005 act requires community planning partnerships to establish local single outcome agreements. It has been refreshing to witness the enthusiastic way in which my local fire service has engaged with community planning. In the past we failed to realise how important it is that the fire services should be key stakeholders in our local communities. We need to recognise that partnerships are key to providing benefits for our communities. I hope that the minister will continue to encourage such partnerships. People who attack our firefighters while they carry out their important duties are a blight on our communities. The Parliament was right to deliver the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, which gave our firefighters more legal protection. The minister mentioned the work that is done with young people in particular, which I welcome—although it is not only young people who attack firefighters. Visits to local schools, for example, promote positive links with young people and are welcome. In my and many other members' experience, the vast majority of people support firefighters and have done so for many years, and only a tiny minority view firefighters as a target for antisocial activities. We need to ensure that the 2005 act is doing what it is meant to do, by providing our prosecutors with a sentencing tariff that sends a clear message to people who will not listen to reason. We also need to be convinced that firefighters are reporting attacks and that they feel that the authorities are willing to act on those complaints. I also welcome the fact that the key stakeholders document refers to supporting our local economies. During difficult economic times some businesses may feel under pressure to cut corners. The fire service can play a crucial role in providing advice on issues related to fire safety. We all recognise that fire safety legislation can sometimes be complex and bureaucratic, and it is a benefit to any business to have the fire service on its side with helpful and valuable advice. It is widely acclaimed that our firefighters are trained to a very high level. The Scottish Fire  Services College provides that training, and I am sure that we all agree that it is of high importance to ensure that the safety of our firefighters is given priority. It is important that resources and time are spent on ensuring that that high standard of training is provided throughout Scotland. Labour believes that it is important that we get best value from the training that is delivered across Scotland and that standards are consistent. It is important to highlight the concerns that have been raised by the FBU. Although it recognises that the Scottish Fire Services College provides a high standard of training, it is concerned that there appears to be less consistency in the training provided by local fire service authorities on what are identical training modules. We all respect the fact that there will be different training requirements throughout the country, and of course there should be local flexibility in what is provided on many of those courses, but there is a need for the courses to be consistent throughout Scotland. It would be welcome if the minister, perhaps through an intervention or a comment in his closing speech, could advise us on how he wishes to take forward this issue that the FBU has raised. When we passed the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005, we did so with the support of all the main political parties and based on the principle that we wanted to improve the way that fire services are delivered throughout Scotland. At the same time, we wanted to promote equality and fairness. I believe that all of us would have signed up to that principle, so I was surprised to learn that there appears to be a fragmented approach towards discipline, grievance and dispute procedures. In particular, I note that only one fire authority provides employees with the right of appeal. The basic right to fairness in the workplace should always include the right of appeal. I would be grateful for clarification of the Government's position on the issue. I hope that the minister agrees that when we passed the Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 it was certainly not with a remit to remove the right of an employee to an appeal during a grievance procedure. It is important that we consider that issue in the context of fairness. A number of wide-ranging and important issues will be raised in today's debate, and many key stakeholders have a number of views on them. We all recognise the important role that our fire and rescue services play in our local communities and their professionalism, which I would argue is recognised throughout the world. It is important—I have made this point throughout my speech—that the Government shows a willingness to have an open mind on how we shape the document that is before us and how we take forward many of the  issues that members who contribute to the debate will have to consider. I hope that the Government can show leadership in that respect by recognising that, as the minister said, some difficult decisions will have to be taken. Those decisions must be taken for the right reasons, and in doing so we must embrace the principle that we will work together. I hope that members in other parties will be minded to support my amendment and Robert Brown's amendment. I move amendment S3M-4810.1, to insert at end: "and recognises the tremendous contribution and crucial role played by firefighters in Scotland and the need for consistent and rigorous enforcement of health and safety standards in fire and rescue services right across Scotland."

I recall watching, as a young man, the events of Lockerbie unfold on 21 December 1988. Like many others in the chamber, I felt genuinely touched by the grief displayed by so many families who were so cruelly affected by the Lockerbie bombing. However, I also remember the dignity that was shown by the victims' families and by those from the Lockerbie community, despite the tragic loss of their loved ones. I also recall the feeling of disbelief at the magnitude of the crime. Many people posed the question why such a peace-loving country would be the victim of such a terrible atrocity. Political leaders from all over the UK displayed a united front during that period, as we can see when we examine the Hansard report of the meeting of the UK Parliament that followed the disaster. It shows that a number of powerful contributions were made. One thing that united all the parties was an appetite for the perpetrators to be brought to justice. Our justice system showed its fairness and compassion by going to considerable lengths to ensure that a fair trial was held. After lengthy negotiations, many of which were led by Nelson Mandela, we finally arrived at a trial in the Netherlands. After 84 days and £75 million in costs, Mr Megrahi was found guilty. The reason for this preamble is to set out the fair and compassionate approach that was taken by our Scottish justice system when Mr Megrahi was being dealt with.

I am afraid that I do not have time. I would like to make another point. When we are satisfied that we have delivered justice, we should take responsibility for the perpetrator being punished and required to see out his sentence. The Scottish Government has failed the justice system by allowing Mr Megrahi to be released and transported as a free man to a hero's welcome in Tripoli. Kenny MacAskill has failed to answer a number of simple, straightforward questions today. Why could not Mr Megrahi serve his sentence in a facility that was managed by the SPS? Let us put it on the record that Labour members would not have expected him to arrive at the Marie Curie  hospice in Springburn, but we believe that other options were not given due consideration. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice has failed to demonstrate how he interrogated the options that were before him. The police estimates that Mr MacAskill presented to the chamber have no status or proper scrutiny attached to them. In Mr MacAskill's words, Mr Megrahi is a "dying man". Suggesting that a dying man requires 48 police officers to guard him clearly requires further investigation. I was concerned about the option-appraisal process that was carried out via a telephone call to the assistant chief constable. That was a sloppy manner in which to carry out an appraisal. Did the Government, which is concerned about potential costs, take into account the costs of the hundreds of police officers who were required to police the Faslane 365 protest, which its party took part in? No, it did not. The evidence that victims were a true part of Mr MacAskill's decision is also open to question. Some 189 of the victims on the Pan Am flight were Americans. Given the grief of their families and the fact that such robust concerns were raised by the US Government, like Jack McConnell and many others I am disappointed that Mr MacAskill sought to engage with the families of the American victims via videoconference. I genuinely do not wish to make a cheap point—this is a serious issue—but, given that ministers are only too happy to cross the Atlantic for events such as tartan week and the homecoming event, why did the cabinet secretary not make that same journey to consult with the American political representatives and the families who have been so affected by Lockerbie? To meet Mr Megrahi personally, but the American victims only via videoconference, is to get one's priorities very wrong. Even worse, when we examine the documents that have been made available for the public record, we see that the meeting was at the request of Mr MacAskill. Many of us were disgusted at the VIP reception that Mr Megrahi received on his arrival in Tripoli. The scenes of a convicted Libyan bomber being welcomed in Tripoli should have been avoided. Although I accept that we cannot control the outbursts of jubilation from the Libyan people, we should have considered how conditions could have been attached to Mr Megrahi's release to ensure that public grandstanding was prevented. We should have considered including provisions dealing with Mr Megrahi's behaviour, given that he is still on licence and is still required to report to East Renfrewshire Council. Surely that message should have been sent out. I ask once again that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice put on record and make available for public viewing the representations that he made to the Libyan Government calling on it to keep its particular homecoming event at a low key.

They were not published yesterday, so perhaps Mr Salmond can clarify the matter in his concluding remarks. In conclusion, the Scottish Government has been responsible for a flawed process whereby it has released Mr Megrahi on compassionate grounds. The Government has let the people of Scotland down. I call on the Parliament to support the amendment in the name of Richard Baker.

A number of people have raised concerns about the way in which Mr al-Megrahi was received—with a hero's welcome—on his return to Libya. I note from Mr MacAskill's statement that he made representations to the Libyan Government. Can he provide that information for the public record? Did he consider the possibility of the attachment of a precondition to Mr al-Megrahi's release, which would have prevented him from engaging in the kind of public grandstanding that has so hurt the Lockerbie victims?

Does the cabinet secretary share my concern about a recent report in the Evening Times,  according to which more than 200 pupils in Glasgow—some as young as 12—said that they carry knives? What action is the Government taking in that respect? Will the Government support our call for a knife amnesty?

The debate has shown us that members are united in one respect: in an ideal world, we would not want prisoners to benefit from compensation payments. As far as I am concerned, prison should be seen as punishment, not as an opportunity for compensation payments. As Richard Baker said—other members have referred to this—the issue is complex, and we have faced it for many years. Legal minds have been challenged on the rights and wrongs of the issue but, as others have said, we are now required to face up to the Somerville judgment in such a way as to bring us into line with the rest of the United Kingdom. Like Richard Baker, I am pleased that we can now introduce the one-year time bar, following constructive dialogue between our Westminster colleagues and the Scottish Government. On Angela Constance's point, according to all the reports from ministers, that dialogue has been helpful and has allowed us to take matters forward. I appreciate that Conservative members want to highlight the issues that may have exposed us to the claims in the first place. The Government  press release refers to the prison estate that the Government inherited. It is important to recognise the work that was carried out by the previous Scottish Executive, under the leadership of Jim Wallace and Cathy Jamieson, to modernise the prison estate. In 2005, the previous Executive announced an investment in HM Prison Edinburgh of £16 million. That included a new prisoner house block and a health education centre, which enabled slopping out in Edinburgh to end. At HMP Glenochil, a £28 million investment enabled the construction of a new prison house block and a health centre. That investment also allowed us to move forward. Under the previous Executive, an investment of more than £35 million in HMP Perth enabled the construction of a new prisoner house block, a health centre and an activity centre, which allowed the ending of slopping out in Perth. I could go on, but the important point is that the previous Executive highlighted concerns about slopping out and took action to ensure that the number of cells in which slopping out was required reduced from more than 1,900 in 2001 to the figures that have been referred to today. It made a significant investment in the prison estate, at an unprecedented level. Such investment in the prison estate does not fit with the populist agenda. Understandably, the vast majority of our constituents want money to be invested in schools, community facilities, health centres and so on, and politicians respond to that. The passage of the bill will lead to savings of an estimated £50 million, so perhaps we can meet the aspirations of our local communities in that respect. Given the cross-party co-operation that has been displayed in the chamber today, I hope that we can work with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice on how best those savings can be expended.

I have already exhibited the unprecedented investment in the prison estate by the previous Scottish Executive. Although it is important that such investment takes place, we must recognise that the populist agenda does not necessarily involve investing in the prison estate. However, I appreciate Patrick Harvie's point—it is important that we have a modern prison estate. The Justice 1 Committee reviewed the prison estate in 2001, when I was a member. I refer Patrick Harvie to the Official Report, in which he will see that I emphasised that it is important to  invest not just in the prison estate but in the rehabilitation of prisoners to prepare them for release. The issue will not go away. The passage of the bill is crucial and should be taken seriously, because it will minimise the risk to the public purse in respect of future claims. I call on members to support the Convention Rights Proceedings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

I think that many other members of the Justice Committee would agree that we have successfully interrogated a number of the challenges that we faced during the progress of this bill. It is important to put on record our appreciation of the clerks who have provided us with support during the process, and our appreciation of the Scottish Parliament information centre, which provided information to Robert Brown that allowed him to further his interrogation of issues that we discussed earlier. I also want to put on record our appreciation of the Lord Advocate, who has played a crucial role in the modernisation of our legal system in relation to this issue. On many occasions she has been a champion who has ensured that victims and their experiences are considered very carefully. That has been important. Robert Brown was right to raise the issue of consulting young people on the effects that this bill will have on their lives. I hope that he has been successful. A key theme during our interrogation of this bill was that young people were key stakeholders. A trend has appeared, not only in the Scottish Parliament but in various organisations that are responsible for implementing legislation, of talking at young people and not listening carefully to the points that they raise. I hope that Robert Brown's points will be taken on board. They were constructive, and I welcomed the Government's response. The committee acknowledged the issue and recommended the need for a meaningful and age-appropriate response to providing young people with the information that they require. I believe strongly that we have to encourage young people to pursue positive lifestyle changes. That can only  be achieved by our working with them. Johann Lamont gave a very positive example of that. Earlier, we discussed Robert Brown's amendment 125. I have no doubt that every member of this chamber wants to protect the welfare of every child in Scotland, and I understand some of the points that Robert Brown raised. However, I make no apology for considering the other end of the spectrum. I am not saying that the possibility is not remote, but the technical possibility remains that the sexual assault of a child could result only in a fine. That is unacceptable. I appreciate that other members feel that it could not happen and that there would be an appeal, but it remains technically possible. We have received information that the sexual assault of a child could result in a fine. That is unacceptable, and it is quite right for the Labour Party to interrogate the issue. It is also right for Robert Brown to raise his particular example. However, we have to have the debate, because sometimes we are not quick to represent possible victims. As a result of amendment 125, children could be at risk.

It is all very well for members to say, "That is right" from a sedentary position. It is also right to say that it is technically possible for the sexual assault of a child to result in a fine. Members may shake their heads, but that was made clear in the information that was provided to the committee. If members take the time to read the Official Report and the responses that we received from Professor Maher and the Lord Advocate, they will see that nobody disputes that that is the current position. As I said repeatedly throughout the three stages of the bill, that is unacceptable. It is important to make that point. There have been many positive aspects to the bill. We have successfully interrogated every aspect of this complex bill, and I hope that members will support it at decision time.

rose—

Robert Brown raises a genuine challenge in highlighting the issue of the forcible kiss that he referred to, but we should also look at the other end of the spectrum. If amendment 121 is agreed to, it will be technically possible for the sexual assault of a child to result in a fine. Surely we should deal with that loophole, which would clearly exist.

Will Robert Brown confirm what he means by "trivial matters" in relation to sexual assault?

During stage 2, I said that I thought that the Government had got it right by lodging amendments to ensure that a fine may not be imposed as the sole penalty when an accused is convicted of rape, sexual assault or sexual assault by penetration or rape of a young child. I do not say this often, but the Government got it right on that occasion, and we were satisfied with its approach during stage 2. Robert Brown's attempt to reverse that, which the Government supports, is wrong. In effect, those who have been charged on indictment with sexually assaulting a child could get a fine, which is beyond belief.

I think that that is a serious offence. It is sexual assault and it demeans the girl. Robert Brown provides a minor example of something that can be a serious sexual assault, for which the possibility of a sentence and a fine is required. I do not think that Robert Brown has provided a very clear example. We believe that we should proceed on the basis of the amendments that were agreed to at stage 2.

I will raise a technical point. If Robert Brown's amendments were agreed to, would it be possible for a sexual assault on a child to result in only a fine?

Patrick Harvie and I have disagreed with each other on many issues in the chamber, from identity cards and DNA retention to ways of tackling antisocial behaviour. However, I am delighted to say that, on this occasion, we whole-heartedly agree with each other. I commend Patrick Harvie and the organisations that have ably supported him during the passage of the bill and have provided us with useful information, such as the Equality Network and Stonewall, for the work that they have done. There have been a number of thoughtful and powerful speeches in the debate, and it is clear that there is cross-party support for the bill at stage 3. I will touch on a number of the themes that have been raised today and at stages 1 and 2. As John Lamont mentioned, the common-law system allows courts to take account of aggravating factors in determining sentences. It is important that we recognise and respect that but, as I said during the stage 1 debate, it is also important that we represent the views of those who contributed to the evidence sessions. Witnesses told us that the common law cannot send out a clear message that such hate crimes are unacceptable in Scotland, and it was generally felt that establishing an offence of statutory aggravation would address many of the motivations behind such crimes. I am disappointed that the bill does not contain any provisions for mandatory sentences. As Patrick Harvie will be aware, I have raised that point on a number of occasions in a constructive manner. I made the point, which Margaret Smith and Bill Kidd also touched on, that there are some individuals who, as a result of their social profile—as I would refer to it—will not respond to anything other than a robust mandatory sentence. It is important that the bill offers an opportunity to send out messages.  Like others, I welcome the fact that we are clearly moving in the right direction. It is important that training is put in place in the various organisations that will play a key role in implementing the legislation. That point has been made on many occasions in the chamber. Michael McMahon gave an example that highlighted clearly the importance of reporting such incidents, which Nigel Don also touched on. Sometimes our authorities do not get it right in dealing with members of the public, and particularly with disabled groups, as the RNID points out. That is not a poor reflection on our police officers, and I do not wish to suggest that it is, but, as members in the Scottish Parliament, we should ensure that, as well as recognising when an authorities gets it right, when an authority does not get it right we take action on behalf of our constituents and communities to ensure that the law is robustly enforced. I have mentioned a number of examples that members have given during this short debate, and I believe—to pick up on Michael McMahon's point—that it is important that we ensure that the law is robustly enforced. The bill will have no effect unless we do that, but it is clearly a step in the right direction and I congratulate Patrick Harvie on bringing the bill to stage 3.

A key element in tackling antisocial behaviour is ensuring that when members of the public contact the police, they receive a good service from the contact centre. I have received a large number of complaints from constituents who are concerned about the very poor service that they receive when they contact Strathclyde Police. Will the minister join me in calling for a top-to-bottom review of the contact centre that is currently in place at Strathclyde Police?

It is always welcome to get the last penny out of the drug baron's pocket, and the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 provides an opportunity to do that. Working with the UK Government, we delivered an effective piece of legislation. Without the 2002 act, we would not be debating the cashback for communities scheme in the first place. The prosecution of criminals has always taken priority and it will continue to do so. However, it has always been unacceptable that the ownership of the proceeds of crime remained immune from legal challenge where criminal proceedings were not available. The 2002 act gives the police the power to seize the cash of suspected drug  dealers. The principle and ethos of the legislation is that the moneys that are seized should be reinvested in communities that are affected by crime. Like other members, I have seen so-called drug barons flaunting their wealth in communities, with their flash cars and luxury homes, and showing contempt for authority. As Bill Aitken and others have said, that sets the wrong example to future generations. That is why the humiliating—to them—process of recovering drug dealers' wealth is to be welcomed. However, despite the best efforts of the many people who are involved in the process, I am not convinced that we recover anything like as much cash as we should. Richard Baker is correct to say that we should not blame anybody for that, because we recognise the challenges that are involved, but the moneys that are recovered are minute compared with the sums that criminals obtain. Using the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, "Panorama" found that, in the past three years, the Scottish unit that is responsible for criminal confiscations froze £60 million of assets but managed to recover just £6 million of that. We all find that unacceptable. Collaboration between all the relevant agencies is important. On regeneration, as Margaret Curran has said, our communities are held back because of the unacceptable criminal activities that take place within them. Tricia Marwick mentioned that as well. The Parliament must represent not the minority but the majority of people in our communities, who live responsible lives. We welcome the cashback for communities programme, but we do so on the basis that the communities that are most affected by crime will see the recovered money. There are examples of cashback money being invested in my constituency. Bob Doris helpfully mentioned operation reclaim, which has been running successfully for the past five or six years, following the tragic murder of Firsat Dag in Sighthill in 2001. The additional funding from the cashback programme has been welcome. Reidvale adventure playground in my constituency has also benefited. There are many good examples of activities for the young, but as others have said, we need more transparency in how projects are identified for funding. I ask the minister to clarify the process in his closing speech. Does a project board decide how funds are invested? It is important that the process is transparent and that we move forward on that basis. Those who have suffered because of criminal activities should see the proceeds of crime. As Michael Matheson and Tricia Marwick said, we should ensure that our communities are  empowered to apply for funding. That is another important aspect. All too often, it is those who are more informed or are considered more sophisticated whose applications for Government funding are successful. I am afraid to say that parts of my constituency such as Springburn, Ruchazie and Blackhill, Possilpark in Patricia Ferguson's constituency, and other areas have suffered dramatically because of drug barons. A number of members made the constructive point that those communities must be genuinely empowered to apply for funds. We should also examine the basic criteria for funding. After all, we want the majority of it to be provided to communities rather than to the authorities that fight crime. I know that certain police authorities in England and Wales have benefited from the cash that has been seized. Richard Baker raised the possibility of police chief constables looking for up to 50 per cent of the assets seized. I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary is dealing with that issue. I understand why police officers and other authorities that fight crime might find the prospect of keeping the cash appealing, and I realise that some might even argue that such a move would incentivise police officers, but I do not think that anyone should need to be incentivised in dealing with this matter. Instead, we should be motivated by our determination to humiliate criminals by stripping them of their wealth and ensuring that they get the message that they will not benefit from our communities and that we will stand up to them and their associates. The "Panorama" programme that was transmitted earlier in the year filmed Michael Voudouri, who pocketed more than £3 million from an international fraud scheme that he ran. According to the programme, Mr Voudouri, who served a prison sentence for his crime, now lives in a £2 million house in the Stirlingshire town of Bridge of Allan—in Richard Simpson's area, I understand—and drives a £60,000 car. We have to address the public's concern that although we deal with the perpetrators of crime, their families and associates still benefit from those crimes. Indeed, Bill Aitken has made the same point on a number of occasions. We must send a very clear message to those individuals that we will ensure that the law is on our side instead of, as Richard Baker has pointed out, the legal aid system apparently being on their side.

It would be completely wrong of us to draw conclusions on any section of the bill before we have interrogated it. However, as Bill Butler and Richard Simpson have pointed out, the issue of reasonable doubt was dealt with in the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 to ensure that the benefit of the doubt fell on the prosecution rather than on the perpetrators of crime. I ask the minister to reflect on some of the issues that have been raised in this consensual debate. Indeed, it has been proven this afternoon that we can reach a consensus on justice issues. However, the debate has also been challenging, with Margaret Curran in particular making some robust points about the criteria and the need to ensure that the communities that are most affected by crime feel that their needs have been identified. Those points must be dealt with. I ask members to support Richard Baker's amendment.

Does the member agree that, as we have said on several occasions in the Parliament, it is not solely young people who are involved in antisocial activity? We must consider why we are focusing the cashback scheme purely on activities for young people, as they are not the main contributors to antisocial behaviour.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to procure the proposed extension to Stobhill hospital in north Glasgow. (S3O-7114)

Will the minister join me in welcoming the £100 million investment in Stobhill hospital that was procured by the previous Scottish Executive? Will she bring forward proposals for the proposed extension, which will provide up to 60 short-stay beds? Does she propose to procure that investment by public-private partnership or by direct funding from the Government?

On behalf of Scottish Labour, I commend the Scottish Liberal Democrats for securing the debate. There is no doubt that the Amber alert system has great merit and would make a difference to the protection of children from people who pose a threat to community safety. A great achievement of the Parliament is that we can show unity when we give priority to children's safety. We have done that on a number of occasions. I experienced such unity when the sub-committee of the Justice 2 Committee in the previous session of the Parliament considered the management of registered sex offenders. The need to ensure children's safety lay at the heart of the sub-committee's report. Many parents have experienced that heart-stopping feeling when we momentarily lose sight of our child. The relief that we feel when we find them is indescribable. It must be unbearable for parents who are not so lucky—there are many well-publicised examples, such Kate and Gerry McCann. We need to be convinced that every opportunity is taken to enable a missing child to be found by the relevant authorities. The missing children alert scheme would provide added protection. Every year some 130,000 children go missing in Europe. We know that the sooner information on a missing child reaches the public, the greater the chance of tracing them. That is why the proposals for an EU-wide alert scheme are to be welcomed. We know that a similar system in the United States works well, as Robert Brown said. Since 2003, that scheme has recovered more than 400 children, of whom 80 per cent were recovered in the crucial first 72 hours. I am aware that the proposed scheme has the majority backing of MEPs, including Catherine Stihler and David Martin, and I hope that we are a step closer to ensuring that any child who goes missing in Europe is given the best chance of being recovered. As I said, every year, more than 130,000 children go missing in Europe. Most are returned within a week but, on average, each year six children are never found. The pain behind those statistics cannot be described. That should ensure our determination to progress the issue and look at every possible avenue to ensure the safety of our children. There is no doubt that a scheme  similar to the Amber alert scheme in the United States would save lives. The European Parliament's initiative is a good example of how Europe-wide action can make a real difference. The USA's Amber alert scheme operates in 13 states and has successfully saved the lives of many abducted children by breaking into media broadcasts to give details of suspected child abductions and by flashing up messages on highway signs that alert drivers to keep an eye out for children. Robert Brown spoke about the scheme's approach. The criteria that are used to trigger such alerts are as follows: the child should be under 16 and missing; a police officer of at least the rank of superintendent thinks that the child might suffer serious harm or death; the child must have been kidnapped or be suspected of having been kidnapped; and there must be sufficient descriptive details of the victim or the offender to justify the alert. Having spent 10 years as an MSP, it seems ridiculous and unacceptable to me that such a scheme is not already in place. Many of us have the notion that such a scheme should involve a much more sophisticated approach—I learned that as a result of scrutinising the legislation on the management of registered sex offenders. We live in a computer age. We use the internet, mobile communications, blogs and so on. Surely we can use such information technology to our advantage to ensure that our children are given every possible opportunity. The Parliament is at its best when we work together to ensure the safety of our children. I urge the minister to listen to all the parties' points of view and implement a scheme that plugs the gap that exists nationwide before more children go missing. I appreciate the challenges that the minister will face with many of the bureaucracies that exist throughout Europe, but it is extremely important that we progress the issue through this debate and the many other debates that will take place. I call on members to support the amendment in the name of Richard Baker. I move amendment S3M-4245.1, to insert after "UK Government": "and to encourage Scottish police forces to collaborate with their UK and European counterparts".

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to manage registered sex offenders. (S3O-7010)

On 24 March, I submitted a question to the minister requesting information on how many of the 33 recommendations of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee would be implemented. Despite receiving a holding response on 14 April, I have yet to receive a response to that inquiry. Eight weeks on, will the minister respond to the question that I submitted?

The First Minister will be aware of the 33 recommendations of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee in the previous session in connection with managing registered sex offenders. How many of those 33 recommendations have been responded to by the Government? Will the First Minister commit the Government to providing the kind of resources that will be required to deal with some of the most dangerous offenders on the planet?

On accepting his nomination as First Minister, Alex Salmond lectured the Parliament, saying: "The days of Scottish Government imposing its will on the Parliament are behind us, although I daresay that there might be days in the near future when I come to lament their passing."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 25.]  Does the cabinet secretary agree that the First Minister should regret having made that statement?

We have consistently argued, during many justice debates, that offenders must be dealt with robustly. We have also stressed the need for communities to have confidence in the justice system and for rehabilitation opportunities to be provided to offenders. As many members have suggested, the community courts model provides a structure for those opportunities to be delivered, but it is clear from the speeches of the apologists on the SNP benches that the SNP is out of touch with the reality that our communities face. Our communities want to see justice done, yet the SNP is the only main party in the Parliament that does not adequately support community courts. It is not only the main political parties that support community courts; the Lord Advocate said, in March 2007: "This court will be at the heart of the community, delivering justice that is swift, visible and informed by a thorough understanding of the offender's background and of the impact of the offence in the wider community."  With the greatest respect to the High Court in Glasgow, I do not consider it to be at the heart of the community. That was wise counsel from the Lord Advocate, who has significant experience of the courts in delivering justice for our communities. Frank McAveety referred to the proposal to develop a court in the Bridgeton area of his constituency. That proposal provided an opportunity to ensure that the courts would be seen as relevant and effective in providing solutions to many of the problems that Bridgeton and other parts of Glasgow face in respect of antisocial behaviour in our communities. We show humility sometimes and realise the need to be objective. We recognise that courts alone cannot solve all the problems, and so do our communities. We believe strongly that communities have a role in contributing to solving many community problems. Many communities sense that courts are removed, attitudinally and physically, from the problems they face. I do not believe that our courts properly appreciate the challenges that our communities face when they try to combat antisocial behaviour. As Richard Baker and other Labour members said, we support the principle of payback. That is why, in government, Cathy Jamieson did not just talk a good game but delivered the game. She delivered community reparation orders, which were scrapped by this Government. I have yet to speak to any community representative who does not want certain offenders to be given the opportunity to face up to their unacceptable actions. Reparation orders provided that very opportunity, and so too would community courts. The problem lies with the Government's unwillingness to fund community courts adequately. There can be no doubting that community courts will cost money but, with regard to the point Robert Brown made about the spend-to-save principle, I would say that spending money on community courts would save money in the long run. Compare the cost of a community court—£3.75 million, with annual costs of £700,000—with the effect that vandalism and antisocial behaviour have on our communities throughout Scotland. Courts often talk about low-level offences, but those so-called low-level offences are not low level to the communities that are affected by antisocial behaviour. I say that on behalf of my constituents and the pupils of Balornock primary school, whose playground project has been vandalised. They want action to be taken to stop antisocial behaviour. We believe that the community courts would have provided an opportunity for that to happen.  The debate has exposed this Government's lack of innovation. It is evident that the Government is good at posting glossy documents on its website but that when it comes to following that up with action it is posted missing. We call on the Scottish Parliament to support the amendment in the name of Richard Baker.

Does the minister support dispersal orders as a possible last resort in any community in Scotland?

I ask the member the question that I put to Robert Brown. If every avenue has been exhausted, should a penalty order such as an ASBO be served?

I respect many of the points that Michael Matheson is making in a considered way, but I ask him to name one community organisation that is mentioned in the document.

Does Robert Brown accept that some individuals will not respond to the diversion activities that we delivered in coalition Government? That is unfortunate, but it is a fact of life so such individuals need to be dealt with via a legal remedy. That is the only option left.

Our amendment makes it clear that although we note the framework—particularly its references to projects that were delivered in the Labour years, which we recognise—we must express our dismay that, after 18 months of review, the Government has provided little vision or leadership on how best to tackle antisocial behaviour in our communities throughout Scotland. Of course we want to prevent antisocial behaviour. That is why, when we were in government, we did not just talk a good game; we put money on the table for local authorities to spend on projects. That is why youthbuild and the clean Glasgow campaign were introduced, and that is why twilight basketball was introduced in the Labour years. Twilight basketball is an excellent project that has operated in my constituency and in other constituencies throughout Scotland. During the Labour years, we did not hide behind the so-called historic concordat—we took a direct interest in ensuring that diversionary activities were in place.  What is invisible in the document is any reference to the fact that sometimes we must use legal remedies to give our communities respite from the individuals who blight them. We should make no excuses for taking such actions. It is all very well for members, from the comfort of the chamber, to talk a good game about prevention, integration and all the other buzz words that appear in the document, and to launch nice, glossy documents with carefully orchestrated photographs.

I will do so in a moment. People who live in communities such as Blackhill that are blighted by antisocial behaviour do not benefit from that comfort zone and look to their local politicians to be on their side. Perhaps Mr Thompson would like to respond to that point.

Too many people, including the Government, are quick to make excuses for the tiny minority who perpetrate antisocial behaviour. It is a pity that such haste is not afforded to the majority of people in our communities, who want politicians genuinely to understand their plight and not to patronise them with warm words and glossy documents; we have heard such warm words in the chamber on many occasions. We want our communities to be safer and stronger and to feel confident and reassured that, when they report antisocial behaviour, we will follow through on their concerns in a concise and concentrated manner by taking action, where appropriate. We also want to give local communities the power to take action. That is why today we propose that they should be able to apply directly for antisocial behaviour orders. Our communities are best placed to stand up to the antisocial behaviour that they encounter, so they should be empowered to do so.

Labour members have made clear that they want to do both—it is a pity that other parties do not.  We call on the Government to consider the proposal that constituted community groups be given the power to apply for antisocial behaviour orders. All too often our communities must depend on others to pursue their concerns. Our proposal is a creative opportunity to give communities a real say in making their area a safer place in which to live. The Scottish Labour Party has said on many occasions—I make the point on the record again today—that the perpetrators of antisocial behaviour are not all young people. That was confirmed by closed-circuit television images that I saw when a dispersal order was being considered in my constituency. There is evidence that the perpetrators of antisocial behaviour have a number of different age profiles. However, we cannot move away from the fact both that young people are victims of the antisocial behaviour and that such behaviour is perpetrated by a tiny minority of young people. I welcome the minister's commitment to dealing with the issue of greater parental responsibility, which the chamber should not avoid. A minority of parents simply fail to take responsibility for their children's actions. Many of the young people who are involved in unacceptable behaviour are influenced by their parents, who lack parenting skills. All too often I hear from police officers who report that, when they return children to their homes, the parents are more concerned about missing an episode of "Eastenders" or the football than about dealing with their and their children's responsibilities. There is no God-given right to be a parent. Parenthood should be valued—members should frequently affirm that notion. We accept that families sometimes face difficulties and need support. That is why the 2004 act introduced parenting orders, which provide opportunities to address concerns.

I will come on to exactly that point. I am glad that the member raised the issue. Parenting orders provide opportunities to ensure that a young person is attending school and completing their homework and is at home and under supervision at certain times of night—that matter has been raised with members on a number of occasions. Anyone who attends meetings of community organisations will be aware of anecdotal evidence that many young people are unsupervised late in the evening, which is unacceptable. We should take action by imposing parenting orders, which we should regard as a positive intervention.  I say in response to Mr Lamont that I think that local authorities are not implementing parenting orders because of what I call the database of excuses. Officers who do not live in the community that is blighted by the antisocial behaviour think that the issue is not their problem. The Government talks about the cost of implementing antisocial behaviour orders for under-16s. I am sure that Mr Fergus Ewing will mention that, but I ask him to consider the cost of repairing my constituent's car, which had battery acid poured over it after she spoke out against antisocial behaviour. There are many such stories throughout Scotland. A bus company spent £1 million in one year on repairing 8,000 broken windows. Dundee City Council paid out more than £800,000 on repairs as a result of vandalism. Those are the costs to people of antisocial behaviour.

We should ensure that we stand up for communities, which should not be left by the Government to stand alone. We will be on the side of the majority of constituents throughout Scotland. We will stand up to unacceptable behaviour. We will make no excuses for the tiny minority who engage in such behaviour. We will ensure that all possible opportunities are provided for such people, but we will stand up not just to young people who engage in antisocial behaviour but to anyone whose behaviour is unacceptable and should be challenged. The majority of people in our communities want to live constructive and peaceful lives. We should encourage them to do so and make them aware that we will take action to deal with people who cross the line. I ask members to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S3M-3849.2, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: "believes that too many communities in Scotland are still blighted by antisocial behaviour and recognises that the Antisocial Behaviour etc. (Scotland) Act 2004 was a response to these concerns; further believes that there should not be reduced use of legal remedies, which have been effective in providing individuals and communities with relief from the selfish activities of a minority; recognises that while the Antisocial Behaviour Framework is right to highlight good practice and preventative measures, such initiatives must be properly resourced; acknowledges that, while only a small minority of young people engage in antisocial behaviour, parental responsibility is crucial in addressing this problem, and believes in widening access to legal remedies for communities that wish to tackle problems of antisocial behaviour in their areas."

To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to tackle gang-related violence. (S3F-1578)

The First Minister will agree that gang-related violence is unacceptable and blights far too many communities throughout Scotland. I seek assurances from him that, in tackling such unacceptable behaviour, the Government will stop making excuses for the tiny minority of people who commit antisocial behaviour and start to represent the majority of decent men, women and children in our communities by ensuring that it delivers the legal measures in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, which was introduced by the previous Executive. Will the Scottish Government enforce those measures properly instead of diluting them, as is set out in "Promoting Positive Outcomes: Working Together to Prevent Antisocial Behaviour in Scotland"?

Given that the Government so enjoys subject debates and Government debates that, on many occasions, are to discuss absolutely nothing, it is a pity that we have had to use our Opposition time to extract from the Government its so-called commitment to delivering 17,265 officers, as promised in its manifesto. We will not allow the Government to hide behind the police force projection study and will hold it to account on its commitment to delivering the 1,000 police officers. For so long, the Government has sought to condition our thinking on this issue. Perhaps we were mistaken. As Robert Brown said, perhaps the manifesto commitment was to deliver the  equivalent of 1,000 more police officers. Perhaps the commitment was to set up a fund that would allow police authorities to bid for money to put police officers on our streets. It is time for the Government to be open and accountable. When Alex Salmond was elected as First Minister on 16 May 2007, he said that this is "a Parliament of minorities where no one party rules without compromise or concession."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 24.]  This is an opportunity for the Government to deliver the principles behind those fine words. I find it unacceptable that I had to appeal to the Scottish Information Commissioner, following the Government's rejection of my request under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 for information on how it would deliver its police recruitment figures. I am delighted that the commissioner has upheld my request and I look forward to receiving the information by 23 March. As I said in a recent debate, Labour members are reasonable and fair individuals. We simply want to be given the opportunity to scrutinise a minority Government. That is why I support Richard Baker's call for an independent report. That would give the Parliament an opportunity to appraise properly many of the challenges that face Government on a day-to-day basis. Perhaps the Justice Committee could assist the Government in the process. That would also give the Parliament an opportunity to highlight the support that Labour councils throughout Scotland have given the Government on recruitment. My council—Glasgow City Council—has contributed to the recruitment of more than 200 police officers and yet we have heard not one reference from a Government minister on the subject. Perhaps the cabinet secretary might like to intervene. I am happy to let him credit Glasgow City Council for its contribution.

That was yet another contribution of the sort that we have had to take from the Government today. That said, I welcome the commitment to and the fine words about Glasgow City Council. Community groups in my constituency in Glasgow have told me of their concern that  community planning budgets are being used to pay for police recruits. They have told me that that is to the detriment of many local projects, which are experiencing budget cuts. The groups welcome the deployment of recruits in their communities, but not to the detriment of local community projects. Labour will support the Liberal Democrat amendment in the name of Robert Brown, which sets out eloquently the frustration that many members feel in trying to extract any clarity from the Government on its position. Once again, I am happy to give way to the cabinet secretary to enable him to say those magic words, "There shall be 17,265 police officers in Scotland by 2011."

Once again, we failed to hear the magic words. Let me be clear that we will not take lectures from members opposite on police numbers. We not only provided additional officers when we were in government but gave them the legal remedies to do their job of attacking antisocial behaviour through the delivery of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. That act was widely acclaimed by police forces throughout Scotland, which said that it provided them with the toolkit that they required to fight crime. Now that this Government is in power, it is making clear its intention to dismantle all the remedies that are available to our officers. New recruits have the thankless task of being governed by the hug-a-hoodie alliance of the SNP and the Tories. We will not support the Tory amendment. Its content reeks of this sad alliance's desperation for attention. It reminds me of a saying of the great Abraham Lincoln: "I am a success today because I had a friend who believed in me and I didn't have the heart to let him down." We are delighted to have extracted key information from the Government on its manifesto, but we have yet to extract one bit of information. I ask the cabinet secretary again to say the magic words that he will deliver 17,265 police officers. That is a pledge that we will hold him to. I call on members to support the motion in Richard Baker's name and the amendment in Robert Brown's name.

I congratulate Patrick Harvie on the progress that he has made so far on the bill. Members who are progressing a member's bill, or who have completed that process, appreciate the hard work and commitment that are required to progress a bill through the Parliament. At decision time, Labour members will support the motion in Patrick Harvie's name, "That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Offences (Aggravation by Prejudice) (Scotland) Bill." Most of those who gave evidence to the Justice Committee were genuinely supportive of the aims of the bill and were clear on its provisions and what it would achieve. I will highlight some of the issues that were raised in the stage 1 process. The committee recognised that the common-law system allows courts to take account of aggravating factors in determining sentences. However, a number of witnesses told us that the common law cannot send a clear message that such hate crimes are unacceptable in Scotland. The general feeling was that having a statutory aggravation will address the motivation behind such crimes. On balance, Labour members are content that the statutory aggravations should be created. We need to ensure that we take every possible step to send out a clear message to those who commit  crimes of hatred because of an individual's presumed sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability. The bill contains no provision for mandatory sentences. Many witnesses made the case that an appropriate response was the way forward and that the judiciary should have discretion in sentencing. Although I accept the right of the judiciary to have discretion in sentencing, I believe that we need to monitor carefully the effectiveness of sentencing policy in dealing with those who commit hate crimes. The Parliament needs to acknowledge the unacceptable fact that some individuals react only to the possibility of a prison sentence. Patrick Harvie has to take that into consideration and he may want to address it in his closing speech. Although the community sentencing disposals to which Tim Hopkins referred in his evidence can be considered as a serious alternative to prison, I am not convinced that they are always appropriate sentencing options for the perpetrators of the crimes that were described to the committee. The bill requires that, in recording a conviction that contains an aggravation relating to disability, sexual orientation or transgender identity, the court must do so in a manner that shows that the offence was motivated by prejudice on one of those grounds. The step is to be welcomed, but I would have expected such information to be recorded at present, although we heard evidence about the difficulties of recording such crimes. On a positive note, Superintendent David Stewart told the committee that recording these statutory aggravations will give police forces baseline figures to work from and allow them to target resources. That is a positive step in the right direction. There can be no doubt that training plays a crucial role in raising awareness of legislation. As we have heard on many occasions in the chamber, it is important for new legislation to be implemented consistently and robustly. In this case, additional resources may be required. I would welcome a commitment from the minister in his closing speech that resources will be provided to the relevant agencies. There is no point in passing the bill if crimes are not reported, so we must ensure that victims are given respect and proper consideration. In its written submission, the Royal National Institute for Deaf People Scotland stated: "deaf and hard of hearing people are even less likely to report crimes against them because some find it difficult to access police services. For example, police stations may struggle to find interpreters at short notice when deaf people who use BSL as a first language want to report a crime. As a young deaf man who tried to report a crime at his local police station recalls: 'I had to wait for an  interpreter at the police station from 4.30pm to 10pm and in the end, I was tired.'" If people are to be convinced that they should report crimes and that they will be taken seriously, we must ensure that an action plan is in place to deal with such experiences. I call on the Parliament to support the motion.

The leader of Glasgow City Council advises me that he would be willing to postpone his plans under the school estate strategy if the Government was willing to provide additional funding to allow new schools to be built. Will the cabinet secretary make representations to Mr Swinney, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth, to allow for a new school building programme of the kind that took place under the previous Scottish Government?

We have heard powerful speeches, particularly from members who support the bill. The Justice Committee, of which I am a member, carefully considered a wide range of issues during the passage of the bill. During the process I learned a great deal about asbestos and its history. For example, I learned that asbestos has been known to be a poisonous substance since 1892. I heard from people who had worked with asbestos about employers' unacceptable practices. The negligence of employers is an important aspect of the debate, as the minister made clear. During the committee's consideration I listened carefully to the case that the insurance industry made. First, the industry said that it was concerned that premiums could increase; then it  said that they would increase; then it was not quite sure. The industry provided the committee with little evidence to back up its views. I listened with interest to Derek Brownlee's comments on amendment 9. Derek Brownlee says that he is concerned about post-legislative scrutiny, but he has not remained in the chamber for the debate. He wants the Scottish Government to make a commitment to seeing things through, but he has shown little commitment to doing that himself. I am pleased that the Parliament rejected amendment 9, which was ill thought out. I am disappointed that Mr Brownlee's party singled out the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Bill for special treatment. John Lamont talked about uncertainty. I do not want to lecture members, but all members—especially those who have been in the Parliament since 1999—know that the Parliament faces challenges to do with uncertainty almost daily.

Conservatives have proposed a template for scrutinising legislation in the future. I look forward to hearing more about their proposals. The Parliament has faced challenges with regard to other bills. I remember a similar debate about the Smoking, Health and Social Care (Scotland) Bill, when businesses raised concerns about the potential impact that the ban would have on them. I also remember such a debate regarding the Licensing (Scotland) Bill in 2005. This is not the first time that the Parliament has faced challenges regarding the impact that legislation will have on businesses. Nigel Don eloquently crystallised many of the issues, which were worth raising. Having listened to the debates on the matter, I am clear that the bill should be passed with no ifs, buts or maybes. The hard-working men and women who were negligently exposed to asbestos have had enough of the insurance industry's attempts to evade its responsibilities. It is time for the Parliament to put that wrong right. The Parliament should be proud of the stance that it has taken on behalf of the many hard-working men and women throughout Scotland who were negligently—I make that point again—exposed to asbestos. Like others who spoke in the debate, I pay tribute to the trade unions, such as Unite, that played a role alongside Clydeside Action on  Asbestos and the other groups that raised issues on behalf of those who have been affected by asbestos. I note the important role that Frank Maguire played on behalf of Thompsons Solicitors. It was evident to me during the committee's consideration of the bill that the insurance industry was well represented and spared no expense in legal matters. I am delighted that the hard-working men and women were given the same opportunity for legal representation by Thompsons Solicitors. The process highlighted the important role that the unions play in ensuring that our workers are fairly treated and given legal representation in the workplace. The bill deals with an industrial legacy in Scotland that needs to be put right. It is important that we grasp the opportunity to put that shameful legacy behind us. I call on the Parliament to support the passing of the bill.

I agree that the £50 million is a significant sum that can be put to better use. Can I take it from what the cabinet secretary has said that that £50 million will not be provided for the prison estate? I would like a yes or no answer, please.

Many of the 1.2 million people who voted SNP during the 2007 Scottish Parliament elections marked their crosses on the ballot paper in the belief that the SNP Government would deliver 1,000 more police officers in addition to the 16,265 it inherited from the previous Government, but it is becoming clear that the SNP Government will fail to deliver on its promise.

I will give way in a moment. Let us be fair in this respect. Many of us on the Labour seats are fair and reasonable individuals—Margaret Curran, Johann Lamont and Hugh  Henry, among others. We can be reasonable, and we accept that the Government faces many challenges in delivering its manifesto commitments. The SNP Government has created a niche market in blaming the Opposition when the going gets tough. Let us be clear—we do not oppose the Government's plan to deliver 1,000 more police officers than it inherited, but what we need from the Government is for it to show humility, and not the projection study that Nicola Sturgeon mentioned.

I will not take lectures from Mike Russell on fairness. Today's debate gives the SNP Government the opportunity to say that it is sorry to the Scottish people for its broken promises, including the failure to deliver an increase in the number of police officers to 17,265 by 2011. I sense that some SNP members are perplexed by my comments, but they have this opportunity to rebut what I have said. I see that both Kenny Gibson, who is an ambitious back bencher, and Nigel Don, who is a veteran member of the Justice Committee, are in the chamber. They have this opportunity to rebut my comments by confirming that the Government will have 17,265 police officers in place as per the SNP's manifesto commitment. I will welcome a rebuttal from Kenny Gibson on that point.

I welcome that point from the ambitious back bencher, Kenny Gibson. I wonder what that commitment will do to his career. We can watch with interest. SNP members also have the opportunity to correct me if I am wrong in saying that, of the 441 police officers to whom Kenny Gibson referred, 197 were recruited by money that was provided by local authorities. In press reports earlier this week, rather than express his thanks to local authorities for making sacrifices in their budgets to bail him out, Mr MacAskill sought to put the SNP's spin on the very little progress that has been made and on the budgetary commitments that the Government  has failed to make. As I have said on many previous occasions, it is unacceptable that the SNP Government should claim that its interventions have made a difference to police numbers. I have a restricted document with me today that confirms that, despite the SNP Government's conditioning of the public message, the SNP's interventions have not made a difference on police numbers. The document shows that many of our police authorities intended to review their recruitment levels regardless of the Government's intervention. On previous occasions, many members have asked why the Labour Party did not promise to deliver 1,000 extra police officers, so I remind them that making the promise is easy, but delivering on the promise is the challenge. The people will judge the Government not on the promises that it made but on the broken promises on which it has not delivered. I remind Tricia Marwick that, although that might be what the SNP Government stands for, that is not what the Labour Party stands for. We stand for honesty and for giving the people of Scotland manifesto commitments on which we will deliver. On tackling alcohol abuse, there can be no doubt that the Scottish Government—through the offices of Kenny MacAskill—has grabbed many of the headlines. One of those has been that the polluter should pay. In August 2007, Mr MacAskill said: "The effects of alcohol on our city and town centres is not cost free and those who profit from it must contribute to addressing it. It's not right that taxpayers pick up the whole of the bill, licensees should pay their way too." Such a "get tough" message on alcohol abuse from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has received support on previous occasions from those of us on the Labour benches. During the passage of the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005, I lodged an amendment that would have allowed us to ensure that the polluter pays, but my amendment was opposed by Fergus Ewing and Bruce Crawford. Because of their opposition, we were unable to introduce that polluter-pays principle. Mike Rumbles—whom I see on the other side of the chamber—will recall that amendment. The polluter-pays principle is not accepted by all members of the Scottish Government, which is divided on the issue. I remind the Government that opposition to the polluter-pays principle came not from the Labour benches but from the SNP benches. In conclusion, I call on the Parliament to support the motion in the name of Johann Lamont.

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to tackle alcohol abuse. (S3F-1483)

On 29 August 2007, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said: "The effects of alcohol on our city and town centres is not cost-free and those who profit from it must contribute to addressing it." Despite recent media reports suggesting another U-turn on Government policy, will the First Minister confirm that he will continue to implement the policy announced by his cabinet secretary, which is the principle that the polluter should pay?

In any debate on policing, it is important at the outset to acknowledge the important role that police officers play in ensuring community safety in all our communities. We learned in the Justice Committee inquiry that police officers show a great deal of commitment, sometimes in very difficult circumstances. It is important to put that on the record. It has been recognised that the inquiry was a useful opportunity to highlight constructively how we can improve local delivery of policing resources. I will refer to several key issues that the committee raised. The committee recommended that community police officers should be in post for at least two years. It is fair to say that the lack of continuity of community police officers causes great concern in many communities throughout Scotland. In my experience as an elected representative for more than 15 years, the issue is one of the top five complaints that I receive from constituents. Communities realise that local police officers  should be given the opportunity to build relationships in communities and that such relationships are impossible if there is a high turnover of officers. Although we all accept that such decisions are for chief constables, it would be wrong of chief constables or the Scottish Government to ignore the legitimate concerns that communities throughout Scotland have raised.

Anecdotal evidence that I hope all members have received indicates that police officers want continuity and that they understand the importance of stable relationships with communities. Officers being in post for at least two years would be a step in the right direction. The Justice Committee heard consistent evidence that a stable and continuing relationship is important. As the report states, many people accept that the high turnover of community police officers results in poor knowledge and a poor service to the public. The Justice Committee discussed abstraction of police officers from our communities and the need for a policy to dictate a presumption against that. Although many chief constables, including Stephen House of Strathclyde Police, have said that they want to take steps to minimise abstraction of community police officers, doing so can sometimes be difficult, given competing demands for officers. I recently observed the policing operations during a Rangers and Celtic game at Ibrox football ground, at which it was clear that many of the 500 police officers had been abstracted from communities throughout the west of Scotland. Although we should accept that such events require police resources, it is important to accept that football clubs, for example, should be required to compensate police authorities properly for the time that police officers spend at events such as football games. Although the committee report does not go into detail on that issue, it is worth raising. There can be no doubt that sharing good practice among police forces is the way forward. We heard about many examples of good practice in police forces. However, it is important to put on record that there was virtually no evidence on how good practice is shared among the forces. I would welcome a brief intervention from the cabinet secretary to assure us that good practice is being shared among police forces.

We have learned during the inquiry that what is displayed in flowcharts and presentations does not necessarily work in practice locally. Although there is sometimes a tendency for police boards to be parochial, that is not exclusive to police boards and happens throughout civic life in Scotland. We have to ensure that we in Parliament show leadership to ensure that good practice is shared, so I welcome the minister's constructive intervention in that regard. The committee recognised that there is scope for further research into where good practice can be shared, and also for taking more evidence on the effectiveness of the various policing models that are being developed throughout Scotland. We accept that one size does not fit all, and that there are examples of good practice that more effective independent research might develop. The Government gave a commitment to deliver 1,000 more police officers than the 16,236 officers that it inherited in May 2007. We on the Labour benches will ensure that it is held to account on that promise. It is important to recognise that if our policing models are to be successful, the Government should be held to account on its commitment.

As we conclude our consideration of the bill at stage 1, it would, on reflection, be fair to say that all the parties that are represented on the Justice Committee have made a genuine attempt to ensure that we meet the many challenges that face modern society, particularly those relating to sexual offences. In the short time that is available to me, I will touch on a few of the key issues. Part 4 of the bill is on children. The policy memorandum states that sections 14 to 19 aim to protect young people. I welcome that. I have no doubt that all members support the public's view that we must ensure that we protect young children at every possible opportunity. Many provisions in part 4 of the bill will do that. We welcome the Government's approach in that respect and its commitment to progressing the issues involved. We also welcome the cabinet secretary's statement on the provisions in the bill that send out a message to young people that it will be possible to prosecute those aged 13 to 15 who engage in sexual activity. In addition, I welcome his statement that that will happen in a minority of cases and that every opportunity will be sought to use services that are available through the children's hearings system. However, we should ensure that young people are aware that engaging in underage sex presents many long-term health problems and we should seek to prevent those problems at every possible opportunity. We also need to make it clear to young people that we will support them at every possible opportunity.

Margo MacDonald makes a good point. Sometimes we in this chamber have to show humility and say that we are not very good at consulting young people and I am sure that other committee members agree that we need to be more effective at communicating with young people. I assure Margo MacDonald that I will come back to that point later in my speech. If the Government genuinely wants to make progress, it must ensure that it takes on board some of the views that were raised by those who gave evidence to the committee at stage 1. The Government has got it wrong in its justification for treating oral sex differently from penetrative sex and it should reconsider its position. I understand  that the minister will consider that point and I look forward to having constructive discussions. In response to Margo MacDonald's question, I refer her to one of the committee's recommendations, which was the need for meaningful and age-appropriate materials to be provided to young people in order to support them during the difficult adolescent period of their lives and to give them every opportunity to make positive lifestyle choices. I hope that in his summing up, the minister will give us some assurances that he will consider how we can communicate more effectively with young people and ensure that they are given such opportunities. Section 35 creates the offence of the "Sexual abuse of trust of a mentally disordered person". We on the Labour benches welcome that provision. We all recognise that those who have mental health conditions can be extremely vulnerable. We should take steps to ensure that individuals who are in a position of trust are not provided with an opportunity to abuse. The Lord Advocate offered a powerful statement in her evidence to the committee: "The exploitation of mentally disordered people's vulnerability must be dealt with in the most draconian way and should include a deterrence element."—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 25 November 2008; c 1438.] The Lord Advocate's commitment to dealing with the issue is to be welcomed and we should ensure that her point is developed in the enforcement of the legislation after the bill is passed at stage 3. The committee considered carefully the subject of sexual assault by penetration. We received authoritative evidence from many organisations that deal with victims throughout the country, setting out the trauma endured by those who have been assaulted. The committee reached the unanimous view that there should be a separate offence of rape with an object, or with another part of the body, limited to vaginal or anal penetration. What is key is that the committee recommended unanimously that the offence should attract the same penalties as rape. We acknowledge that such a provision exists in England and Wales and we on the Labour benches call on the Scottish Government to take that recommendation forward, ensuring that we learn lessons from the challenges that England and Wales have faced in that respect. I refer the chamber to schedule 1 to the bill, which sets out the penalties for offences. As I read schedule 1, it sets out the frightening anomaly that the rape of a child could result in a fine. I am convinced that no member in the chamber, or any sensible person in society, wants to envisage a situation in which an offender was fined for such a despicable act. The cabinet secretary has advised  us, in his response to the committee's stage 1 report, that he will ensure that the possibility of imposing a fine as a sole penalty for rape will be dealt with at stage 2 and that under no circumstances will the anomaly apply. I welcome that, and the mature and constructive discussion that has taken place about the matter. I repeat that we agree with the bill's general principles, subject to the committee's constructive points being dealt with positively by the Scottish Government.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to tackle poverty and income inequality. (S3O-5485)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive answer. However, why does the Scottish Government's document, "Achieving Our Potential: A Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland", not contain year-on-year targets for achieving the aims that he has set out?

I note that in his document entitled, "Protecting Scotland's Communities", the Cabinet Secretary for Justice wants to ensure that our communities "feel as safe and crime free as possible." The Labour Party is arguing that scrapping six-month sentences just does not equate to protecting our communities. Bill Butler has said a number of times that we need to recognise that there are some serious individuals who need to be imprisoned for the safety of our communities, which should not be jeopardised by the Scottish Government's drive to empty our jails because it has failed and because it is so inept and lethargic when it comes to procuring our new prisons. I call on the cabinet secretary to confirm when the new Low Moss prison will be complete. I am not interested in the construction start date or in the procurement process at this time—that will be a debate for later. We want to know when the prison will be complete. I would be more than happy to accept an intervention from the cabinet secretary on that point, but he is not willing to make one. A number of members expressed genuine concerns about how the Government will ensure that the many measures that are set out in the document will be delivered. We want to know how they will be delivered in financial terms. The document will mean nothing unless the Government sets out clearly how it will ensure that the resources for a "fair, fast and flexible" justice system are delivered. It is not good enough simply to produce a glossy document that says nothing about how the Government will deliver on it. Robert Brown, Bill Butler and Bill Aitken all made that point a number of times. It is about attention to detail and about ensuring that we know how the measures will be taken forward. Delivering a "fair, fast and flexible" justice system will be resource intensive—I think every member who spoke made that point a number of times. It will require new programmes for payback schemes and additional resourcing for drug treatment and testing orders, to which Richard Simpson referred. The money is simply not there. If the minister is confident that the money is there, he should show us. I am happy for the minister to give us a chance at some point—perhaps in another document—to follow the money so that we can ensure that it is brought forward.  The Government must stop hiding behind the so-called historic concordat, which is now prehistoric, and show leadership by making it clear how it wishes to advance its vision. A number of members asked why Labour members are so strongly opposed to the scrapping of six-month sentences, and accusations have been made that Richard Baker and Bill Aitken are competing for right-wing credentials. We are opposed to the scrapping of six-month sentences because we are in touch with the realities of our local communities. We are on the side of the people in those communities and we understand their genuine concerns about community safety. Bill Butler was extremely effective in amplifying those concerns on behalf of his constituents. We will take every opportunity to express the genuine concerns of our constituents. Many offenders have been given two, three, four or five opportunities to mend their ways. For us, the safety of our communities is the paramount consideration. It is simply not good enough to make statements in a glossy document: the Government must mean what it says. Of course we want to provide opportunities for people to be rehabilitated inside and outside our prisons, but we must at the same time consider our communities. The Government's document mentions the kind of alternatives to custody that offenders would be involved in. The section entitled "Paying back to communities" gives the example of the wibbly-wobbly wall that was built by offenders in Orkney. Is that an example of the tough alternatives to custody that Henry McLeish mentioned in the Scottish Prison Commission's report? Wibbly-wobbly walls have been built by offenders for many years—in recent years, Bill Aitken might even have given a number of people community service sentences that have involved such activities. Community service has been carried out for decades. The wibbly-wobbly wall that has been built in Orkney is not an example of "innovation", so why does the minister refer to it as such? Community service orders have been available for decades; they are not an innovation. Although the idea of payback sounds good, we must track offenders more effectively after payback, once they have served their sentences. Labour has said on several occasions that no effective evaluation has been carried out to ensure that community disposals work. The Government's policy is based on the assumption that the judiciary's increased use of custody over the years reflects dissatisfaction with the rigour of community-based alternatives and that if community sentences were more rigorous, more severe sentencers would make more use of them, thereby reducing their use of custodial  sentences. That is a simplistic belief. As Bill Aitken acknowledged, many factors come into play, including the offender's circumstances, their condition, the nature of the offence and the nature of the offender's past convictions. The Government's commentary that sheriffs are using community sentences to deal with daft laddies who need a bit of tender loving care simply does not add up. The Government must address such issues. As Labour members, we are proud of our record on justice. When it mattered to local communities, we were on their side. That will always be the case. I am delighted that my colleague Dave Stewart will lodge a proposal for a member's bill to set up a new victims commissioner, which I hope will receive the support of members of other parties. I call on members to support the motion in the name of Richard Baker.

We all agree that drink driving is unacceptable and that we should all work together to root out the problem. I have met families who have lost loved ones because of drunk drivers. The pain and devastation that are caused to victims and their families should motivate us all to root out the problem and work together with our Westminster colleagues. This should not become a constitutional debate about seeking differences of opinion.

I note that Mr MacAskill makes a comment from a sedentary position. I am sorry to have to make this point, and will do it as constructively as possible, but the minister has been missing for two thirds of the debate. It is disappointing that a minister should be missing from such an important debate. Perhaps Mr Stevenson can give us an explanation for that when he winds up. We have not talked about random breath testing today. I have always been of the opinion that, as a law-abiding driver, I have nothing to fear from random breath testing. I believe that random breath testing is an effective detection method that would help our police officers. If we are serious about tackling drink driving, we should support our police officers in every way possible, including providing them with the legal remedies that allow them to show initiative.

I understand that ACPOS has, in the past, supported the introduction of random breath testing.

I welcome that helpful intervention from Richard Simpson, who is well versed in such matters. It is important that Parliament pay tribute to police forces throughout the UK, who over the years have led a number of highly successful public awareness campaigns that have changed perceptions of drink driving, which in previous generations was an acceptable practice. There is no getting away from the fact that—as Bill Aitken, Aileen Campbell and others have said—drink driving used to be tolerated. Aileen Campbell gave  a clear example of the cavalier attitude that existed. We have moved forward, and we should acknowledge that we have done so as a result of some extremely constructive public awareness campaigns that have set out a zero-tolerance approach to drink driving. In our amendment, we make the point that if we are to continue with such high-profile campaigns against drink driving, we must ensure that the Government provides the necessary resources. We agree that greater use should be made of technology to detect whether drivers are under the influence of drugs so that they can be dealt with. Stewart Stevenson mentioned some of the technology that is being developed. The Tory amendment makes the constructive point that we must be vigilant at all times of the year. To be fair, there are a number of good examples of police authorities that are. During Dave Thompson's members' business debate on the subject, Claire Baker referred to a number of successful initiatives in her region, including the successful safe drive, stay alive campaign in Fife, which is sponsored by Diageo. It works with senior pupils and college students to consider a range of issues that face new drivers, and it emphasises the dangers of drink driving. I note that around 1,500 young people take part in the project every year. The project's content reflects the findings of statistical evidence and feedback from emergency services personnel. We sometimes miss out the emergency services when it comes to feedback. Consultation is also done with education officers and road users. We must welcome the innovative and hard-hitting approach that the safe drive, stay alive campaign has adopted, particularly its involvement of the parents of road accident victims and other victims. Our amendment recognises that the consultation that the UK Government is carrying out on road safety and related matters offers a holistic approach to the five key areas of speeding, drink driving, seatbelt wearing, drug driving and careless driving. I believe that the Department for Transport's consultation is a fair and comprehensive document. In relation to the point that Mr Brown and Mr Finnie—who has left the chamber—made, I refer to the consultation's invitation to respondents to say "what priority they think should be given to a change in the prescribed alcohol limit for driving". The consultation could not be any clearer; it will provide opportunities to respond on that specific issue. I will not take any lectures from a Government that has passed only one piece of justice legislation and one piece of transport legislation in  21 months and that has passed a total of only seven bills since it came to power. I will not take any lectures on the ability of the SNP Government to make quicker progress on the issue than the Westminster Government, which has set out its timetable. Suggestions have been made that the UK Government might be considering the introduction of powers that would allow the courts to gain new sentencing powers that would require repeat or serious offenders to have alcolocks fitted to their cars after they have served bans. Richard Simpson dealt with the matter constructively. We believe that alcolocks, which work by linking the ignition to an onboard breathalyser, constructively use the technology available to deal with persistent offenders who take every opportunity to evade the law. This is not the last time we will debate this issue. I hope that the Scottish Government will show leadership by putting aside its differences with Westminster and working together on this issue with our colleagues in the Department for Transport. I beg Parliament to support Richard Baker's amendment.

Does the minister recognise that the European norm for penalties for drink driving is much less than the norm in the UK?

I am sure that we all agree that our communities are now much safer as a result of the imprisonment of Peter Tobin for the rest of his life. In light of the fact that DNA played such a crucial role in bringing Peter Tobin and others to justice, will the First Minister assure the chamber that he will keep an open mind on how we can legislate further to give our police officers additional powers in connection with the retention of DNA samples?

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to its news release of 12 November 2007 that stated that an extra 150 police officers would be recruited by the end of the financial year, whether those were recruits whom chief constables were already planning to recruit. (S3O-5085)

Last November, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice promised the Parliament that he would recruit an additional 150 police officers by the end of the financial year. I have in my possession a legally obtained document prepared by a senior police officer that confirms that the introduction of the so-called additional 150 police officers was already being planned by chief constables throughout Scotland. Will the cabinet secretary apologise to the Parliament for failing to meet his commitment to deliver those additional police officers and for his blatant attempt to cook the books?

Has the cabinet secretary discussed with the chief constables the possibility of providing headcams to police officers? The experience of the police force in Plymouth demonstrated that the introduction of such new technology helped to reduce bureaucracy, increase the number of offenders brought to justice, and reduce crime. Would the cabinet secretary consider such a proposal?

The minister raises the issue of the economic decline that we currently face. Is he also concerned about the money that has been spent on the national conversation?

If the Calman commission needed evidence of a Government that showed little interest in its existing powers and more interest in the powers that it did not have, it need look no further than the current SNP Government, which enjoys the  trappings of power but does little when it comes to taking responsibility for government. Patrick Harvie has done a disservice to the links that we have formed with Malawi. The Parliament has close bonds with Malawi and I have welcomed residents of Malawi to my constituency. To say that we should not have debated Malawi in the way that we did—[ Interruption. ] I ask members to excuse me while I clarify the point. I did not say that we should not have done so. The way in which we debated Malawi was by ensuring that we used the powers that are available to the Scottish Parliament to take forward our effective relationship with Malawi.

May I clarify the point? I listened intently to what Mr Harvie said. Mr Harvie said that the Parliament debated Malawi. The Parliament debated Malawi in respect of the powers that we have available to us—we did not encroach on the powers that are available to Westminster. I reiterate that point for Mr Harvie. The key point for Labour members is that the national identity scheme will allow people to prove their identity more easily. It will be harder for their identity to be stolen or misused because it will be protected by biometrics, and we believe that the scheme can prevent criminals from using false or multiple identities. We have said that on a number of occasions. A serious point that every member of the Opposition parties has ignored is the fact that identity fraud is a problem. That problem, which is also being ignored by the Government, costs the public more than £1.7 billion a year on the latest estimates. We must acknowledge that we have a responsibility to provide extra protection to those high-profile targets that terrorists have targeted in the past, particularly airports. I am delighted that the Home Secretary, Jacqui Smith, has shown real leadership in introducing new measures using identity cards for baggage handlers, check-in staff, aircraft engineers and immigration and customs officials.

The debating points that we make here sometimes use examples from other countries. In this country, I did not expect the terrorist attack that took place in June last year, and I am afraid that we have had to react to that incident. I did not expect that to happen in this country. We believe that those new measures will deliver a strengthened identity assurance regime, making pre-employment and security checks much easier for airside workers. We believe that that is the way forward. Another area in which identity cards can be a success is employment. We cannot ignore the fact that there are employers out there, in our communities, who would willingly employ illegal workers and pay them well under the minimum wage. Not only does that have a negative impact on the local economy, but it is grossly unfair to those employees and employers who go about their business in a legitimate manner. The introduction of ID cards will provide an opportunity for technology to be used to prevent such practices from taking place and will leave unscrupulous employers in no doubt that their activities will be detected and, possibly, prevented. A number of members have been extremely exercised about the information that will be held on the ID cards. Mr Rumbles is concerned that we would hold a picture of him on the card. It is not often that politicians do not want their pictures taken—I do not recall Mr Rumbles being concerned previously about pictures being taken in this chamber or outside this chamber. Indeed, I am sure that, on Mr Rumbles's website, there are a number of press releases that include photographs of him.

I am sure that we will check that statement for accuracy later. The only information that is not provided on my photocard driving licence but which will be provided on the ID card is two fingerprints, which will be encrypted in the card. There is not much difference between the ID card and the photocard driving licence or any of the other cards that members of this chamber possess. The issue of public support has been raised by a number of members. Independently conducted polls consistently show strong support for the principle of ID cards—recent research shows that support to be as high as 59 per cent. I take on board the point that Robert Brown made, which is that public support has reduced as a result of the loss of data throughout the period. However, I am clear that the agencies that are responsible for the  holding of such data need to show greater care when they are handling and holding that data. I do not think that Mr Ewing responded to my earlier question about information that has been lost by the Scottish Government over the past 18 months. An uncontested press release from Richard Simpson confirms that Nicola Sturgeon has presided over the largest loss of confidential files in Scottish history. More than 1 million confidential files have been lost by the SNP Government—that is the piece of information that Mr Ewing was unable to provide the Parliament with. I will not take lectures on this matter from this Government. I remind Christine Grahame that she described previous incidents involving the loss of national health service files as "extremely alarming". I am sure that she is also alarmed that her party's Government has managed to lose more than 1 million confidential health files. Once again, I protest about the way in which the Government treats this chamber like a debating society. When our prisons are bulging, our councils are facing massive cuts and our communities are living in fear, it would be better if the Government debated the issues that our communities face instead of taking every possible opportunity to pick a fight with Westminster. We oppose the Government's motion and the Opposition parties' amendments.

Have there been any instances when the Scottish Government has lost personal data—yes or no?

As the minister may be aware, cigarettes or other tobacco products were responsible for 30 of the 76 fatal fires in Scotland in 2004. I am sure that the Parliament welcomes the European Commission's decision to introduce proposals that will ban traditional cigarettes by 2010 and force smokers to buy fire-safe cigarettes. What discussions has the he had with his colleagues in Westminster to raise public awareness about that?

We have heard a number of powerful and thoughtful speeches. I give special recognition to Des McNulty and Duncan McNeil, who with others have campaigned on the issue since the Parliament's formation. I am proud of the stance that the Parliament is, I hope, taking. However, given what John Lamont said, I am not sure of that. I take it, though, that the Conservatives support the bill. We are taking a stance on behalf of the hard-working men and women throughout Scotland who have been negligently exposed to asbestos. Like  others, I pay tribute to the role that unions such as Unite have had, alongside Clydeside Action on Asbestos, in addressing the serious challenges that claimants face. The key word for me during this stage 1 debate has been "negligence". To all those who protest against and oppose the bill, particularly the insurance companies, I say that we would not be here were it not for the fact that—I direct this point to Jackson Carlaw—employers exposed their workers to asbestos. Indeed, it has been known since 1892—this fact has been clarified—that asbestos is a poisonous substance. The Justice Committee received written evidence that industry leaders on some occasions deliberately ignored and, indeed, hid the dangers of asbestos. That written submission has not been contested. It is important to take that into consideration, while entering into the spirit of consensus on the issue and ensuring that we take it forward. The more that I consider the issue, the more concerned I become about the way in which men and women have been labelled a problem by the insurance industry. Let us be clear: the claimants are victims. The problem is with those employers who exposed the victims to asbestos. I refer to the evidence that we received from the insurance industry. Perhaps it is not surprising that it raised concerns that the enactment of the bill would result in insurance premiums increasing. However, from the evidence that we received, I believe that that view is speculative and has little effective written evidence to support it. During an evidence-taking session, I asked Dominic Clayden—the director of technical claims at Norwich Union Insurance Ltd—the following question: "So it is possible that there will not be an increase in premiums." Despite his having provided us with significant written evidence advising that there would be an increase in insurance premiums, he admitted in his response: "There may not be, but if the bill is enacted, it will create an upward pressure on premiums in Scotland."—[ Official Report, Justice Committee , 2 September 2008; c 1032.] I cannot help observing that another pressure on premiums may be the massive legal costs that the industry has incurred as a result of raising 10 test cases in England and Wales. Perhaps the industry's vigorous and aggressive approach towards dealing with those claims has raised the possibility that insurance premiums might be increased. Several witnesses on various occasions said, "Of course, this is an emotive subject." Of course the subject is emotive. It is emotive for those who have been exposed to asbestos and for their  worried families. They should make no apologies whatsoever for being emotive. What compounds such feelings of anxiety is that the insurance industry's answer to the problem is to educate claimants to condition them into thinking that they need not worry any further about their condition. Once again, I cannot help observing from my recent experience of submitting a life assurance form, for which I was subject to the usual interrogation process that many of us will have experienced, that the insurance company did not say that I need not advise it of particular medical conditions. As I recall, I was interrogated about, and had to submit details on, every possible medical condition. If the insurance industry advises that information on pleural plaques need not be submitted in a medical insurance application form, I am sure that we will be able to take the issue forward. As several members have said, pleural plaques are not visible. The disease causes irreversible damage to the lining of the lung such that, if it involved visible tissue, compensation would obviously not be denied. The fact that pleural plaques do not affect a person's external appearance should be irrelevant. On the financial memorandum, it is not often that I disagree with Bill Aitken but I am not uneasy with the challenges that we face in respect of the bill. Of course the Parliament's role is to scrutinise any legislation that is introduced, but the challenges that the bill presents are no different from those that we face with every piece of legislation that is introduced. Let us be clear on one thing: the political will of the Parliament is to proceed with the bill. I believe that that view will prevail. I read with interest the Hansard report of the debate that was secured by Jim Sheridan MP. In a powerful speech, he used his personal experience of having worked in Glasgow's shipyards to provide an account of the irresponsible attitude of employers. He said: "I remember times when we could see asbestos dust floating in the air. The foremen would tell us to carry on working because it would not do us any harm. I do not blame the foremen or managers, because they were only doing as they were told."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 23 January 2008; c 460WH.] That is the account of a man who personally experienced the shipyards. In conclusion, we on the Labour benches believe that the bill deals with an industrial legacy of which Scotland's employers should be ashamed. It is important that we use this opportunity to put that shameful legacy behind us.

Does Des McNulty agree that asbestos was a banned substance pre-1965 and that it has been known as a poisonous substance since 1892?

I concur with the minister's consensual vision of how we can take secure accommodation forward. However, I would like him to assure us that the resources that are provided for the 124 places will continue to be provided. He said that he wants to find a sustainable way forward. Does that mean  that there will be no reduction in resources and that those places will continue to be provided?

I agree with the point made by many members that alcohol abuse—by young or old—is unacceptable, as is the antisocial behaviour surrounding it. Mary Mulligan pointed out that Labour brought in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 and the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003, which contained measures to deal with the challenges that face our communities as a result of the unacceptable behaviour fuelled by alcohol. Alcohol retailers who sell to under-18s need to get the message that their behaviour will not be tolerated. If we are to be serious about tackling alcohol abuse among those who are under age, we should take on board Claire Baker's point, and ensure that we hit the suppliers. Labour does not need to respond to consultation documents to make such points. We are parliamentarians, and we are elected to debate issues such as this in Parliament. The minister should listen to our points. It is good enough for the minister to launch consultations outside Parliament, so we can make our points and develop them in Parliament. In his consultation, the minister should take forward the idea that if a supplier is found selling alcohol to people who are under age, on the first offence, we should ban them for three months; on the second offence, we should ban them for six months; and on the third offence, they should lose their licence.

I do not have time. I hope that the minister can deal with the point when he sums up. More important, we want to name and shame such retailers on a central website, which is another issue that the minister could take forward in his consultation document. Why should the reputable retailers be tarred with the same brush as the unscrupulous ones? Such a website would allow residents in local communities to decide not to shop in outlets that sell alcohol to underage minors—a practice that is unacceptable. We also want to name and shame adults who sell alcohol to young people. There can be no more grotesque a crime than an adult who purchases alcohol to sell to a minor. I was involved in introducing amendments to the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 that allow us to imprison such adults for up to 6 months. We need more detection—a point that a number of members made—and to name and shame those individuals. As other members have said, the proposal to raise the age to 21 is inconsistent. The only thing that is consistent in the debate is the tough-guy spin from the minister. If he wants to be taken seriously, he should be serious about what he proposes. Simply seeking to make us believe that he is taking action to deal with alcohol abuse is not good enough. Labour led on legislation to tackle antisocial behaviour and to modernise our licensing arrangements. We will take no lectures from SNP members, who grudgingly supported the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill and Labour's proposals on licensing. They also opposed my polluter-pays amendment at stage 3. It is time for the Government to stop playing with the issue and to take it forward.

Scrutiny of the bill has provided us with an  opportunity to improve the way we deliver justice in Scotland. As the minister correctly pointed out, the bill has been developed over several years, especially since 2006, when Cathy Jamieson was a minister. We have heard many good speeches today, but I do not expect today's debate, which has had an historically unprecedented degree of consensus, to be widely reported. I do not expect Sky News or the BBC to report how consensual we have been today, but neither do I expect the man or woman in the street to get excited about the bill. However, it is important to recognise that the Parliament plays an important role in engaging with the judicial authorities and responding to their concerns in the context that Robert Brown mentioned. We need such legislation to deliver a fair justice system in our communities throughout Scotland. The transfer of Scottish Court Service functions to the Lord President has been a continuing issue. Throughout the process we have been advised by the judiciary that widening the role of the judiciary to include the management of our courts will improve the delivery of justice. We will hold the Lord President to that commitment. We on the Labour benches support the proposed transfer, but we will carefully monitor how effective that transfer is. We expect the Lord President to recognise that, as democratically elected representatives, we will want to interact with him in ensuring that we are able to scrutinise the management of our courts service. I have not yet received the correspondence that the Lord President has apparently sent me. I look forward to receiving it, and anticipate that it will be helpful and will show how far we have moved forward in the debate. Unlike Bill Aitken and John Lamont, we supported the provision on a complaints reviewer. Chapter 4 refers to judicial conduct, and I refer in particular to the proposal for a complaints reviewer. The world we live in is, helpfully, now more open and accountable, so more than ever it is good that we should ensure that the independence of the judiciary continues. We also have a responsibility to ensure that procedures are being followed properly, and we believe that the complaints reviewer will provide that opportunity. In the modern world, that should be welcomed. Like others, including Richard Baker and Nigel Don, we strongly support the case for mandatory training. There is compelling evidence, particularly in relation to cases in which children give evidence—that we require certain levels of sensitivity and experience. Like others, I have the greatest respect for those who serve on our judicial benches; many have many years' experience and we should commend them for their  hard work over the years but, like others—including us—they are not infallible, and they, too, can benefit from training and, in turn, provide a better service to the public. If the Lord President is determined to ensure that that is the outcome of this legislation, that will be a step forward. We will monitor the delivery of mandatory training carefully. It should be noted that, once again, we have placed greater responsibility on the judiciary. Their destiny is now in their hands and they must ensure that better justice is delivered. Today, our exchanges have been constructive and consensual to an unprecedented level. It is now for the judiciary to take on board all the issues that have been raised and to deliver fair and natural justice in our courts.

In the interests of natural justice, we, too, support Bill Aitken's amendment 23. The evidence that we received at stage 1 was powerful in its support of the issue that is raised in amendment 23.

I commend the minister for the co-operative fashion in which he has followed up the issues. I will raise two important issues. The first relates to Robert Brown's point about whether it is necessary for the provision to be placed in the bill. It is not unprecedented for us to state the obvious in a bill. There are references in the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill, which we debated recently, to the role of the Lord Advocate in the dispensation of justice. Arguably, the obvious was stated in that legislation, so it would not be unprecedented for us to include in this bill the wording that has been proposed. Secondly, although it is important to recognise that we welcome the co-operative exchanges that the Parliament has had with the current Lord President, the issue is not with the current holder of that post. The current Lord President will not always be Lord President. It is important that any legislation that the Parliament passes takes account of the distant future. However, I intend not to press amendment 18, given the minister's assurance that he will come forward with a framework document—or historic concordat or whatever he wants to call it—that will ensure both that the Lord President is made  accountable and that the issues that members raise in Parliament are taken into consideration.  Amendment 18, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendment 18 would entitle the Parliament to request the Lord President to give evidence only on matters relating to the management of court services, which will be transferred to his remit if the bill is successful. I believe strongly that, in our democratic society, we should protect judicial independence, and I would defend the right of the Lord President to protect his judicial independence from any political interference. However, amendment 18 would allow the Parliament to request the Lord President to give evidence only on matters relating to the management of courts or, in other words, the services that the Scottish Court Service currently provides. If the bill is successful today, the Lord President's job description will change to include the management of court services. As that is a matter of public interest, it is perfectly legitimate for democratically elected representatives of the Parliament to pose questions to the Lord President on how the services are being delivered. Amendment 19, in the name of my colleague Cathie Craigie, would in effect retain the status quo, in that the minister would remain the titular head of our court services. I believe strongly that Cathie Craigie is right to raise the issue, which she will no doubt develop further. We seek assurances from the minister on how the Parliament will interact with the Lord President on matters relating to court services. I move amendment 18.

Like other members, I recognise that the commission report that is before us today contains many sensible recommendations that can be supported. All members have agreed that it provides a useful starting point for considering how we can best manage those who are in our prisons. For the benefit of Robert Brown, I put it on record that Labour members support the rehabilitation of prisoners. We worked closely with the Liberal Democrats to ensure that those who were in prison needed to be in prison. However, I make clear that our priority when developing our policies in future will be the safety of our communities. We make no excuse for that. All too often we hear from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice about the bad and sad in our prisons—those who do not belong there and should make their way to a new career, perhaps in the construction industry, building the new Commonwealth games village or constructing the new M74 motorway extension. Apart from the fact that that is an obvious slur on hard-working men and women in our construction industry, it is becoming apparent to me that the cabinet secretary is intent on developing policy outside the chamber. If he is genuine about his proposal, which we strongly oppose, Mr MacAskill should bring it before the chamber so that we can have a genuine debate. As other members have said, we need to know from the minister what he means by the bad and sad. Gavin Brown and others sought that information from SNP members. The cabinet secretary should give us examples and indicate which individuals would be eligible for his bad and sad alternatives to custody scheme. Is he—as Bill  Aitken suggested—referring to shoplifters, who pose a genuine threat to many communities throughout Scotland and to our economy? What message does it send to victims of domestic violence if the perpetrators, who would have served a sentence of six months or less, are told that, thanks to the bad and sad alternatives to custody scheme that has been provided compliments of the new Government, they will no longer do so? A number of members have sought specifics, so I will provide the chamber with a specific example that is on the public record. Recently, the boxer Scott Harrison was handed a two-month sentence for assaulting his girlfriend and a two-month sentence for assaulting a police officer. I am happy to give way to the Minister for Community Safety if he wishes to contradict me. Members of the Parliament have fought hard to make it clear that domestic violence and assaults on public workers are unacceptable; in fact, we have legislated to prevent such activity. What message would we send to our communities and to the victims of crime if we labelled the perpetrators of domestic violence and those who commit crimes against public workers as bad and sad? Such offenders are not bad and sad, but individuals against whom our communities should be protected; offenders should not be protected by the Government. It is sad for the victims of crime that the Government is so obsessed with emptying the prisons of Scotland. Labour members will not allow the Government to pursue that policy. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice again seeks to condition the Parliament into believing that sheriffs imprison every individual who walks through the doors of their courts. John Lamont made a powerful point on that. Many of those individuals arrive at Barlinnie prison as a last resort. I will give another specific example. What about 18-year-old George Maxwell? He was already on bail for carrying an offensive weapon and attacked two police officers with a samurai sword while under the influence of drink and drugs, but was freed with a probation order and 260 hours' community service after the sheriff heard that he had gone teetotal. That individual and many like him would have a number of opportunities and end up in Barlinnie prison as a result of their unacceptable actions. Surely, when the Parliament is considering how to deal with knife crime, sentences such as the one that was served on George Maxwell send out completely the wrong message. The minister must answer for conditioning the public view that many of those individuals are bad and sad.

Robert Brown fails to recognise the point—which Duncan McNeil amplified—that our communities sometimes need respite from individuals such as George Maxwell who, at 18, thinks that, under the influence of drink and drugs, it is acceptable to attack police officers in our local communities. Such actions are unacceptable. Many of those individuals have been given second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth opportunities to correct their ways, but our paramount consideration must be the safety of our communities. Of course we want to present opportunities for such individuals to be rehabilitated in our prisons, but we must also consider our local communities. The Labour Party supports the payback schemes—Richard Simpson introduced the previous Government's reparation schemes—but payback or reparation schemes—whatever we want to call them—require significant funding. I see that the cabinet secretary is rather animated on the subject; I am happy to take an intervention from him. If the Government wants to make such schemes a priority, it must provide the necessary funding to ensure that they can be developed. They require commitment, not only from the cabinet secretary but from the Government's local authority partners in the historic—or prehistoric—concordat. What kind of commitment will they make to them? Perhaps, when we find that out, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will be more animated.

Those are warm words but there is no action from the Government. We want it to move away from the warm words—the debates that take place in the Parliament and the friendly exchanges with local authorities. We welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary is meeting our Labour colleagues, and I am sure that there have been many constructive discussions with Harry McGuigan, but we want action—not on behalf of  the perpetrators, but on behalf of victims of crime the length and breadth of Scotland, who want real action to be taken. Despite having a number of differences with the commission's report, we welcome it. We look forward to ensuring that the Government takes on board a number of the concerns that we have raised and to working with the commission in future.

Let there be no more excuses from this Government. [ Interruption. ] The point is a fair one. Never before has a Government said so little when talking of passing legislation. The previous Executive passed 51 bills, yet to date this Government has proposed only 21 bills, and we are not even sure how far many of them will go. For a Government that has so much to say about what it would do if it had the legislative powers that are reserved to Westminster, it is a pity that it makes so little use of the powers that the Scottish Parliament has at present. I listened with interest to the First Minister boasting about record numbers of police officers, given that the increase is fewer than 100 officers since the SNP Government took office. I will provide the chamber with the facts: in the 10 years of Labour in Scotland from 1997 to 2007, the average increase in the number of police officers was 125 a year and yet, over one and a half years, this Government has managed less than half of that. Labour will not allow this Government to continue its attempts to condition the Parliament and the people of Scotland into believing that it will deliver its pledge of 1,000 more police officers. I am happy to take an intervention from any member on the Government benches if they feel that I have misrepresented the facts.  I have some advice for Annabel Goldie: do not sit on a hot stove while waiting for the number of officers to reach the figure of 14,236. She needs a reality check. Given current trends, the SNP Government will not deliver on that pledge. The First Minister reminded Labour members that our manifesto contained no commitment on delivering additional police officers. I say to him that our respect for the electorate is such that we did not want to make an empty promise to deliver 1,000 additional officers. What the First Minister said represents the kind of cheap politics that we saw in the 2007 election campaign. In January, in line with a number of other health boards throughout Scotland, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde entered into car park charging arrangements. Subsequent to that, I raised the possibility of introducing a member's bill to scrap hospital car parking charges throughout Scotland. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to scrapping car parking charges at hospitals at the end of the year—yes, constructive points are made in this chamber. [ Interruption. ] I would welcome constructive responses to constructive points. However, let us get to the nub of the matter: will the cabinet secretary provide all the additional funding—not transitional funding—that will be required for health boards to exit their current car parking arrangements? Does she accept that it is grossly unfair that three hospital sites will not have free car parking?

I remind the minister that she signed the documentation that allowed car parking charges to be introduced at Stobhill hospital, Glasgow royal infirmary and the Southern general hospital. It is not good enough for her to provide only the information that suits her in the chamber. If she wants to have a real debate on hospital car parking charges, she should advise us what the termination costs would be for the three private hospital sites in Scotland. From the Government's justice agenda, it is clear that it prefers spending time making excuses for the perpetrators of crime to defending those who are the victims of crime. I call on the Government to ensure that the antisocial behaviour legislation that the Parliament passed is not diluted by Kenny MacAskill and Fergus Ewing. We will oppose with vigour any attempts by the Government to dilute that legislation, which was welcomed by every community in Scotland and gives our communities protection from the tiny minority who cause havoc through crime.

The First Minister was quick to remind us that his Government had provided the additional funding to allow police authorities across Scotland to recruit an additional 150 police officers. Can he assure me today that the £580,000 that the Government  provided to police authorities has been spent on new recruits?

We in Labour have supported, and will always support, young people who want to be rehabilitated and play a positive role in their local communities. That was the case when we were in government, and it is the case now that we are in opposition. In government, we delivered youth courts—I will come back to that subject later. We were specific about where to place funding in the youth justice system. In 2004, Cathy Jamieson, the then Minister for Justice, announced a package of more than £35 million for the youth justice fund, and we introduced initiatives such as youth courts and the provision of places for young people in restorative justice projects. Not only did we talk about youth justice; we delivered. I welcome the minister's commitment to operation reclaim, which was mentioned by my colleague Bill Butler. The project, which has been operating for some years in my constituency, was instigated after the murder of Firsat Dag in Sighthill. The minister recently visited my constituency and met a large group of young people—I understand that they had been advised that they would be meeting a famous football star rather than a famous football supporter. The minister welcomed operation reclaim. The project's ethos is not just about dealing with offenders but about ensuring that young people have an alternative to offending in the first place. It is made up of a wide range of young people from different territorial areas within Glasgow. However, we in Labour have to say that there are currently no tangible proposals for tackling youth crime that are anywhere near as specific as those of the previous Executive. Some members might disagree with the strategy of the previous Executive, but at least there was a specific strategy; very little in the way of specifics is provided in "Preventing Offending by Young People". I would be happy to take an intervention from the minister if he wishes to confirm that point, or he may wish to comment on it in his summing-up speech. We need to be specific. It has been 13 months since the Government was formed—we are 410 days on—and we are still in consultation or discussion-paper mode. We are still having debates in the Parliament. That is simply not good enough.

I always welcome key findings from the Auditor General, but I also welcome key findings by my constituents, who welcomed the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. They welcomed the fact that local police officers would have legal remedies at their disposal. The time for the database of excuses is over; it is time for enforcement and action in our local communities. I welcome feedback from people in local communities on their real-life experiences. Our amendment calls for the "further rolling out of youth courts". I ask the minister, in his summing up, to be specific about the Government's future plans for youth courts. The Labour Party is committed to the principle that we should have a more focused and specialised approach to the delivery of youth justice. We know that victims find their involvement with the youth courts to be a much more positive experience because the system gives them the opportunity to see the perpetrator being dealt with more quickly and effectively. The youth courts give professionals in the youth justice system the opportunity to work together to ensure that young people understand the impact of their crimes on the victim, and the youth courts also allow more effective disposals to be enforced. I move on to an issue that many members raised. I do not often disagree with Cathie Craigie but I will do so today. It is valuable to reiterate that a large majority of young people in our communities are a credit not just to themselves but to their parents, and they will play a valuable role in Scotland's future. That goes without saying.

I need not say anything else. The point has been well made. The youth justice system must not ignore the genuine concerns of communities that have to endure the actions of those who persistently reoffend. In many communities, young offenders have been given second, third, fourth or fifth chances—or more—to reconsider their activities. In the real world, police officers regularly complain that it is a waste of time to arrest perpetrators in the first place because there is a lack of parental control. As John Lamont said, we must ensure that parents are accountable. The vast majority are, but some are not.  That is the situation in the real world, and those are the concerns of our local communities and police officers. It is okay for us, in our comfort zone, to raise the issues and to discuss the strategies and the glossy discussion documents that are churned out by our civil servants, but we have to strike the right balance between the rights of the offender and our local communities' right—which we will always respect—to live in peace and harmony. Some members sought to make excuses for persistent offenders, sometimes by citing poverty as a reason for offenders' behaviour. I do not believe that poverty is an excuse. I know many families in my constituency who do not have significant means at their disposal but who are an absolute credit to the local community. I know of many persistent offenders whose parents have significant economic means at their disposal, so I do not believe that poverty is an excuse, as many academics claim. Our amendment mentions the need for resources to allow youth services and the youth justice system to be effective. The minister will be tired of Labour members calling for the necessary resources to be available to ensure that strategies are enforced, but he can look forward to many more calls for clarity about the Government's financial plans. The Government has been in power for 410 days and it has had plenty of time to mull over its financial plans. We want action on the issues. I call on members to support Pauline McNeill's amendment.

Will the minister kindly suggest specific alternatives to junior ASBOs? What proposals does he have in mind?

I do not think that the minister answered John Wilson's question. Since our legal services debate in November last year, a clear question has been what consultation has taken place with Which? One reason for today's statement is that organisation's super-complaint, so I would have expected the minister, Which? and other consumer organisations with an interest to have had discussions since November.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it expects to have 17,265 police officers in place by March 2011, in line with the commitment made in the Scottish National Party's 2007 manifesto. (S3O-3637)

We welcome the co-operation that is taking place with all the agencies that the cabinet secretary mentioned. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will co-operate with us today and clarify this: on 31 March 2011, will there be 17,265 police officers in place throughout communities in Scotland—yes or no?

The background to the debate has been about seeking consensus and working together on an issue that troubles many of us and concerns us all as members of the Scottish Parliament. Our constituency case loads identify those constituents who are affected by drug misuse. It could be a constituent who has lost a son or daughter, or a grandparent who is now caring for children who have lost their parents because of drug misuse. Those are real-life examples that face us every day. We owe it to those people to ensure that we stand up for our communities. It is quite right that that requires robust, frank and honest scrutiny of any proposals that the Government makes. That is why we have proposed an addendum to the Government's motion that raises a number of issues that require further scrutiny. First, our amendment makes it very clear that we want the word "target" to feature in the strategy document; it is used on only two occasions. If we are to spend public money, we must ensure that we get best value for it. That is what the people of Scotland expect from us. We should ensure that we get best value for every pound that is invested in the strategy. Members should be reminded that the Parliament debated a drugs strategy in January 2000 and delivered an action plan in May 2000. It would therefore be wrong to suggest that the Executive and the Parliament at that time did not reach a cross-party consensus and work together on the challenge that faces us today.

I want to develop my point, but I will give way to Margo MacDonald if there is time available. We called for resources to tackle the issue but also for more precise information on where the  money would be spent. In May 2000, the Deputy Minister for Justice, Angus MacKay, advised us that £250 million per year would be spent on tackling drug misuse and that half of that would be spent on enforcement; that meant that the Deputy Minister for Justice could have been held to account. If the Scottish Government genuinely wants to engage with us on the issue, the minister must provide more detail on how he will progress what was a pre-election commitment to provide an additional 20 per cent to the drugs budget. Another commitment was to restore ring-fenced funding for drugs education. We are entitled to have a robust and honest debate, and the minister should answer our questions if he wants to make a difference for the people of Scotland.

The word "outcome" is very serious, but we should be clear that we want to set targets and we should not fear setting targets. We need to set a clear agenda and all those who have a responsibility to tackle the issue should show leadership and ensure that clear targets are set. The previous Executive was also responsible for establishing the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, which was set up with a clear emphasis on disrupting the supply of drugs in our community. That was our manifesto commitment in 1999. We wanted not only to tackle the major drug dealers but to deal with the local network of small dealers who feather the nests of the crime bosses. The Labour Party demands more information—it is not in the strategy—on how the Scottish Government will deal with local drug dealers. Local drug dealers are the scourge of every community throughout Scotland; they prey on our communities. The Government should learn from the success of the drug dealers don't care campaign, which was backed up by real outcomes: more than 600 drug dealers were arrested as a result of calls to a hotline and more than £1.5 million-worth of drugs and £61,000 in cash were recovered. I do not see the minister on his feet to intervene. It was clear from the 430 per cent increase in calls to Crimestoppers that local people were empowered. I see nothing in the strategy that takes us any further forward in disrupting the supply of drugs and in addressing how we should encourage local communities to stand up to drug dealers. Drug dealers do not care about our local communities and the Government strategy should say that clearly. On public information, the strategy refers to the  further development of the know the score campaign, which will result in a leaflet being delivered to every household in Scotland. The Labour Party sees no harm in sending a leaflet to every household, but we find it difficult to see how that will excite and enthuse the communities that are affected by drugs. Not through choice, many parents are already aware of the drugs issue. It is what we do about the dealers that matters to those parents. Real innovation would be about how we promote alternative, healthy lifestyles throughout our communities in Scotland. Has the minister thought about how we can use the Glasgow Commonwealth games as a catalyst for promoting and encouraging healthy lifestyles? Young people all too often see considerable media coverage being given to so-called celebrities such as Amy Winehouse and the supermodel Kate Moss. They do not send a positive message to young people. Why do we not use our sports personalities to promote a positive lifestyle? We believe that that would make a genuine difference. The Labour Party appreciates that we face many challenges on this issue and on many related issues. We call on the Government to take the serious steps that are required to ensure that it effectively resources efforts and projects to deal with the issue. Our amendment is clear. We call for additional resources to deal with the issue and for clear targets to be set to ensure that we make a difference. Let us also reflect on previous debates that have taken place on the issue. There was consensus in the debates in January and May 2000, but it is clear that the challenge that faces the Government is to ensure that we act and take the message forward. I move amendment S3M-2038.2, to insert at end: "acknowledges the efforts of all those engaged in drug misuse services; recognises that the strategy identifies the need for broader treatment services and wrap-around care for drug users to move beyond stabilisation; believes that the strategy should provide detail on targets on a range of indicators so that progress can be monitored; strongly believes that there should be a clear and identifiable increase in funding in the justice and health budgets, and further strongly believes that there should be a continuing focus on enforcement against all drug dealers and that communities most blighted by drugs will benefit from the proceeds of crime legislation."

Of course members of all parties seek consensus, but we must also hold the Government to account. In its manifesto, the Scottish National Party made a commitment to "a 20 per cent increase in funding for drug treatment and rehabilitation programmes." In the current spirit of consensus, I ask the minister to say whether that manifesto commitment will be met.

On behalf of Labour members, I associate myself with  the remarks of the Justice Committee convener about our support staff. We were served well, and we received high-quality stage 1 evidence. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to improve how justice is delivered. The previous coalition Government considered the issue, and we now have the opportunity for the bill to proceed. The bill proposes that the Scottish Court Service will no longer come under the authority of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and that responsibility for it will be transferred to the Lord President, as the cabinet secretary said. The issue exercised the committee a great deal—both on the record and off the record. Labour members are not convinced that there is evidence to suggest that the status quo does not serve us well. I do not recall receiving great volumes of correspondence or inquiries from constituents raising concerns about how our court services are managed at the moment. We must examine further the proposal for such a change amid a lack of evidence proving that, given his current responsibilities, the Lord President will be able to accommodate the additional demands. There is a need for more objective, rather than subjective, evidence to be provided to make the case in respect of those demands. We welcome the commitment that the cabinet secretary gave on the review. However, we would welcome the committee receiving further evidence, in some form, on the review's terms of reference, to ensure that the review is carried out objectively, deals with the principle of whether court services should be managed by the Lord President and addresses the issue of additional capacity, which exercised committee members on a number of occasions, both on the record and off the record. Chapter 4 of the bill relates to judicial conduct and proposes the role of judicial complaints reviewer, which we support fully. I simply cannot agree with the Lord President, who said that there was no need for a complaints reviewer and cited the fact that complaints can be taken up further at the Court of Session. Surely we should take every opportunity to avoid the possibility of further legal action and welcome the prospect of having an independent complaints reviewer. I welcomed the evidence that Lord McCluskey gave the Justice Committee. I respect Lord McCluskey, given his experience over the years, and found his contribution most informative and helpful. However, I do not agree with some of the points that he made in his evidence. For example, he suggested that a number of individuals simply would not be qualified to judge complaints about procedures. I can think of a number of highly respected individuals who have considered procedural issues over the years. We are well  served by ombudsmen, such as our current Scottish Public Services Ombudsman, and we should respect the roles that they carry out—we in the Labour Party have certainly done that. I see no reason why an independent system cannot be put in place to ensure that the public confidence to which the minister referred is embedded in the system.

I confirm to the member that the Lord President will be consulted when the reviewer is appointed by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. The issue is how to ensure that the procedures are carried out properly. The SPSO and other ombudsmen report back to the authority concerned. The system that we are discussing is designed to ensure that the individuals learn from the experience and take into consideration where procedures were not carried out properly. The judiciary has a genuine opportunity to show humility in accepting and learning from such a system to ensure that there is no recurrence. Probably the most controversial recommendation in the committee's report was on the issue of mandatory training. We in the Labour Party support strongly the case for mandatory training. A public petition was submitted on the issue, relating it to cases in which there is evidence from children. Given that a great deal of sensitivity is required in such cases, it is simply unacceptable that no arrangements are in place to ensure that the judiciary has mandatory training in that area. We call on the cabinet secretary to reconsider his position, given the symbolic gesture that we would make in sending the clear message that we expect mandatory training to be put in place. We welcome the bill and ask the cabinet secretary to take seriously the issues that the committee raised and the recommendations that it made in its stage 1 report. I look forward to stages 2 and 3.

I, like other members, welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's supportive comments in connection with the previous Executive and his support for taking the 2004 act forward, but the important issue is to ensure that additional resources necessary to do that are in place. The financial memorandum to the 2004 act indicated that there would be additional running costs of £3.95 million and a one-off cost of £1.2 million. Can the cabinet secretary provide members with the details of how the financial memorandum has been taken forward and the expenditure that has been committed to date and will be committed in the future?

Will the minister take an intervention?

My point was that many of my constituents do not have access to information about who their local police officer is, and I want clarity about that. I am in a position to access that information.

The Justice Committee embarked some months ago on a significant piece of work on the effective use of police resources. What has been clear since the first stage of the inquiry—I think all the committee members will recognise this—is that all the witnesses, including the minister, have a genuine appetite for changes to the delivery of police services throughout Scotland to ensure that what was fit for purpose 40 years ago is made fit for purpose in the 21 st century. As the cabinet secretary said, our communities value the important role that our police officers play in those communities. In our deliberations, the committee sought to ensure that we would produce recommendations that would amplify local concerns. I am afraid that we have not had clarity from the cabinet secretary about police numbers. The  committee was clear on the issue, recognising on a cross-party basis the importance of the Scottish National Party Government delivering on its manifesto pledge—which was not in small print—to deliver 1,000 additional police officers on our streets. We sought assurances that the funding for that would be provided. However, the Government has again attempted to wriggle out of its commitment, which sends the message that the glossy manifestos that were sent to every household in Scotland that advised people that they would see 1,000 additional police officers in Scotland now mean nothing but an empty promise.

To paraphrase a comment that the First Minister made in the chamber earlier, Mr MacAskill is in Government now and we are not. It is for the Government to answer the questions on its manifesto. What is clear from the recommendation in our committee report—I reiterate that it was agreed by all the parties represented on the committee—is that we want to ensure that the funding is in place to deliver the 1,000 additional police officers. However, I am happy that the cabinet secretary has now clarified that he will not deliver 1,000 additional police officers, which is unlike what we heard from the First Minister again today. The committee report also rightly refers to the concerns about the tensions between the SPSA and the police forces. We cannot ignore that. I am afraid that I am not reassured by the cabinet secretary's comments on that; they mean that he is not willing to show leadership to ensure that we deal with that issue. I appreciate what a complex issue it is, but we call on the cabinet secretary to show leadership by defining the SPSA's role and the relationship that it should have with other agencies throughout Scotland. The creation of the SPSA was supported by a wide spectrum of interest. Labour supported it, and we continue to do so. However, the cabinet secretary must show leadership to ensure that we take the issue forward. It is time for him to do that in the most effective manner possible. The committee also called for a clearer definition of the role of community policing. We need to develop further how our community police officers and their senior officers interact with the  communities that they serve. I have been struck by the difficulty for communities in identifying their community police officers. I interrogated Strathclyde Police's website today to try to find out who my community police officer is, but it did not provide that basic information. If our officers are to be accountable to their communities, we should provide on websites, for example, basic information on who those officers are and contact details such as e-mail addresses. In the modern era of information technology, it is unacceptable not to provide such basic information. The committee firmly supported the crucial role that community wardens play by assisting our police officers throughout Scotland. I note with interest that the Minister for Community Safety, Fergus Ewing, will ensure that the committee's views on that issue are taken into consideration. I make it clear that Labour members are proud of what our communities have done over the years in partnership with our community wardens, which the previous Liberal and Labour coalition delivered, to stand up to antisocial behaviour. Any attempt to dilute the stance that the previous Government took will not be accepted by Labour members. As the committee moves on to its next inquiry phase, it is important that we continue to be willing to progress the issues with an open mind, that we give our communities maximum protection and that we make the most effective use of our police officers throughout Scotland. I ask members to support the motion in Bill Aitken's name.

Despite popular belief, we occasionally agree with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, and the time is right for us to support him in his review of the legislation that governs the fatal accident inquiry process. We also agree with the appointment of Lord Cullen; he is an excellent choice to lead the inquiry and, as many others have said, his reputation speaks volumes. We have no doubt that he will ensure that we continue to deliver justice in the 21 st century. Many members have referred to their own experiences of dealing with constituents who have been affected by the procedures that were followed during the FAI process. We have also heard about the public petitions process. Michael McMahon spoke effectively about the case of Mr and Mrs Curran, who made their concerns known through the public petitions process, after the death of their daughter, Gillian. It is important to put on record our appreciation of them for making their case so constructively, and of the Public Petitions Committee for ensuring that their concerns were amplified through the parliamentary process. The proposals to modernise the process that are before us today are a result of their actions. It is important that Lord Cullen takes evidence from victims' families and considers a number of experiences that have been raised through the public petitions process. Those people's input is vital. He should also acknowledge that families find themselves part of the process through no fault of their own, that they have no specific knowledge and that the evidence they receive can be distressing. It is important to consider how to deal with families. As Pauline McNeill pointed out very clearly, families should get justice and answers through the FAI process. We have received correspondence from Des Browne about how best to support service families. He sets out a welcome commonsense approach. The Scottish Government should build on that approach by considering how best to legislate to allow for the two main issues that Des Browne raises in his letter. To paraphrase what Donald Dewar said in 1999, the Parliament is here to provide Scottish solutions for distinct Scottish needs. While we consider the pain that service families endure, the case for legislative change is compelling and right. We call on the Government to take the issue forward, taking into consideration the points that have been raised today. If there was ever an argument for the UK and Scottish Governments to work together, this is it. That is why we will ensure that we work with the  Government constructively to ensure that the families get the justice they deserve. Nigel Don raised an effective point and genuine concerns about the monitoring of recommendations. We must recognise that a great deal of resource and time is invested in fatal accident inquiries. The crucial part of the process is in ensuring that lessons have been learned. That is the point that Nigel Don rightly raised. The monitoring of recommendations should play a crucial role in the process and it surprises many of us that more consideration is not given to ensuring that we monitor the recommendations and that they are delivered on. The purpose of the fatal accident inquiry process is to learn lessons. If we do not monitor the recommendations that come out of an FAI, we do not complete the process. If we want genuinely to monitor recommendations, we cannot escape the fact that resources will be required. We and Lord Cullen will have to consider that issue. As Nigel Don said, resources will be required to ensure that we implement and monitor effectively, whatever recommendations Lord Cullen makes at the end of his review. We welcome the commitment to have the review consider legal representation for families. Michael Matheson spoke effectively on that point. Fatal accident inquiries are complex, and we sometimes underestimate the challenges that families face during the process. Labour members believe that legal representation is a key issue. The current provisions may have been right in 1976, but in 2008 very different arrangements are required. Lord Cullen's findings on legal representation will be crucial. We are encouraged by today's debate, which has been constructive. I reiterate that we will work closely with the Scottish Government and ensure that it works closely with the Westminster Government, which will be crucial in ensuring that the points that have been made today and the recommendations that Lord Cullen will make are given the priority they deserve.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and what issues were discussed. (S3O-2822)

Does the minister understand the disappointment of the community that lives in the area around Stobhill hospital about the fact that the Scottish Government has not been willing to appoint an independent scrutiny panel, which would have allowed for proper scrutiny of previous decisions by the health board in connection with the delivery of acute services at Stobhill hospital? I do not need any gentle reminders from the  minister about the actions of previous Governments; I want to know what the present Government will do.

Once again—for the third time—the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has failed to convince members of the merits of extending the home detention curfew scheme from four and a half months to six months. This has been a shameful journey for the Scottish Executive. There has been a lack of respect on the part of the Government towards the committee process and contempt has been shown towards decisions taken by the Parliament. It is important to recognise that the situation is unprecedented: never before has a minister presented secondary legislation to our committees for it to be defeated there. It is also unprecedented for a Scottish statutory instrument to be brought to the chamber, defeated and then brought before us again. I remember a number of the things that members who formerly were in opposition said over the years about the respect that should be shown to the committee process. Perhaps Mr Ewing, when he sums up, can clarify the fact that  he made such remarks about the process on many occasions. I have read with interest the unprecedented number of briefings in recent weeks regarding the prison overcrowding challenges that face the Government. John Wilson, Mike Pringle and other members are concerned about overcrowding, and they quite rightly made a case in that respect. I also heard some quotes from the governor of Barlinnie prison on the overcrowding challenges that he faces. I respect Bill McKinlay, who represents the prison that is located in my constituency, and I recognise the challenges in his role of managing Barlinnie prison. However, no one in the chamber should allow Mr McKinlay to believe that adding 50 prisoners to the HDC scheme will give him any respite from overcrowding. That is the serious point that needs to be made in the debate. The order will make no difference to the overcrowding challenges that we face. If the order is passed today, perhaps the cabinet secretary will ensure that members will be kept informed, through the convener of the Justice Committee, of the success of the order, and of whether it has any positive impact in dealing with overcrowding. The overcrowding argument has been the pivotal one that the cabinet secretary has made in respect of the order. He must, on a regular basis, be able to prove that the legislation is making a difference. In the interests of good, open and accountable government, and assuming that the Government presses ahead with its plans today, I ask the minister to clarify in his summing-up speech when the extension of the HDC scheme will actually be operational—not when the legislation will be passed. That is the most important point in the debate. It is about not what we do in respect of overcrowding, but what difference the home detention scheme will make. As I said, the Government has once again failed to convince the Parliament. It might win the vote today, but it will not have won the argument. I call on the Parliament to support the motion in the name of Bill Aitken.

The cabinet secretary rightly set out the seriousness of the situation and the suffering that has been inflicted on a young woman and her family as a result of Robert Foye's actions. Lessons have to be learned, and some of them are set out in the internal review document that has been prepared by the Scottish Prison Service. I ask the cabinet secretary whether the Scottish Prison Service should be judge and jury in respect of those lessons. Would he support an external review of the Foye case that would allow for more objective scrutiny?

Once again, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has failed to convince members of the merits of extending the home detention curfew scheme from four and a half months to six months. Let us be clear: he wants to implement the measure to deal with the pressures on the prison estate. That concern has been well briefed, compliments of Barlinnie prison and many well-orchestrated press releases from the Scottish Prison Service. We accept the prisoner numbers that the cabinet secretary presents, but we are not convinced that the extended HDC period will make a significant contribution to reducing them. Mike Pringle is ill informed to support a proposal if he does not know when it will be implemented. If he believes so strongly that the extension will make a difference, he needs to understand how, when and where it will do that. It should also be noted that the average prison population over the year is, in fact, 6,500, which is well below the design capacity figure. Once again, the Kenny MacAskill spin machine has sought to present its unprecedented defeat at the Justice Committee as members playing party politics. Let me be clear what the Labour members' politics are: we will, at every possible opportunity, interrogate legislative remedies that are placed before us. It is our job as parliamentarians to do that, and the cabinet secretary must convince us of the merits of the proposals he puts before us. His inability to provide the facts to back up his proposal is why it failed; it has nothing at all to do with the politics injected into the Justice Committee. It is important that the Parliament not only passes legislation that looks good but ensures that the extension will fulfil the key aims that the order is meant to achieve. I reiterate the point that the minister said that it would significantly reduce prisoner numbers. Our politics are to seek answers and the cabinet secretary's politics are not to provide them.  A considerate Bill Butler put forward a genuine compromise during committee proceedings on 4 March. The First Minister would be proud of it, because it follows the spirit that he set out in his acceptance speech, when he said that he wanted "to reach across the parties and try to build a majority, issue by issue, on the things that matter to the people of Scotland."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 25.]  Bill Butler proposed an opportunity for the cabinet secretary to respect the committee's concerns on home detention curfew and revisit the committee with a redrafted order that included a sunset clause.

I will not give way. Fergus Ewing has had his opportunity.

Once again, SNP members have proven that they do not want to be constructive and do not want to answer the question.

A sunset clause would ensure that the six-week extension would expire after a given period. The reason the cabinet secretary gave for not redrafting the order was: "We are guessing, but we estimate that it would probably take a couple of months."—[ Official Report , Justice Committee , 4 March 2008; c 555.] He needs to up his game and deliver legislation at the pace of former Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace. In response to the circumstances surrounding the Noel Ruddle case, Jim Wallace brought forward a timetable that allowed changes to the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 to be passed 10 days after introduction. Cathy Jamieson and Jim Wallace respected the Parliament and its committees. Mr MacAskill would do well to follow that challenge.

The member says that the measure that we are  considering will reduce prisoner numbers. If members agree to the measure, does he know on what date it will be implemented, to allow that to happen?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether any funding, over and above that in the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's budget, will be allocated to deliver the rehabilitation of offenders. (S3O-2532)

Many of the budget headings have been amplified by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice on a number of occasions. Will the cabinet secretary clarify that audits will be done to ensure that whatever investment is made in the system will have the effects that the Government said it will have?

The First Minister might be aware that next Sunday, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde will begin charging for car parking at Stobhill hospital. That is despite the fact that the Public Petitions Committee has asked the health board to delay the implementation of charging until its consideration of a petition is complete. Does the First Minister agree that the Public Petitions Committee should be allowed to complete its consideration of the petition before the car parking charges are implemented?

We have heard several powerful and thoughtful  speeches on what—as several members have said—is a very complex area of law. When we analyse the Law Commission's findings, it becomes clear that it has used its experience and knowledge of the subject to reach a comprehensive set of 62 recommendations. We have highlighted a number of matters, but we should be well aware of the work that the Justice Committee will have to do to interrogate the 62 recommendations. The committee will, for example, have to interrogate carefully the recommendation that the offence of lewd and libidinous behaviour should be abolished and replaced with a more focused approach in legislation, and it will have to ensure that the law officers and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice provide information on that. We should recognise the crucial role that the Lord Advocate has played in her current post and previously as the Solicitor General for Scotland in modernising practices in the justice system. That modernisation presents many challenges, as the Lord Advocate knows, but she has taken them on. The announcement by Frank Mulholland last month that the Crown Office will form part of a new dedicated sexual offences team in Lothian is an example of not just talking good practice but doing something to put in place good practice that people throughout Scotland will welcome. At the heart of Labour Party policy are victims' rights and ensuring that the justice system supports victims of crime by modernising the system in respect of rape and sexual offences. We believe that such modernisation will send out not just to victims but to perpetrators the right message—that we are willing to stand up to perpetrators' unacceptable actions and to take the issue forward. Like Gil Paterson, Labour members welcome the work of Rape Crisis Scotland and many other organisations that have played a crucial role in supporting victims over the years. Pauline McNeill talked about providing clarity in the law. We need to ensure that whatever provisions we pass to provide clarity deal with attitudes to sexual assaults and that appropriate resources are in place so that cases can be prepared coherently and effectively. The issues to which the Law Commission's report refers will require practitioners with experience, expertise and back-up, if the proposed legislation is to have an impact. In June 2004, the then First Minister, Jack McConnell, said: "it is important that the ... Law Commission review cover all aspects of definition and proof in relation to sexual offences, and ... in particular ... that we maximise people's confidence not only in our courts—and in the sentences and prosecutions that are available to them—but"—  this is the important point that he made— "in how the system deals with those who report ... offences."— [ Official Report , 3 June 2004; c 8896-97.]  Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the necessary resources are in place to implement the legislation that the Parliament passes? Our advocates on the front line must be able to deal with the additional responsibilities that are placed on them. That theme was clear from the Justice Committee's recent visit to the Crown Office. For any changes in the justice system, we must both ensure that additional resources are provided and consider reconfiguring resources that are in place. Members will note that, in the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name, we have called for more time in the timetable. On reflection, and as other members have said, we have in the past not had the full opportunity to interrogate proposed justice legislation. The Law Commission took more than three years to produce its report and its comprehensive set of recommendations, as I said. It is important to do that work justice by interrogating the proposed legislation effectively. The Parliament will have a job in ensuring that that happens, because extending the timetable has always been difficult, despite members' determination. I reiterate Pauline McNeill's comments about changing the law in relation to children. We need to be clear that changing the law concerns not just how the legislation is implemented, but the message that such legislation sends to society. I ask the justice team to consider that carefully in producing the bill and to give us every opportunity to interrogate that aspect. We say that in a co-operative and constructive manner to ensure that whatever is passed provides absolute clarity. Pauline McNeill also talked about clarity being provided to juries. I am not sure whether such clarity will be achieved in full, because of the need for expertise, or whether juries will at all stages be completely aware of the legislation. Let us face it—the report contains 62 recommendations. What can we expect of our juries? We need to be clear about that. However, we should ensure that common knowledge can be made available to juries. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will elaborate on that issue, which can be discussed later. Margaret Smith made a thoughtful and effective speech—I say to her that Labour members give out positive vibes. She drew a good, thoughtful analogy with society's attitudes towards the stabbing of a young man in the street, which amplified the concerns about society's attitudes towards rape victims. Bill Aitken also drew an effective analogy. However, it is not good enough for us to draw such analogies in the Parliament. It would be better in the long run for us to ensure  that we do something about the situation. That is the challenge that the Justice Committee will face. The Law Commission's recommendations and the draft bill that it has produced mean that the Justice Committee has a great deal of work ahead of it. It will have a job to do in interrogating the draft bill, and Labour members will take that process very seriously. As Marlyn Glen said, the proposals for reforming the law on rape and sexual offences are ground breaking and we look forward to ensuring that that work is brought forward in the Parliament.

Whether the member is for or against disclosure, the point at issue is that the judicial process is a public one. When a sex offender is placed on the register, they are identified. The process is public, even prior to any disclosure.

On infringement of civil liberties, does the member accept that the law lords ruling, on a four-to-one majority, acknowledged that no such infringement was involved?

Will the member give way?

In speaking to the motion on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I will refer to three main themes. On 15 December 2006, the Justice 2 Sub-Committee published 33 recommendations. They were reached after a comprehensive assessment of the arrangements that were in place for managing sex offenders before that date. Many of us welcomed the input from and commitment of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, who was involved in the sub-committee; our Labour member, Jackie Baillie; and others, including the Presiding Officer, Alex Fergusson. We are disappointed that some 14 months later, 17 of the 33 recommendations are outstanding. I ask the cabinet secretary to take this as a constructive point: the Government needs to be clear about which issues are outstanding, what resources will be provided and when we can expect to hear about further progress. There is consensus on many of the issues that surround the management of registered sex offenders. We have had many debates in the chamber on the matter. However, the Government needs to be reminded that the recommendations of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee are our priority. They are of paramount importance to the safety of our communities and our children throughout Scotland. All too often, we react to tragic events and we console and empathise with families who have suffered the loss of loved ones. We on the Labour benches call on the Parliament to ensure that we have at least taken the issue forward and created opportunities to minimise the risk that many of our communities face. I have made the point in the chamber several times that when we refer to registered sex offenders, we refer to a minority of people in our communities. In our communities, adults and children interact in a positive and constructive manner. It is important to recognise that the motion refers to a minority. A key aspect of the Justice 2 Sub-Committee's recommendations is the need to place greater responsibility on the authorities that manage registered sex offenders, be they housing authorities, prison authorities, social services authorities or local government authorities. They all have a responsibility to deliver on the  management of registered sex offenders. The Parliament's role is to show leadership and direction by legislating to improve the current arrangements and by providing policy direction. However, we need to ensure that the authorities play their part. We on the Labour benches—and I think we should all be united—want to inject some sheer doggedness and ensure that the authorities deliver on the recommendations and the other policy objectives on the issue. Our motion also mentions the importance of retaining DNA samples in both the detection and prevention of crimes of a sexual nature. The cabinet secretary has often acknowledged that, in developing policy, it is important to listen to our police authorities throughout Scotland. I say to him that the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland and almost every police authority support the retention of DNA samples and the position in England and Wales. I challenge him to acknowledge and accept that and take it forward.

In a moment. Our manifesto made it clear that we support the position in England and Wales. We should retain the DNA and fingerprints of all crime suspects to help to convict the guilty and acquit the innocent. Whether or not members agree with them, we have made proposals that we believe will make our communities safer. I ask the Scottish National Party to do likewise. We are willing to take tough and controversial decisions rather than simply sit on the sidelines. I am less than clear about the SNP's position. It claims to want a debate on the matter, but it has given the inquiry that it launched a narrow remit. If the SNP wants to have a genuine debate, we are happy to participate in one.

There have been many well-publicised and tragic cases in England, and I will make the figures clear to Gil Paterson. The DNA database has produced matches that have allowed us to prosecute 452 homicides, 644 rapes, 222 other sex offences and 18 other violent offences. All those prosecutions came about as a result of the law in England and Wales. For me, that is sufficient evidence that we should do likewise in Scotland. Many members will want to debate the proposal for a compulsory DNA database. The Scottish  Labour Party is not entirely persuaded by the argument for a compulsory database. We believe that much more evidence would be required before such a database could be set up. If I were asked whether I saw it as my civic duty to provide a DNA sample—as many others have done in past cases—I would say yes and I would do so. Nevertheless, I recognise that some serious arguments would have to be made in favour of the proposal. Four community disclosure pilot schemes have been launched in England and Wales. Last week, I asked the First Minister to produce similar proposals and to accept that we should at least consider best practice in England and Wales. There is evidence to suggest that such pilot schemes should be introduced in Scotland. I have met Margaret Ann Cummings, who tragically lost her son as a result of the actions of a sex offender, Stuart Leggate. I want to look Margaret Ann Cummings in the eye after we implement the sub-committee's 33 recommendations and tell her that I—along with the Scottish Labour Party and, I hope, other parties—did everything possible to minimise the risk to children and adults from registered sex offenders in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of making further progress on the 33 recommendations published by the Justice 2 Sub-committee on 15 December 2006 in connection with the management of registered sex offenders; believes that ensuring public safety is paramount in the management of registered sex offenders; further recognises the crucial role that the retention of DNA samples and fingerprints of all crime suspects has played in England and Wales in detecting sex offenders; acknowledges the value of the pilot schemes in England and Wales that will allow parents to ask police authorities whether a named individual such as a carer or a new partner has previously been placed on the sex offenders register, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring a statement to the Parliament on the implementation of the Justice 2 Sub-committee's report J2SC/S2/06/R1.

To ask the First Minister what additional measures are being taken to monitor registered sex offenders in Scotland. (S3F-00519)

I am sure that the First Minister agrees that registered sex offenders are among the most dangerous individuals on our planet and that we should not rule out any measure to ensure maximum protection for our communities. Does the First Minister support the pilot schemes in England and Wales that will allow parents to ask police authorities whether a named individual such as a carer or a new partner has previously been placed on the sex offenders register?

The amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill makes our position very clear. We differ from Nigel Don in that we believe that prison acts as a deterrent and plays a crucial role in ensuring that the perpetrators of crime are aware that prison sentences are always an option. As Bill Aitken said, community disposals, which are alternatives to prison, should be robust measures and carefully audited to ensure that they are not seen as a soft option for the perpetrator. Some members might not relate this issue to today's debate, but we are clear that victims of crime must be considered in this discussion. I offer a constructive criticism of the current Government: much of what we have heard from it so far has supported the perpetrators, but we want to ensure that the victims of crime are also supported.

Robert Brown will admit that following that philosophy is easier said than done, although what he says is a serious challenge to us all. We on the Labour benches are clear that we must put victims at the forefront of many of our strategies. We did that in partnership with our Liberal Democrat colleagues and delivered for victims. I ask the McLeish commission to take seriously the views of the various victims organisations throughout Scotland. Of course we support rehabilitation and alternatives to custody; that has always been the case. Most of us in the chamber support that philosophy. However, we need to acknowledge that our communities need to be protected from the individuals in our communities who pose a serious threat. We will not support the scrapping of short-term sentences. We will not release 600  housebreakers, 1,600 individuals who have been convicted of common assault or 60 who have been convicted of serious assault. I ask the minister in his summing-up to confirm that those statistics are correct and I challenge him to make it clear that he will be releasing those individuals if he scraps short-term sentences. Nigel Don referred to the need for sheriffs to be free to make disposals. However, it would require legislation to deliver that philosophy. The early actions document that the SNP produced as part of its manifesto process said that an SNP Government would deliver a criminal justice bill, which would give us the very opportunity that Nigel Don mentioned. If the minister is serious about delivering alternatives to custody and opportunities for rehabilitation, why will it take over two years for him to deliver the criminal justice bill that he said would be an early action of the Scottish Government? The minister needs to answer that question and he needs to say where the money is. He said that he would make available £35 million to deal with rehabilitation. Again, he needs to make his position clear. I ask members to support the amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill.

Can Nigel Don say how many fine defaulters are in prison?

In respect of the procurement process for the new Low Moss prison, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice said last year that there would be some delay but that it would be a delay of months rather than years. Can he confirm that that is still the position?

As the minister has rightly said, the time bar is controversial. Would it not therefore be fitting for the Parliament to launch a top-to-bottom review, so that we have an opportunity to consider a number of issues surrounding the time bar?

Given that the member knows so much about the subject, can he say how many police officers are in place at this moment, and how many will be in place as of April 2011?

We have heard a number of interesting contributions today. I would not call Bill Wilson "Wild Bill Wilson"; I would call him "Honest Bill Wilson". He has set out the situation, which is that this is about a fight with Westminster. That is unfortunate, and I will elaborate on why we believe that. On the Labour benches, we are clear that our duty is to do what is right. Like others, I as a parent acknowledge the human tragedy that is attached to today's debate. Bill Butler spoke about a young child who was killed by a callous thug who thought that it was fair game to aim his air-gun at local firefighters who were going about their job and serving their local community. I am sorry  to say that such attacks are clearly evident in my constituency, as in many other constituencies throughout Scotland. They have been evident for a number of years. In fact, members might recall that in September 2002 I lodged an amendment to the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill to provide the same sentencing tariff for an attack on a firefighter as for an attack on a police officer. Over the years—we heard about this particularly during the passage of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill—it has been evident that air-guns are used as a method of terrorising communities and emergency workers, which is unacceptable. I am proud that the Labour Party challenged such antisocial behaviour during the passage of that bill. The discussion of the possible regulation of air-guns should be considered as unfinished business. We support that and we want to take forward our agenda of attacking this unacceptable antisocial behaviour in our communities. We welcomed the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006, which was passed by our colleagues at Westminster and which, in effect, outlaws the sale of air-guns at car-boot sales, corner shops and outlets not regulated by the police. It also bans the sale of air-guns over the internet and through mail order catalogues and raises the legal age for owning an air-gun from 17 to 18, which we welcome. As Pauline McNeill set out eloquently, we cannot see the case for anybody who resides in an urban setting to say that they require to own an air-gun. I can think of many of my constituents who clearly could not make that case. Pauline McNeill is right that we should tip the balance towards requiring the applicant to make the case for owning an air-gun.

This is a serious subject. I will give Fergus Ewing an answer, although the Cabinet Secretary for Justice did not give an answer when he was questioned by others. Cathie Craigie set out the position well. We will consider a review so that we can consider all the issues, on which I am sure that the minister will want to elaborate during the summit that will take place. The cabinet secretary said during his speech that he has an open mind and that he wants to take forward a number of reviews and to hear a wide range of views from throughout Scotland. As Cathie Craigie said, surely we should be willing to listen to all  points of view on the matter. We are open to how best we can manage the issue to accommodate those who have a legitimate reason for owning an air-gun. We have reiterated that point on a number of occasions.

The Parliament has a proud record of interrogating all possibilities. The minister does not have an open mind. Given that we have to submit freedom of information requests to get information from the minister, it is a bit rich for him to ask me to respond to him. I will not take any lectures from him about providing information—he should practise what he preaches. Bill Aitken said that, even with legislative remedies, we will not take air-guns out of circulation. The determined individual will access an air-gun. However, my view is that we should not make it easy for them to do so. The determined housebreaker will be able to break into my home, but I do not want to make it easy for him—I want to make it difficult for him, which is why I have a five-lever lock in my front door and an alarm system in my home. In considering a system to take the issue forward, we should look at how we can make it difficult for possible perpetrators. As our amendment says, we want to work constructively with our colleagues in Westminster. A sign of a good Government, whatever its make-up, is that it demonstrates that it can work with others. Let me also say that I will not take any lectures about delivering justice and legal remedies from a Government that has yet to deliver one piece of justice legislation to the Parliament—it does not look as if it will deliver any justice and legal remedies this year. We will not hear any proposals from the Government for a criminal justice bill for 18 months and yet it lectures us that, if Westminster does not deliver legislation, it will do so. It is unacceptable to take such a lecture from the Government. We are confident that we have a case to make that will ensure that our colleagues in Westminster agree that a review is needed. I ask the  Parliament to support the amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill.

I have a very straightforward question for the minister: will the £3 limit apply to all acute service sites throughout Glasgow, including Glasgow royal infirmary?

I always welcome the confidence that John Swinney has shown in local government. However, I ask him a similar question to the one that I asked Christine Grahame. Will he extend that confidence to allow local councils to set the local income tax that his party proposes to implement?

Christine Grahame and Alex Neil referred to ring fencing and have confirmed their confidence in local democracy throughout Scotland. Why does that confidence not extend to the setting of local income tax levels? I understand from the SNP's manifesto that those will be set centrally.

Earlier, I heard some poor comments from Christina McKelvie regarding the intellectual deficit in the Parliament, but, given that answer from Christine Grahame, it is just not good enough to say that. After being elected as First Minister, Alex Salmond said: "My pledge to the Parliament today is that any Scottish Government that is led by me will respect and include the Parliament in the governance of Scotland over the next four years."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 36.]  The First Minister should transmit such aspirations to his cabinet secretaries, who, at various committees during the scrutiny of the spending  review, have failed to respect the role of committees in ensuring that we interrogate effectively the spending plans. I will elaborate that point in relation to Kenny MacAskill's performance during his session with the Justice Committee on 4 December 2007. As we know, and have discussed a number of times, the SNP said that it would deliver 1,000 additional police officers on our streets throughout Scotland. It is perfectly legitimate for members of the Opposition to interrogate ministers about how they intend to deliver those 1,000 police officers. Ministers have said that that will be achieved through improved retention, redeployment of officers and increased recruitment. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is absolutely confident that he will deliver those extra police officers, but I am afraid that I am not. It is perfectly legitimate for us—

I will take no lectures from SNP members with regard to the creativity that we showed during our coalition years to ensure that officers were released for front-line duties. Our alliance contract, which I understand the members of Kenny Gibson's party opposed, was one of the measures that released 250 officers for front-line duties throughout Scotland. However, the issue here is that the minister has advised us that the process of retention will assist the Government in ensuring that an additional 1,000 police officers can be recruited. It is perfectly legitimate for members to ask the Cabinet Secretary for Justice how he expects to achieve that increase from retention, and whether his Government officials have carried out any illustrations or simulations of how they expect to do that. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice's answer was that there are no illustrations of how he expects to achieve that increase as a result of the retention of police officers, and that there have been no projects within his Government office to ensure that that happens. We have seen back-of-a-cigarette-packet politics from ministers—they are not willing to provide illustrations of how they expect 1,000 police officers to be delivered. The Government announced last year that it would procure a new prison in the Bishopbriggs area of Glasgow through the publicly procured process. As part of the interrogation process in the Justice Committee on 4 December last year, it was legitimate for us to question the cabinet secretary on how he expects that to progress. We  received no information from him on how the procurement process would be pursued. Again, there is not enough information from the Government on how it will pursue its agenda. For the Government to sign a blank cheque in that regard is not good enough. Our motion sets out very clearly what we expect from the Government, and we expect the Government to deliver on that.

At this time of year, it is traditional to bid each other a happy new year. I would like to take this opportunity to bid every criminal in Scotland a very unhappy new year as a result of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. There can be no doubt that serious organised crime causes misery in many of our communities—Margaret Curran made a powerful speech in which she raised those issues—but it is important to note that this is not only a justice issue and that almost any layer of government could be represented in the debate. As Bill Aitken said, organised crime has an effect on the health of our communities—so Nicola Sturgeon could be here to respond in relation to many of the challenges that face us. Organised crime also affects the business opportunities that John Wilson mentioned in his speech. There are many hard-working men and women who want to go about their daily business and develop their businesses but cannot do so because of the Tam McGraws of this world—and the other individuals who have been referred to this afternoon. Different layers of government are affected, and it is important that we look at the many ways in which we can approach this serious issue. The Labour amendment is clear and concise. In its one line, it says that we want to ensure that the resources are in place to ensure that we are seriously taking forward the message that there needs to be a cohesive approach to dealing with the serious issue that we are discussing. Pauline McNeill raised the well-publicised case of James Stevenson, nicknamed "the iceman". I am sure that if we were shown the details of the cost of the operation that apprehended him—not that I am requesting them—we would see that the costs of such operations are significant. The issue of resources is not just a political point that is being made here today; it needs to be dealt with seriously if we are to ensure that that kind of operation can be developed in the future.  There is no doubt that the partnership approach that the Crown Office and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency have taken is to be commended, and I commend the current and previous Lord Advocates for showing leadership on that. A direct approach to confiscating assets has been taken, to ensure that the individuals concerned realise that it is inevitable that crime does not pay. When we refer to partnership, we cannot evade the concerns about the relationship, which appears to be experiencing difficulty, between the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and the Scottish Police Services Authority. I ask the cabinet secretary to show political leadership to deal with the tensions that are clear in both organisations. From time to time, organisations have conflicts.

I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment. In all the evidence that I have seen and in the formation of both organisations, it is clear that the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency's operational responsibilities were to be independent. The tensions appear to relate to that, so any clarity from the Government about that would help. The Labour Party has always put tackling serious crime at the forefront of its manifestos. Bill Butler made the case for introducing a serious and organised crime bill, on which we made a commitment in our recent manifesto. Will the cabinet secretary introduce such a bill at some point? I understand some of the concerns that he expressed about the current legislation and the need to work with the UK Government, but we will have to refresh our legislation to deal with the individuals who are involved, whose crimes are the most serious.

This new year is going to be consensual. I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment. I am sure that many of us agree that, despite the successes in recovering assets and the increase in recovered assets over the years, the £17 million that has been recovered since 2003 is a small fraction of the criminal assets throughout Scotland. The latest estimate of the value of crime throughout the United Kingdom is £18 billion per year, so we face a serious challenge. Bill Aitken illustrated well the public's perception that, although we deal with the perpetrators of crime, their families still appear to benefit from their crimes. I would welcome a commitment from the Lord Advocate that more information will be provided in that respect, although I appreciate that the onus is on individuals to provide information about how they received their assets. I ask members to support the amendments in the names of Pauline McNeill and Margaret Smith. Ensuring that 1,000 additional police officers are evident in our local communities will assist the serious process of dealing with serious criminals—Sandra White cannot dismiss that fact. For the record, we met our manifesto commitment to provide more than 1,400 additional police officers from 1999 to 2007. I hope that the current Government will do likewise and meet its promise to deliver 1,000 additional police officers.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Labour members will in every way protect the civil liberties of the many. We have made that case on many occasions, for example by passing the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, thereby protecting the civil liberties of local residents, and by passing the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, which secured the civil liberties of paramedics. We have rebalanced the civil liberties debate to ensure that everyone has such protection. That is an important part of what we are discussing today. Margaret Smith's motion on behalf of the Liberal Democrats refers to the erosion of civil liberties and makes specific mention of ID cards. The Parliament cannot ignore the fact that we need a more robust and secure way of checking people's identities and ensuring that they are who they say they are. Margaret Smith failed to provide an alternative to ID cards; the Liberal Democrats have made no such proposals.

We will come on to the issue of cost, which is an important part of the debate. It is also important to point out that the Westminster Government has never considered fighting terrorism to be a policy objective of ID cards. However, they will not do any harm in that respect.

I cannot take any more interventions. Let us deal with a number of the myths about ID cards. One such myth is that people will be required to carry their ID cards, which members of other parties have claimed on a number of occasions, but it is clear from the Identity Cards  Act 2006 that citizens will not be required to carry their ID cards. It is not helpful to peddle such misconceptions. Another myth is that the ID card database will carry a wide range of information on card holders—Bill Aitken said that. However, the 2006 act is clear about what information will be held. My insurance company holds more information on me than will be held on the ID card database. The 2006 act provides no evidence that more information will be held by the Government on the database than my insurance company holds on me.

We cannot ignore the fact that 24 out of 27 member states of the European Union already have such a scheme in place. It would be crass of us not to learn from the European experience. Members often refer to what happens in other European countries, but no one has seen fit to do that in this morning's debate.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I remind Jeremy Purvis that it was a Labour amendment to the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill that allowed us to retain DNA samples from people who have been prosecuted for violent or sexual crimes. I hope that evaluation of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 will prove that that measure has been successful. DNA retention also helps to prove the innocence of people who have been falsely convicted of crimes, as a number of highly publicised cases involving people who had been incarcerated for many years have demonstrated.

Debates on such matters should take place in Westminster if they are to be constructive. I hope that, in the rest of the debate, our Liberal Democrat colleagues will do what they have not done so far and reveal their proposals for a scheme that is more effective than ID cards.

Will the member give way?

Labour members will support the amendments in the names of Bill Aitken and Margaret Smith. We think that they make good sense. Bill Aitken amplified a number of the greater public's concerns about ensuring that fines on individuals are effectively enforced. Margaret Smith's amendment speaks volumes, and it will help to ensure that the profession is with us and is part of the reforms. The cabinet secretary will be encouraged by the fact that we will also support his motion, which Labour members are greatly encouraged by. Of course, the motion is on the implementation of a piece of work that was carried out by the Labour ministers Cathy Jamieson and Hugh Henry. We want that legacy to be taken forward, and we thank the cabinet secretary for the kind words in his speech that acknowledged the work of the previous Executive and for his assurance that it will be implemented. Labour members want to ensure that the new legislation is enforced effectively and is resourced. We can see from the financial memorandum to the Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill that the Government will face a number of challenges in the upcoming spending review period to ensure that some of the financial commitments relating to courts are met. We will be holding the cabinet secretary to account in that respect. The public perception—sometimes unfair—is that justice is not being done, that it is not being done within the timescales that are required to secure public support and that it is not being effectively enforced. I am not in a position to give any personal experiences of having being cited as a witness, but many of us have heard from constituents who have endured very difficult experiences. The minister referred anecdotally to his own experience. During the passage of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, we heard about the experiences of many communities and their frustration with the justice system. Their perception was that the justice system works in favour of the accused—the perpetrators—rather than the victims. The 2007 act addresses that. It  will help us to strike the right balance and consider the victim's point of view. A number of specific matters were raised during the passage of the 2007 act, and the cabinet secretary mentioned some of those today. A key element of ensuring that the legislation works is the early preparation of cases. It is fair to say that there should be early preparation anyway and to ask why it was necessary to bring forward a new initiative. Perhaps we should have considered more effective early preparation of cases, which perhaps should have been happening before the bill was passed. However, we want to look forward rather than back. Labour members are confident that the Lord Advocate and her team will ensure that the time framework is delivered. Resources will be required, and I ask the Minister for Community Safety to clarify how the challenges will be resourced. For example, we have heard many times about the cost of preparing social inquiry reports and the difficulties associated with that. We have heard from the Scottish Police Federation about the challenges, including information technology challenges, that it faces in preparing for cases. We have to ensure that the resources are in place. That is a challenge for the Government. We have heard anecdotal evidence of the need to ensure that hearings are more effective. I am sure that we all hope that the change in the period between hearings from four weeks to two weeks will improve the system. We want the timescales to be fine tuned. The minister must make a commitment to provide the funds that are required to do that. We also want to ensure that the timeframe is enforced locally. Stuart McMillan was right to say that we need to take steps to ensure that we enforce the timescales. However, I do not agree with his specific point, because individuals could take advantage of statutory timescales. I do not want such difficulties in our justice system, so I do not think that that is the way forward. It is crucial that our JPs and sheriffs work with the system and us to implement the reforms; otherwise, they will not work. The previous Government signed up to provide significant resources to ensure that training was provided to assist with the process. I ask the minister to provide the necessary resources to train both new and existing sheriffs and JPs so that they are aware of the reforms. We must be clear that, unless those at a senior level in public services sign up to the reforms that the Parliament legislates for, they will not work. I disagree with Christina McKelvie's comments on work orders. We believe that there is a time and a place for work orders. In fact, in the financial memorandum to Criminal Proceedings etc (Reform) (Scotland) Bill, we set out the costs of  the work orders, which we saw as a way forward. I seek assurances from the minister that the pilots that were set out in that financial memorandum are in place and that, if they are successful—as the evidence that was brought forward showed they would be—they will be effectively resourced in the future. The cabinet secretary is well aware of the challenges that face him in ensuring that the legislation is effectively enforced. We want an effective justice system—one in which the greater public have absolute confidence.

The statements of more than 89,000 health service employees were at some point—some of them—missing for four weeks. Many of us who receive child benefit will have received a written explanation from HMRC of the circumstances following 20 November. To pick up on Murdo Fraser's point, will the minister confirm that he will write to the 89,000 employees to clarify the circumstances that surrounded this particular issue? The minister says that he is absolutely certain that the data did not fall into the wrong hands during the four-week period, but how certain can he be? Many of us have criticised FedEx and its handling of the issue. Has the minister considered requiring Strathclyde Police to examine the documents to ensure that data did not fall into the wrong hands?

This Sunday, 25 November, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board will implement a new policy of parking charges at Stobhill hospital. That is despite the fact that the Parliament's Public Petitions Committee has asked the board to delay the decision until the committee completes its consideration of two public petitions. Will the First Minister write to the health board to ask it to delay its plans until the committee has completed its deliberations?

To ask the First Minister what further funding will be committed to additional policing resources following the recent terrorist attack on Glasgow airport. (S3F-275)

All members in the chamber would have agreed with the First Minister when he said on 2 July that the response—including the response by Strathclyde Police—to the Glasgow airport attack was hugely impressive. Taking into consideration the huge commitment that was shown by Strathclyde Police, will the First Minister give his commitment to provide the £1.5 million that Strathclyde Police needs for the additional resources that it required during that period?

I note that at your request, Presiding Officer, the minister extended his speech. I hope that you do not receive a fee note for that, given that he previously worked as a solicitor. We are entering into a debate—not just today, but in the future—that will take some time to reach a conclusion. We know that a number of aspects of the legislation relating to business models in England and Wales will not be implemented for some time. We have time both today and in the future to develop a model that will improve the quality of the services that the legal profession provides. We welcome the Government's commitment to working closely with the legal profession to ensure that we deliver reforms. It is right for any Government to work with the profession to deliver a business model that can compete internationally. That is true of any business, not just the provision of legal services. Any successful Government—or any Government that wanted to be successful—would make the same case for any business model. At the same time, the Government must be  more specific about how it wishes to enhance the services that are delivered at local level. As with John Swinney's budget statement yesterday, the devil is in the detail. We welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary has accepted the amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill, but he must be clearer and more specific about how he will ensure that local access to legal services improves. Labour and, I am sure, other members have seen that in many of our communities access to justice is patchy and must be improved; many back benchers will have had experience of that. We must make clear how improvements will be made, and Labour will bring forward proposals in that area. Pauline McNeill's amendment is intended to ensure that the issue is debated in greater detail. Many aspects of today's motion were influenced by the Which? super-complaint. Although the complaint refers mostly to the advocate-client relationship, it offers us an opportunity to modernise the legal profession to ensure that we improve the service that the consumer receives. Whatever the chamber's views about the Which? super-complaint, we need to recognise that it was the result of a detailed analysis of the consumer experience. The Government needs to work closely with consumer organisations to ensure that, whatever business model is developed, the consumer experience is improved. Although I do not expect any disagreement about that from the Government—the minister might wish to intervene, however—I seek assurances that the Government will work not only with the legal profession but with consumer organisations to ensure that we—

I welcome that commitment from the cabinet secretary and agree with that way forward.  A number of key issues are worth raising today, some of which were mentioned in the Which? super-complaint. We must recognise that we live in the age of the one-stop shop. It is evident that consumers want commodities to be available at one point of contact, and I do not think that anybody would advocate that we should change an arrangement that consumers have demanded. The idea that solicitors, accountants, surveyors and others operate to a new business model that makes them available at a single point of contact is appealing. The majority of consumers out there would probably welcome such a model and the opportunities that would arise from a much clearer pricing policy and a more tailored service. There is a need for caution, however. The merging of services in such a business model could allow the integrity and independence of solicitors to be questioned. How solicitors would interact with other professions would need to be made clear. Unlike some members I am not legally qualified, but as a lay person, I am well aware of the high value that is attached to the independence of solicitors when they go about their daily business. That is why that proposed business model should be interrogated carefully. Moreover, a number of press and media reports—I do not know whether there is other detailed intelligence—have told how members of the criminal underworld take the opportunities offered by that business model to infiltrate legal practices. Such concerns were raised about the situation in England and Wales. I welcome the clear commitment from the minister to deliver a Scottish model that is based on the Scottish legal system. He rightly sets us apart from other parts of the United Kingdom because of the demographics of our communities. That point should be given serious consideration. Let us not be distracted by the model that has been delivered in England and Wales, although there might be opportunities to learn from experience there. We need to balance our approach to the proposed model with listening to some of the concerns that have been raised by legal professionals. A concern that has been raised with me is that people who are not qualified in the legal arena are providing legal advice. Under any new business model, we must be clear that anybody who provides legal advice must have a legal qualification. I seek assurances from the Government that it will deal with that genuine concern from legal professionals about unqualified people on the periphery of the legal arena. Another concern that was raised in the Which? super-complaint was about competition. Most of us would argue that competition is a good thing for consumers. We all like a bargain—whether it is Pauline McNeill on her many visits to Buchanan  Galleries in Glasgow or people who trawl through the price comparison sites on the internet to find a cheap holiday or cheap insurance. I am not sure whether there will ever be a price comparison site for legal services—perhaps there already is one, or perhaps somebody has thought about developing one. Although I am not legally qualified, I argue that comparing prices on the internet for legal advice is probably more complex than comparing Asda's grocery prices with those of Tesco and others. We must ensure that competition works in the consumer's favour and that our communities benefit from it. Although many of the arguments for the proposed business model are probably well meant, that model might not provide genuine competition. A number of sole traders provide a valuable legal service and we must ensure both that they are able to continue to do so under any new arrangements and that competition remains. In the cabinet secretary's speech to the Law Society, he said that Tesco already has internet advertisements for a £199 conveyancing service in England and Wales. Perhaps the price appeals to the consumer, but will they get the same quality of service? Another concern is that many public limited companies with aggressive and robust business plans would not want to be involved in some of the more detailed work that sole traders carry out, which could lead to cherry picking. Perhaps some sole practitioners already cherry pick—I am not sure—but we must interrogate such arguments carefully. In conclusion, the Law Society said in its consultation document that, of course, there will be rigorous debate on the subject in the Law Society. There is always rigorous debate in the Law Society—what better people to have such debate than legal practitioners? That is a good thing. Although today's debate is perhaps undersubscribed, when we reach the more detailed stages of the debate on the proposed business model for the legal profession and various organisations have made their representations to Parliament, there will be more rigorous debate in the chamber. We welcome the fact that the Law Society has said that the status quo is not an option. That is a mature way to approach the debate. It is also a welcome response to the various reviews that have taken place and to the Which? super-complaint. The legal profession has a responsibility to take the issue forward. The Presiding Officer is gesturing that I can go on for as long as I like, which is unusual, but I will finally conclude by saying that we need to have a rigorous debate in the Parliament. It is important that whatever model we deliver makes a genuine difference in communities throughout Scotland.  For far too long, many of our communities have not enjoyed the access to justice that they should have enjoyed and we must ensure that the legal profession provides a high-quality service in that respect. I move amendment S3M-847.1, to insert at end: "and considers that this approach should also widen choice, provide easier access to legal services and create the conditions for more affordable services so that social justice will be at the heart of future changes."

I welcome the cabinet secretary's commitment to carry out a review in respect of a number of issues, but will she examine the fact that the green transport policy will not be in place by 25 November, and if it is not, will she call on Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board to withdraw its plans until such time as they do conform with the policy?

I thank all the members who supported the motion and the thousands of people from my constituency and other constituencies who signed a petition in opposition to the proposed parking charges at Stobhill hospital and who are no doubt represented in the public gallery. [ Interruption. ]

I hear an allegation from Cathie Craigie that it might be my mobile phone that was interfering with the sound system, but it was definitely not mine. As we enter the festive period, some of us—rather unwillingly, I must say—find ourselves in some of the shopping malls that exist throughout Scotland. I was recently struck by the quality of the car parking facilities in many shopping centres and by the fact that those facilities are provided free. That led me to compare the free car parking spaces in those facilities with the fact that our hospitals charge for car parking. It reflects poorly on society that people who visit relatives and staff who care for patients who are at a vulnerable period in their lives are charged to do so. I will deal with several of the arguments that Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board has presented in respect of the implementation of car parking charges at Stobhill. I was born in Stobhill hospital and have lived in the area my entire life, but I have never known a problem with car parking at the hospital. The capacity has always been sufficient and no issues have arisen with commuters abusing the car park to use it as a park-and-ride facility to travel to Glasgow city centre.  One reason that the health board has given to justify the proposals is that they would fit with the board's green transport policy. If the board cared so much about its green transport policy, why has it not put in place what is required to deliver it? Not one additional bus service will be delivered by 25 November, not one cycle shed will be in place—which is a Glasgow City Council requirement—and there will be no showering facilities for those who wish to cycle to work. The health board has implemented no element of the green transport policy. That is another example of how Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board puts its policies first and worries later about the policies that will have to follow. It is unacceptable. I call on the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to say in her summing up that she will ensure that the health board puts in place its green transport policy before it implements the car parking charges at Stobhill hospital. For many years, Stobhill hospital has enjoyed the support of the community and has had an effective and constructive relationship with it. However, there is already evidence that that relationship will be put at risk if the car parking charges are implemented. There is evidence that building contractors who are involved in the ambulatory care and diagnostic unit project are parking in the surrounding area and that those who wish to evade paying the charges will do likewise. Despite the fact that I, and other elected members, have made representations to senior health board staff on that issue, they have not been able to deal with it. We are aware of the tensions that car parking can cause, particularly when people park outside their own residential area. That will be a consequence of the implementation of car parking charges at Stobhill. I call on the cabinet secretary to meet me and the local residents who will be affected, so that she can hear about the problem at first hand. I note that she visited the hospital to launch the new ACAD unit, which I welcome. However, she also has to meet the people who are concerned about this issue. I hope that she will make a commitment today to do so. The health board has also confirmed that it will make proposals for a private company to enforce the car parking policy. When the parish council built Stobhill hospital in 1899 to ensure that poor people could access health facilities, I am sure that it did not expect that 100 years later we would not only impose car parking charges on those who are already financially disadvantaged but use private companies to enforce those charges. I ask the cabinet secretary to join me in condemning such use of private contractors and to ensure that  those who are already financially disadvantaged are assisted. Far too often in members' business debates there is no clarity in the minister's response. I call on the cabinet secretary to suspend the introduction of charges at Stobhill hospital until the board's green transport plan is put in place. That point has already been made by the hospital's medical staff association. Will she review the very principle of implementing charges at Stobhill hospital? I accept that charges might have to be implemented at some sites but not at others. Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board has made it clear that it will take a blanket approach to implementing charges, which is unacceptable. Will the cabinet secretary carry out a review of the impact that charges will have on the surrounding community? The current review of hospital car parking charges is wide ranging, but it does not cover specifically the challenges that Stobhill hospital will face. The strength of opposition to the charges is something that I have not seen since the save Stobhill campaign. A number of representations from unions, communities and elected representatives have been made. I ask the cabinet secretary to ensure that their views are considered seriously.

Will the minister provide statistics for the number of adults who have been referred to the procurator fiscal for selling alcohol to young people? Will he confirm that additional resources will be provided to police forces throughout Scotland to ensure that they detect those individuals in the first place and to ensure that the legislation that we passed to allow for the possibility of imprisonment for such adults is taken forward?

We should recognise that there have been a number of historic moments in Parliament this morning. Hearts supporters have something to sing about following the Celtic and Hearts game last night. I understand that it is the first time in Parliament's history that that has been the case. Moreover, Bill Butler has converted to being a new Labour moderniser—another conversion and another welcome aspect of the debate.

I take that as read. I am sure that Peter Mandelson will welcome that qualification. I also welcome the fact that ministers have amplified their support for alternative dispute resolution. Fergus Ewing and Kenny MacAskill are not well known for being involved in the arts of meditation, conciliation and arbitration, but we welcome their support all the same. James Kelly referred to the number of surgeries that he has held as an elected representative. Those of us who have been elected members for a number of years will have had a number of disputes brought before us in which conciliation and alternative dispute resolution would have been the way forward. I remember disputes about council house sales from when I was a councillor. Members of the public wanted to settle disputes about land allocation, and that case was made on a number of occasions. I have also dealt with a number of cases that involve property factors. There are opportunities to ensure resolution much earlier in such cases. The Labour Party would welcome clarification from the minister on how ADR will be promoted. That is important. Christine Grahame made a point well when she asked what the public understand by the term. How many of us had to do a Google search on it last night for our speeches? We can see from that that the public would experience difficulties throughout the country.  It is also recognised that provision of the different forms of mediation throughout the country is patchy. I had an offline discussion about that with Charlie Gordon, who made the point that the cost is sometimes prohibitive. In the Glasgow Housing Association example, it is £180 per day. The Government will have to provide additional funding to ensure that such disputes can be resolved. The public would also be surprised to learn that there are opportunities for such arbitration to be legally binding—public information is required on that. Bill Aitken made a powerful point about the need to ensure that people who use alternative dispute resolution comply with the agreements that are reached at the conclusion of the process. It would be helpful to hear evidence on the percentage of parties who comply with such arrangements and on whether there are repeat offenders in respect of non-compliance. James Kelly made a very good point about citizens advice bureaux and law centres throughout Scotland, which fulfil a valuable role in ensuring that our constituents are aware of the options that are available to them. Many CABx and law centres are undervalued, as is shown by the funding that has been made available to them. If we are serious about providing opportunities for alternative dispute resolution, we must ensure that they are given additional funding for that purpose. The cabinet secretary said that he will bring forward proposals for a dispute resolution centre. I would welcome clarity about where the centre will be located and when it will be created. Perhaps Fergus Ewing can give us that information when he sums up. A number of academic reports have stated that there is confusion about what is meant by ADR—a number of members made that point today. We would welcome leadership from the Scottish Government in providing clarity on the matter. There have been many debates and academic reports on the issue, but we need clarity and guidance. The cabinet secretary would not expect to reach the end of the debate without hearing Labour members making the case for additional funding. Often, members of the public will not enter mediation if they believe that the costs will be prohibitive. I mentioned that in relation to GHA. Complainants will not propose mediation if they believe that they will be financially penalised as a result. We have to be clear that, in respect of the complainant, there are opportunities for costs to be avoided. I understand that the matter is complex and that, often, complainants do not want to bring matters to conclusion through mediation. I have dealt with a  number of constituents who were determined to have their day in court. That was how they wanted to make their case, and mediation was not an option for them. They were clear that going to court would give them an opportunity to amplify their concerns. The matter is complex, but we need a framework that provides opportunities for mediation. Pauline McNeill made the point powerfully that there has to be a way of enforcing the process if we want to ensure that people enter it. In conclusion, there has been an unprecedented level of consensual debate this morning, except on Hearts football club. I cannot remember a debate with the Scottish Government in which there has been so much consensus. It means that the cabinet secretary and the minister do not have to come back to Parliament on the matter until they have specific proposals. I hope that, from today's debate, they understand what we want. We look forward to hearing their proposals. The debate is not the most exciting debate that we will have, but it is important to people who are involved in disputes. As James Kelly and others have said, it is also important for organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland, which deal with cases at the front line and which require clarity on the matter as well.

The Executive is to be commended for having a debate on alcohol during alcohol awareness week. It is important that members put on record our appreciation of the large number of organisations that provide support to people who suffer from alcohol abuse. Particular mention should be made of Alcoholics Anonymous, because the evidence that I receive from constituents is that that organisation performs an invaluable role in communities throughout Scotland. It does not receive—nor does it want—a penny of public subsidy for that work. All credit should go to Alcoholics Anonymous. We welcome the opportunity to develop policies in partnership with the Executive and would like to comment on a number of issues that the cabinet secretary has raised. First, I will respond to his commitment to deal with licensed premises, such  as supermarkets, that provide unsuitable displays of alcohol. Many of us, particularly those of us who have children, find it unacceptable that the message that is sent out to communities throughout Scotland is that supermarkets are places to buy cheap drink. We commend the minister for proposing measures that we hope can be enforced effectively.

I thank Richard Simpson, who made—as always—a well-informed intervention. I will talk about underage consumption. On the proposal to ban certain drinks promotions, Labour members condemn retailers who seek to benefit from drinks promotions that encourage irresponsible alcohol consumption. However, we must be careful about how we deliver a ban. We considered the issue carefully during the passage of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill. Some people take advantage of drinks promotions responsibly—I hope that that includes most members—and should be entitled to have the opportunity to do so. We must consider whether evidence backs up the cabinet secretary's proposals. We must place on retailers a social responsibility to ensure that they do not encourage irresponsible consumption. Perhaps the simplest argument that we could put to retailers is that it is not in their interests to shorten consumers' lives by providing opportunities for alcohol abuse. The more we work with the industry to get that message across to retailers, the more successful we will be in implementing our strategy. We must accept that alcohol abuse takes place in our streets and fuels antisocial activity throughout Scotland. I am sure that all members have heard from organisations in their constituencies who have expressed concern about the consumption of alcohol in public areas, particularly by young people. Such behaviour sets the wrong example for the next generation of young people. I am proud of the measures that were delivered by the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 and the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to ensure that legal remedies, such as dispersal orders, are in place to tackle unacceptable behaviour in streets throughout Scotland.  The zero-tolerance approach to such behaviour is welcome, which is why we have difficulty in accepting the Liberals' amendment. We support rehabilitation, but we must send a clear message of zero tolerance of irresponsible behaviour on our streets. On many occasions, rehabilitation has been offered and a number of other avenues exhausted before dispersal orders were considered. There is no doubt that underage drinking presents a serious challenge to many communities throughout Scotland. The Labour amendment urges the cabinet secretary to call a summit of political leaders and relevant stakeholders in Scotland, to provide a framework and to develop not a strategy but an effective action plan to deal with this serious issue. At least 52 per cent of young girls in Scotland get drunk twice a month, which is unacceptable. I am sure that the cabinet secretary wants to work with us to create opportunities to tackle that. We welcome the minister's commitment to ensuring that the polluter pays, but I will strike a less consensual note by quoting the following comment: "I argue against the measure because it is punitive, as public house premises and clubs pay the Exchequer substantial amounts of money ... in particular, through non-domestic rates."— [ Official Report , 16 November 2005; c 20743.]  Those are not my words; they are the words of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's deputy, the Minister for Community Safety, Fergus Ewing, who is not in the chamber. I will quote another member: "The way to address the problem is to deal with it through the bill and the new licensing regime. If necessary, the premises can be shut down. That is what we should do with these places. We should not enable them to bring in other measures as that could legitimise the antisocial behaviour."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 3 October 2005; c 2948.] Bruce Crawford said that when he spoke in opposition to the amendment in my name, which was agreed at stage 2 of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill, the object of which was to ensure that licensed premises pay for the additional policing costs of dealing with any unacceptable activities that may result. I commend the cabinet secretary for bringing forward a measure that was the subject of a successful Paul Martin amendment. Unfortunately, Fergus Ewing, now the Minister for Community Safety, lodged a stage 3 amendment that resulted in the measure being deleted from the bill. Labour Party members are happy to commend the SNP for emulating Labour Party policy and we look forward to providing the Government with many  other examples of Labour amendments that were unsuccessful because of SNP opposition. Of course, the Labour Party welcomes the opportunity to tackle the problem. We want to work with the wide range of organisations that have a role to play in tackling alcohol abuse, including Alcoholics Anonymous, to which I referred earlier, all of which have a serious role to play. We have to work together in Parliament on the issue. On occasion, that will mean that the Government will have to adopt policies that its members rejected when they were in Opposition in a previous life. I ask the chamber to support the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name. I move amendment S3M-681.2, to insert after "product for sale": "further notes the high incidence of underage drinking and the harm done to those young people and the negative effect that underage drinking can have on Scottish communities; believes that the Scottish Government should call a summit of all relevant stakeholders to develop an effective strategy to tackle underage drinking;"

It is clear from the debate that the Scottish National Party has failed to give clear assurances that it will deliver on its manifesto and provide an extra 1,000 police officers. Over the past couple of days, we have heard from a number of politicians who have admitted that they got it wrong. They have shown humility in confessing that they got their sums wrong. The present Government, however, has failed to do the same. I appreciate how humiliating it would be for the minister to admit that he got it wrong, but we will accept that admission by letter, by telephone call, or even by text message, if the minister wishes to exchange mobile phone numbers. The minister has to show the same humility, because that is good government—it is accepting that he got the sums wrong and moving the debate on from there. Instead of showing that humility, the Government seeks to condition our thinking. Perhaps we got it wrong. Perhaps we misread page 58 of the SNP manifesto, which, apparently, mentions the equivalent of 1,000 police officers. I think not. In fact, the manifesto was clear. It said that the SNP would place those extra police officers "on our streets". I do not often quote Julius Caesar in the chamber, but this is an interesting one: "Men are nearly always willing to believe what they wish." In this case, the minister can convince himself that the statement in his party's manifesto means the equivalent of 1,000 police officers. He is experiencing difficulties convincing some of his loyal back benchers, however, particularly Nigel Don. Credit is due to Nigel Don, who is willing to interrogate his Government's manifesto and has given a commitment to deliver on it. Well done to Nigel Don. He is a credit to his party and, indeed, to the Justice Committee. Some members have asked about police numbers when Labour was in Government. What did Labour deliver? Jackson Carlaw has talked about this on a number of occasions. I can provide some interesting statistics. When in Government,  Labour provided, on average over 10 years, 144 police officers per year. When the Tories were in Government, they provided 95 police officers per year, so I will take no lectures from them, although I support the Tory motion, which ensures that we hold the Government to account.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I will also take no lectures from any of the then opposition members who opposed the legal remedies that we delivered under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to ensure that police officers are not only out there on the streets, but can actually fulfil their role as local police officers. The opposition that members raised to dispersal orders, for example, was a disgrace. I hope that the present Government will deliver on the 2004 act as well as giving a commitment to ensure that community wardens can play their important role. I have yet to hear the minister confirm that he will continue the previous Executive's support to community wardens, who play a crucial role in communities throughout Scotland. There was a great slogan during the election campaign: "It's time." I do not know how many times we heard it. It is time now for the minister to tell us how many police officers there will be in 2011. It is time for the minister to answer. How many police officers will retire in 2009? We believe the figure to be 500. Will some officers be refused retirement? The minister must answer yes or no. We would welcome answers from the Government on these issues, once and for all. It is time that it delivered on its manifesto.

To ask the First Minister, in light of the decision to end community reparation orders, what the Scottish Government's plans are to ensure that perpetrators of crime are required to give something back to communities affected by antisocial behaviour. (S3F-200)

On 16 May, the First Minister promised: "The days of Scottish Government imposing its will on the Parliament are behind us, although I daresay that there might be days in the near future when I come to lament their passing."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 25.]  Given that the Government has clearly imposed its will on Parliament by scrapping community reparation orders without consulting it, will the First Minister apologise for the apparent oversight and instruct the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to keep to the principles that the First Minister set out when he accepted his post?

If the SNP does not fulfil its commitment to deliver 1,000 extra police officers, will Patrick Harvie no longer associate himself with the SNP Government?

Derek Brownlee does a great disservice to Labour members by suggesting that they are dour. If he looks at Margaret Curran and Johann Lamont, he will see that they are happy that the SNP's honeymoon has come to an end. The blips have started to appear. On 3 May, more than 1.3 million people cast their vote in favour of the SNP. When they marked their cross in the box, they were clear that the SNP would deliver 1,000 extra police officers. Michael Russell might find that funny, but I am afraid that the people in the constituency that I represent, and in many others throughout Scotland, do not find it funny that those 1,000 extra police officers will not be delivered. The manifesto did not state in the small print that it would be the equivalent of 1,000 extra police officers. It was clear in the SNP manifesto that it would deliver 1,000 extra police officers, not the return of Rebus and Taggart from retirement, not overtime or the "equivalent" that we see in endowment policy documents. Instead, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, who, like his deputy, is not here today, tried to create wriggle-room for himself during his appearance on a debate on STV by saying that it was stupid of Michael Crow to ask how many police officers would be in place on 4 May 2008. I will therefore put my own stupid question directly to Nicola Sturgeon: how many police officers will be in place in May 2008? How many will be in place in May 2009? How many will be in place in 2010? Perhaps the minister wants to intervene on that point. I am more than happy for her to clarify.

She is unable to clarify. The minister needs to be unequivocal. Her document states, "It's time to look forward", but the cabinet  secretary is not happy to do that when answering questions about the future projection of police numbers. The document makes clear the SNP's ambitions for the first 100 days of government and it is clear in stating that it will deliver 1,000 police officers in communities throughout Scotland—no Rebus, no Taggart; it is very clear. We look forward to seeing that commitment delivered, and we will welcome the opportunity to question the minister on 4 May 2008. The minister should take a lead from Roseanna Cunningham, who was unequivocal in saying in 2002: "As Justice Minister I would ensure that the SNP delivered on our pledge to deliver one thousand more police officers." I would like to hear from Roseanna today. That was a clear and unequivocal quotation of her words. It is a pity that she is not the justice minister; the people of Scotland would have been well served by that unequivocal comment. Perhaps I may take issue with Iain Gray, but I will not excite Labour's business manager. My calculation is that 16,234 police officers were in place on 3 May 2007. Therefore, we want to see 17,234 police officers in place on 4 May 2011. Will the minister deliver that, yes or no? Will she deliver 17,234 police officers? No Rebus, no Taggart, no overtime—we want to know how many police officers will be in place. We and the people of Scotland will hold her to account. The SNP also promised, in what the First Minister has called an ambitious document, to deliver a criminal justice bill as an early action. Will the minister confirm what an early action is? When will the SNP introduce that important legislation? I see that Michael Russell thinks that what I am saying is funny, but I suggest to him that several legislative remedies could be discussed. Patrick Harvie's proposed member's bill could be debated, or perhaps Patrick Harvie could lodge amendments to a criminal justice bill. There could be debates on DNA retention, which SNP members have said that they are keen to explore, and on several other criminal justice issues. However, the SNP Government is terrified of having a debate on justice and on the challenges that people throughout Scotland face. It is soft on crime, and it knows that a criminal justice debate would reveal that. The SNP Government promised to work with all the parties that are represented in the chamber—I hear Nicola Sturgeon agreeing with that. In fact, the First Minister said in his acceptance speech: "My pledge to the Parliament today is that any Scottish Government that is led by me will respect and include the Parliament in the governance of Scotland over the next four years."— [ Official Report , 16 May 2007; c 36.]  In that context, I welcome the commitment that Nicola Sturgeon has again given. However, the First Minister has a lot to learn if he thinks that he can advise the Parliament by means of an inspired question that he is scrapping community reparation orders. Obviously, he has been away from the chamber for far too long. If he calls that joint working, he has a lot to learn. The possibility of a general election has been mentioned many times. In the light of the SNP Government's record over the past five months, I say, bring on a general election—and roll on the Scottish Parliament elections in 2011.

How will the cabinet secretary ensure that the polluter pays? I lodged an amendment at stage 2 of the Licensing (Scotland) Bill to ensure that the polluter paid. Fergus Ewing, the cabinet secretary's deputy minister, opposed that amendment. In fact, he successfully deleted the very provisions that would have made the polluter pay. How will the cabinet secretary ensure that the polluter pays, and what legislation will he introduce to ensure that that happens?

SNP members referred to the failure of the GHA stock transfer. If that is their version of failure, I will speak of the so-called failure in my constituency that has seen £115 million of housing investment. Indeed, Nicola Sturgeon's constituency has seen £64 million of housing investment and Glasgow as  a whole has seen over £0.5 billion of such investment. If the minister wants to disassociate herself from that investment, I am happy to support her in that. In fact, if she is happy to disassociate herself from any of the new-build initiatives that we will see in my constituency, I am happy to be there at their launch and confirm that she does not support them.

I am afraid that the minister is not being as constructive as previous housing ministers have been. She should give credit where credit is due—some of her fellow SNP members should have done likewise. The minister did not pay tribute in her speech, though it is important to do so, to the 600 voluntary members on the management committees of local housing organisations. Those organisations would not exist if people did not give up their time day in, day out, to ensure that the investment that is in place is used in the best possible way for local priorities. The minister should give due recognition to those people in her closing remarks because they are local heroes who make a difference in our constituencies throughout Glasgow. As Tom McCabe said in his speech, we must have a balanced debate about the GHA situation. I would simply say that GHA has, to use a famous Glaswegian saying, overstayed its welcome. As Johann Lamont and many other members have recognised, GHA has taken a lethargic approach to second-stage transfer. However, I do not want second-stage transfers to be pushed out the door just for the sake of it. Whatever second-stage transfers are considered, we must ensure that there is a robust argument for them so that they can deliver for future generations. The issue is not just delivering second-stage transfer but ensuring that we deliver futures for our communities. Another major disappointment for me is the poor relationship between GHA and community-based housing associations. I recognise that there may be faults on both sides of the argument, but I call for the minister to show leadership. The previous minister established a foundation that ensured that we brought together as many stakeholders as possible in the working group, which was helpful. We should ensure that community-based housing associations share best practice with GHA and  that they are involved in the development of second-stage transfer. I am not convinced that good practice and a robust relationship are in place. The Communities Scotland inspection report refers to the poor handling of complaints by GHA, which is a particular issue that should be addressed. We have had a good debate. We should consider ways in which we can work together and put in place a timeline to ensure that we deliver second-stage transfer. A robust argument must be made in that respect.

I thank the cabinet secretary for mentioning that, as a result of eight years of a Labour and Liberal Democrat coalition, there has been a reduction in crime. When Labour members made that very point, he did not support it. Alex Neil made the case against the proposed commission when he referred to the Justice 1 Committee's comprehensive and significant work on this issue. The fact is that Scotland's elected representatives have already collated statistics, and I am concerned that the Government finds itself unable to move forward on that basis. Moreover, the proposal for the independent commission lacks detail. I cannot imagine that, in their previous life as members of the Opposition, Fergus Ewing and Kenny MacAskill would have accepted such an announcement without any detail. I wonder whether Fergus Ewing can confirm the timescale for the commission's report. We support the principle of rehabilitation and having alternatives to custody; indeed, members on these benches have said as much a number of times. However, we also realise that our communities need to be protected from some very dangerous individuals. I will be more specific about certain statistics that Cathie Craigie and others referred to. Under the proposals about six-month sentences, 600 housebreakers, 1,600 individuals convicted of common assault and 60 people convicted of serious assault and robbery will be set free. I do not know whether the minister wishes to intervene to tell me that those statistics are incorrect, but—

I thank Mr MacAskill for clarifying that point, to which I will return in a moment. He has also made it very clear that he is unable to deliver the prison places to deal with those individuals, which gives them a passport to freedom. The SNP manifesto says:  "The presumption will be that an offender given a custodial sentence of less than 6 months will have that sentence turned into an equivalent punishment in the community." As I said, that is not from one of my press releases or from any other Scottish Labour Party website. The SNP's manifesto makes it very clear that the individuals to whom I referred will be set free. I realise that we face challenges in respect of the prison population. After all, 50 to 80 per cent of prisoners have difficulty with writing and numeracy skills and they are 13 times more likely to be unemployed than the general population. We also know that they face drug misuse and rehabilitation issues. However, the cabinet secretary's proposals are heavily dependent on the participation of offenders, and he must recognise that, despite record investment in rehabilitation, the offender has to take part in these programmes in the first place. As Mike Pringle mentioned, the SNP's manifesto says that it will provide £35 million of additional funding through changes to the Scottish prison service. When will that funding be provided? It is not good enough for the cabinet secretary simply to advise the chamber that he will provide additional funding; he has to tell us when it will become available. I again refer to the SNP's manifesto, which outlines the early actions of an SNP Government. We know that one of those actions has been to change the name of the Scottish Executive to the Scottish Government. I appreciate that commitment, but we must question how serious the SNP is, given that, in the section of its manifesto on its early actions in government, it said: "We will introduce a Criminal Justice Bill, which will include new arrangements for tough community sentences and steps to increase transparency, consistency and fairness in sentencing." I ask the minister to clarify what is meant by early action. Does that mean next autumn, 18 months after the election? A wide range of views were expressed on automatic early release, but the will of the Parliament was to scrap it. However, this Government is dragging its heels in ensuring that the will of the Parliament is delivered. During the stage 3 debate on the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Bill, Kenny MacAskill accepted the principles of the bill, which had been subject to a number of amendments, but said: "We must ensure that the resources are in place before the bill is implemented."— [ Official Report , 15 March 2007; c 33325.]  The bill was passed on 15 March 2007. It is now—unfortunately, from our point of view—the cabinet  secretary's job to ensure that the necessary resources are provided. When will he do that? When Fergus Ewing makes his closing speech, I urge him to give us no more preamble. I want to hear from the Fergus Ewing we saw in opposition—the straight-talking Fergus Ewing who accused many Executive ministers of being the toothless tigers of Government and who, on a number of occasions, referred to himself as the Celtic tiger. I ask the Minister for Community Safety to answer the questions for once. Will he provide the £35 million that the SNP committed to rehabilitation in its manifesto—yes or no? Will he apologise for the way in which the proposal for a commission has been introduced? Will he deliver the funding for the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007—yes or no? On a more constructive note, will he meet me and Pauline McNeill to discuss issues relating to the success of the 218 programme in Pauline McNeill's constituency—yes or no? I close on a consensual note by asking members to support the amendment in the name of Pauline McNeill.

Will the member give way?

The member has referred twice to tough community sentences. Can he give me an example of tough community sentencing in his region?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Glasgow City Council to discuss recycling targets. (S3O-684)

I thank the minister for his constructive reply. I remind him of today's BBC report, which mentions the interest of a number of social groups in being involved in recycling throughout Scotland. One group in my constituency, the primary and secondary school sector, wishes to be involved in recycling but requires the funding to be able to take that up. Will there be additional funding to allow that sector to be involved in recycling?

I echo Margaret Curran's comments about the families of the victims. They have behaved in an impeccable and constructive manner following the trial and they deserve justice. On the conduct of the trial and in defence of Mr Mackay, the Lord Advocate said: "It has been suggested that the case was not prosecuted properly and that mistakes were made that led to essential evidence not being placed before the court. On the basis of the information that I have been given, I reject that suggestion." Will she confirm what information she has received? What other information might she receive at a further date that might allow her to review her decision that she has full confidence in Mr Mackay's prosecution of the case?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent meetings it has held with interested parties to progress its priorities for culture. (S3O-572)

Will the minister join me in commending projects such as the Northern Rock recording studio and Toonspeak Young People's Theatre in my constituency, which give people—particularly young people—opportunities to access culture and elements of the arts? Can she assure us that such projects, which have experienced difficulties with funding, will see a more consistent approach to securing a long-term funding package so that their future can be ensured?

I want to maintain the spirit of consensus, after one slight interruption. John Lamont said that Annabel Goldie raised the issue of drugs misuse even when it was not fashionable to do so. I argue that all members in the chamber have raised the issue and that it has always been the fashion to do so, because drugs misuse affects many parts of Scotland. It is important that we learn. We are not pioneers of the cross-party approach. I am old enough—I suppose that most of us are—to remember the Scotland against drugs campaign,  which is the one thing for which I give Michael Forsyth credit. The campaign highlighted the need for parties to work together and the need for us to acknowledge the challenges that our constituents face. It is important that we move away from the language that members have used today and in previous debates—the word "holistic", the "joined-up approach" and many other such references that have been made—and talk about the specifics. Duncan McNeil and other members raised specific points, and it is important that we take them on board. He also raised the issue of the importance of having a more robust regime in the methadone dispensing programme. I know that in my constituency there is a role for pharmacies to play in supporting addicts who are involved in the methadone programme and ensuring that they and their children receive services during that process. Trish Godman made a constructive and informed speech on the importance of kinship. Every member in the chamber values the role of grandparents and other carers in respect of tackling drugs misuse. In that area, members of the Parliament can move away from using language such as "holistic" and "joined up" and say, "Yes, we will take on board the importance of the role of kinship, and we will move forward to ensure that grandparents and other carers feel valued." To be honest, I am afraid that grandparents and other carers do not feel valued at the moment. When they do, we will be setting a clear agenda on which we can move forward. As in previous debates on drugs misuse—I checked the Official Report —members mentioned that there were 421 drug-related deaths in Scotland in 2006. We talk about the challenges that arise in relation to drugs, but we should also consider how we can learn from that statistic. We are talking about human beings and human tragedies, and many families are affected by drugs misuse. Is it time to consider establishing a drugs commission? I would like to hear the Executive's view on that. Will the Cabinet Secretary for Justice take the matter forward and consider holding a more detailed inquiry into how those deaths occurred? Are there lessons to be learned from the specific detail of the deaths of those individuals? We are referring to human beings; they are not just statistics. Perhaps we should take a more detailed approach to ensure that we learn from the statistics. The Parliament launched an inquiry in respect of the McKie case. I argue that a public inquiry might be required into the 421 drug-related deaths in Scotland. Such an inquiry should at least be considered, because it would help us to understand the statistics and ensure that, when we invest in challenging the misuse of drugs, we get best value.  I turn to the question of how we tackle antisocial behaviour and the importance of ensuring that the right environment does not exist for the drug dealers who are the scourge of our communities. Let us face it—constituencies such as mine and Margaret Curran's are havens for drug dealers. Through the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, we successfully provided unprecedented levels of investment to tackle drug dealers. I speak from my personal experience in dealing with Glasgow's neighbourhood relations team. For the first time in my career as an elected representative, which will have lasted 14 years in December, I had a call and an e-mail from the neighbourhood relations team in respect of a drug dealer who was carrying out activities in my constituency. The team asked for a letter of support in respect of a court action. That happened because the team is working with the various authorities throughout Glasgow to tackle the drug dealers in our constituencies. The action is a result of the previous Executive's unprecedented investment in tackling antisocial behaviour. I call on the Government to continue that high level of investment, including the investment in closed-circuit television, which plays a crucial role in tackling drug dealers. I am sure that we all wish Graeme Pearson every future success as he retires from the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. He has played a crucial role in providing leadership to those who tackle the most dangerous individuals in our communities—individuals who supply drugs. I welcome his innovative approach. I hope that the new Government will ensure that every support is given to the SCDEA so that it can continue its good work. Nothing hits drug dealers more than the recovery of assets from them and their families. Constituents often raise concerns with members about the fact that drug dealers' families benefit from their activities. We on the Labour benches will continue with the spirit of consensus. I am sure that other members will do so, too. However, it is important that we hold each other to account and have a robust and constructive dialogue, that we drill down into the 421 deaths, and that we do our best for communities throughout Scotland.

Following on from the quotation that the First Minister read out, does he agree that the Executive would be in breach of the Police (Scotland) Act 1967 if it placed police officers in our communities, as the act states that chief constables have the sole responsibility for operational decisions about police deployment and enforcing law in their areas?

The minister mentioned the role of the police service and the importance of the independence of chief constables throughout Scotland. Can he therefore advise us why, in his statement to The Courier , he said that the Executive will seek to place police officers in our communities? Is the minister going to introduce new legislation that will give him the power of ministerial direction to place such requirements on our local police authorities?

For clarification, the Crimestoppers website already has a portal that is headed "Most Wanted", which provides the sort of details that have been mentioned. Would not it be more helpful to embrace that website, rather than form a new one?

I welcome the debate. It is appropriate on this  occasion that there is no motion because that gives us the opportunity to work together. However, there will be healthy differences of opinion on some matters, which we can interrogate carefully. The Labour Party's position on sex offenders has been consistent: precedent should take over when it comes to the safety of our communities and we are absolutely unequivocal about that. We will leave no stone unturned to make sure that that policy is delivered. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the Justice 2 Sub-Committee, which was convened by Jackie Baillie. The minister and other members who are in the chamber today played a crucial role in making 33 comprehensive recommendations on managing sex offenders. We ensured that the petition that my constituent Margaret Ann Cummings brought to Parliament under very difficult circumstances was given serious consideration during the sub-committee's proceedings. As I have said, it is important that we ensure that the recommendations that have been made are implemented and that the previous Government's press releases are not simply recycled. It is more important for the current Government to ensure that those recommendations are advanced. We will hold it to account on that. As we have said consistently—I made this point to Cathy Jamieson, so it is not an issue of political affiliation—we must also ensure that the recommendations are resourced. Looking for offenders who are missing requires resources, so we must ensure that appropriate resources are made available. Labour members feel that it is extremely important that we work with our United Kingdom colleagues on sex offenders—that is a vital aspect of the work that we must do. When it comes to the management of registered sex offenders, there can be no opportunity for those whom I have described as the most dangerous individuals on the planet to take advantage of the constitutional and legal differences that exist north and south of the border. Given that we must ensure that a consistent system is in place throughout the UK, I ask the minister to advise us when he will next meet his UK counterparts to ensure that we work with our colleagues in dealing with—

I genuinely welcome that co-operation; the minister did not have to be defensive. We look forward to hearing the outcome of those discussions. Anecdotal evidence from previous cases shows that offenders such as Peter Tobin have taken advantage of the existence of different systems in different parts of the UK, so it is important to ensure consistency. We look forward to finding out about proposals on how we can work together in the UK. I turn to some of the Tories' proposals and their recent announcements on three issues in particular—the first of which is satellite tracking of registered sex offenders. We welcome that measure, which was announced by David Blunkett in 2004. Three pilots took place in 2004 and we hope that during the discussions that take place efforts will be made to ensure that pilots are rolled out in other parts of the UK. Of course we welcome the use of satellite tracking systems, although it is important that we ensure that they will be effective. As regards what has been described in the media as the naming-and-shaming websites, we welcome the introduction of a system to ensure that communities are made aware of the identity of the people whom I have described as the most dangerous individuals on the planet. However, such a system is already in place: Crimestoppers already provides an opportunity for us to expose such individuals. A representative of Crimestoppers to whom I spoke this morning informed me that that organisation would be happy to develop the existing portal and that such a system could be introduced in Scotland very quickly. I understand that discussions took place with the previous Scottish Executive and the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland to ensure that that is possible. A system that will ensure that we can expose the relevant individuals when they are at their most dangerous is already being delivered. Lie detectors are another measure that David Blunkett introduced in 2004. He made it clear that although they would serve a purpose in acting as a deterrent, they could not—understandably—be used during court proceedings. On that basis, Labour members welcome the Tories' proposal. Another important piece of work by the Justice 2 Sub-Committee was consideration of how best to manage a housing strategy for registered sex offenders. People were concerned that there was no coherent strategy. I know from discussions with the previous Minister for Justice that it was intended that an action plan would deliver a strategy to ensure that we managed sex offenders  rather than their managing us, which was the previous protocol. Retention of DNA samples was discussed earlier. I appreciate that there is no consensus among members on that issue, but the Labour Party is determined to give our communities added protection—we are motivated by that determination. We talk often about how best we can minimise the risk from sex offenders. In line with our manifesto commitment, we said that we would revisit the issue of DNA retention. I raised the issue, in fact, during the course of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill last year. DNA retention can undoubtedly be a useful tool in detecting sex offenders and in preventing sex offences. We are willing to develop the use of satellite tracking, lie detectors and naming-and-shaming websites for sex offenders, so I do not believe that DNA retention, which has been carefully tested, is a civil liberties issue. The law lords considered the issue in detail and made it clear that DNA retention does not contravene human rights. We therefore welcome the cabinet secretary's statement that he will revisit the issue of DNA retention. When I consider civil liberties—I make no apologies for saying this—I also consider the civil liberties of Mark Cummings and Angelika Kluk. We should bear that in mind when we consider whom we represent. The debate has been effective and we hope that it will help to progress the issue.

Like other members, I congratulate Kenny MacAskill and Fergus Ewing on their new positions in the Executive. I have followed the work of both of them over the years, and I do not recall their being so consensual in opposition—or indeed co-operative—but we will consider their conversion closely. I, too, congratulate the new members who have made their maiden speeches. I will follow Bill Wilson's contributions with interest. I congratulate Claire Baker on making a strong case for community wardens. They do a serious job throughout Scotland's communities. They are making a difference, and I hope that we will hear from the minister today that we are to continue with the £120 million commitment that went towards community wardens to ensure that they can continue to make a difference. That is not about having police officers on the cheap; it is about community wardens complementing the important role of community police officers. We look forward to hearing about that important role, and we will follow the situation with interest. We are very proud of our Labour agenda. We were on the side of firefighters—we introduced the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 to ensure that our medical staff, firefighters and paramedics were given added protection. Mike Rumbles sneers at that, but firefighters did not find being attacked in the Blackhill area of my constituency funny or entertaining.

I am sorry, I do not have time.  In the spirit of co-operation, we worked with others in this chamber to tackle religious bigotry, which is an unacceptable part of Scottish culture. We hear the SNP Government talk about co-operation. I remind it that there has been co-operation in this chamber. Margaret Curran and other former ministers worked hard in co-operation with the various parties that are represented in the chamber. We also deleted the database of excuses that existed prior to the passing of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Before that act came into force, the authorities would say, "We can't do anything about it because we don't have the legal remedy to deal with these issues." We ensured that the toolkit to deal with antisocial behaviour in our communities was available to the authorities. As a result of that legislation, communities are much stronger and are willing to stand up to the tiny minority of people who indulge in antisocial behaviour. We will enter into the spirit of co-operation that has been mentioned today—while stressing the fact that it has existed for the past eight years—but we will not join the hug-a-hoody alliance that has been created in the chamber today. We will not make communities safer by making excuses for the tiny minority who cause havoc in those communities. In July last year, David Cameron said that hoodies are trying to "blend in" rather than appear threatening. I do not know whether hoodies exist in the community that he lives in, but I can assure him that they exist in the community that I live in and represent. They exist in the Aitken Street area of my constituency and a constituent of mine who lives there advised me that four young men with hooded tops were trying to blend into the local community while they were vandalising her car. We will not join the hug-a-hoody alliance; we will stand up to the unacceptable behaviour of the tiny minority. It is important to stress, as we have done on a number of occasions in this chamber, that the people I am talking about are a tiny minority. The vast majority of young people play a constructive role in their local community. We are parents, grandparents, uncles and aunts and we all know that to be the case. We will not take any lectures from anyone in that regard. Margaret Curran mentioned the escape route that the SNP's manifesto talks about—the six-month sentence policy that, as Kenny MacAskill advised us, will involve sheriffs being able to serve a six-month sentence only in exceptional circumstances. I will elaborate on Margaret Curran's words on that subject and clarify, by reference to the Scottish Executive's statistical bulletin for 2005-06, what kinds of individual we are talking about. We are talking about 600  housebreakers, 1,600 people who have been convicted of common assault and 60 people who have been convicted of serious assault and robbery, among others, getting off scot free. I ask the minister to clarify, when he sums up, whether those are the individuals who will serve their sentence in the community and to confirm that he will not allow sheriffs to have an opportunity to ensure that such people are given—as a deterrent to others—a custodial sentence. I remind the minister that when Parliament passed the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005, it took the decision to enable sheriffs to give people six-month custodial sentences for offences relating to that piece of legislation. Every year in this chamber, there is a Dutch auction in relation to police numbers. Mike Pringle did his party a disservice when he said that he did not know how the figure of 1,000 new police officers was arrived at. Perhaps the minister can advise us how the SNP arrived at the figure of 1,500 police officers. I ask the minister to clarify whether he will give ministerial direction to police boards in relation to frontline police officers. What will he do if chief constables say, "I'm afraid that we are not going to deliver those community police officers in your local communities"? I and other elected members have made the case for additional resources on a number of occasions, but we have been advised that it is not for ministers to direct local police boards. The minister, Fergus Ewing, is pretty good at asking people to say yes or no. I ask him, when he closes the debate, to say whether he will give ministerial direction to ensure that community police officers are directed to communities such as the one that I represent. He can then go back to the police boards and tell them. We on the Labour benches are proud of the Labour-led Executive's record. We look forward to holding the Executive to account. We will of course co-operate whenever that is appropriate, but we will always be on the side of the local communities we represent.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to improve public transport links to health facilities. (S2O-12229)

Is the minister concerned, as I am, about the gross inadequacy of transport links to acute hospitals throughout the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area? Does he accept that if good public transport links cannot be provided, patients and staff should not be charged for car parking at those facilities?

Will the member give way?

I will confirm my point. I am talking about persistent offenders who have no future, and about the armed forces making available some sort of structure that could ensure that we give those offenders some kind of future and some structure in their lives. That would be better than Barlinnie.

The trademark of this Labour-led Executive is that it has been willing to show leadership on the problem of antisocial behaviour. Far too many people have been on the sidelines of the argument concerning the various legal remedies that we have provided; for example, the SNP on the issue of dispersal orders. Its attitude has been, "Let's look and see how dispersal orders turn out, and then we'll decide whether we support them." We were willing to show leadership and say that we support the possibility of enforcement through dispersal orders. The Tories opposed the dispersal orders that have been successful throughout the country. We have been willing to use enforcement where necessary and to stand up and be counted on behalf of our communities in ensuring that various remedies are available to our constituents in the many areas concerned. Through the debate on antisocial behaviour, and the dispersal orders that have been successful in the Dennistoun area of my constituency, I have learned about the challenges that we face with persistent offenders and the lack of disposals that are available to deal with those individuals. That is not something that members will have heard me debate as often as maybe I should have in the chamber. I have been enthusiastic about debating the enforcements that should be available, but I have been less enthusiastic about looking at how to deal with the perpetrators. However, that is the next phase of the process. We must ensure that  the despair that is felt among the various authorities that deal with young people, especially young males, is dealt with, and we must be more creative in the disposals that are available. I raise one potential controversial possibility in the belief that we must show leadership in at least debating the issue. I call on the minister to consider using the armed forces to provide some kind of structure for those young people. Christine Grahame might say, "Oh dear" but those young people are facing spending the rest of their lives in Barlinnie. I am not saying that the armed forces should necessarily be a long-term solution, but we should at least debate giving those young people the option as a short-term solution. There is a debate to be had in communities throughout Scotland on how we deal with those young people. I feel despair for young people because I do not think that we have spent enough time talking about how we can intervene in their lives, which lack structure and positive solutions. I ask for that debate to be had today; it is a serious issue and we have to debate it throughout Scotland. Many people who went through the antisocial behaviour debate will have to eat humble pie. I looked at the Official Report of stage 3 of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. Douglas Keil, I think of the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, was quoted as saying that police officers will not use dispersal orders and that they would not be very helpful to the police. He also said that the police have enough legal remedies available to them at the moment. That is not representative of the views of every single community police officer whom I have met during my 13 years as an elected representative. Police officers have now moved on and they recognise that a menu of options is available to them to deal with the challenges that face our communities. Now is the time for the authorities to deliver those enforcement options and to ensure that we give the majority of good, hard-working young men and women in our communities a future that they can look forward to. I welcome today's debate and the leadership that has been shown by the Labour-led Executive.

I will touch on what might be Andrew Arbuckle's new Liberal Democrat slogan: the friendly tax. From my involvement in local government from 1993 to the Scottish parliamentary elections in 1999, I know that there is no friendly tax. I am sure that I do not have to lecture Andrew Arbuckle on that. I wonder whether he really will include such a slogan—I think people would see through it. We will always face challenges in respect of what element of their earnings people see for each pound they contribute. That is an important aspect of the debate. Maureen Watt raised a point about the McIntosh commission's reference to involving the local electorate. It is clear from the evidence that we received on Tommy Sheridan's local taxation proposal that, with any local income tax, the involvement of the local electorate will be kept to the bare minimum. They will not be able to influence the council budget as they can at the moment. There will be no consultation documents with a local income tax. At the moment, we can influence the local government budget.  A number of successful businessmen would welcome a local income tax—their returns to HM Revenue and Customs are perhaps more creative than they should be sometimes. The buoyancy of the market is related to that.

I am sorry. I would love to bring Mike Rumbles in, but I do not have time. Referring to the point that Brian Adam, his fellow Aberdeen member, made, Mike Rumbles should be honest: he does not welcome the deprivation factors that are taken into consideration.

I am sorry. I will continue for the moment, but I will give way shortly as I mentioned Mike Rumbles. He should be honest about it. I am honest about the fact that I want to include deprivation factors. I am honest about that to the electorate I represent, but neither Mike Rumbles nor Brian Adam welcome the inclusion of deprivation factors.

I look forward to Mike Rumbles making the case for Glasgow in that respect.

I had not heard Mike Rumbles make that commitment before, but I would welcome his contribution in future. In his speech and in his amendment, Derek Brownlee referred to ring fencing. I do not know whether he was at university or in school in 1993, when I was elected in Glasgow in a by-election, but I wish we could ring fence some funding for Glasgow City Council. We had no funding to ring fence during the Michael Forsyth years. We defended services that are in place today. A Labour local council fought hard to represent local people. There are services that exist in Glasgow today because Labour councillors made the case for their local communities. We did not talk about an inflationary increase or even an election-year less-than-inflation increase; we had an increase of 15 per cent in Glasgow—an inflation-busting increase that featured in the headlines of the Evening Times in 1993. That was the sort of challenge that the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform might have faced when he was a council leader, when rises went well above inflation.  Sometimes, there is a case to be made for ring fencing. Derek Brownlee would be the first person to complain if we were not receiving free personal care through our local authorities or if class sizes were above the levels that they should be. Sometimes, we have to make the case to local government that we expect the funding that is provided by the Scottish Parliament to be used in the best possible manner, and we should make no apologies for that. We should of course allow for some local flexibility, and that is the point that I will finish on. There have been record levels of co-operation between the Executive and local government. The same elements of concern have not been raised by local government for the past three years, as they might have been before. I welcome that stability, and I hope that we can build on it, that we can get the best possible value from the investment that has been made in local communities and that we can get on with the job of delivering services locally, while being less concerned about the academic arguments over the local government settlement and the local income tax. There will always be challenges, but let us make the most of the record investment that has been made.

Will the minister join me in paying tribute to the 600 volunteers who have been responsible for ensuring that the investment has been best spent? Will she ensure that we focus on supporting local housing organisations towards the full empowerment that they deserve, rather than on being concerned about the future chief executive of Glasgow Housing Association?

Does Patrick Harvie accept that, as well as the dispersal order, work has been undertaken with various agencies to highlight the individuals who have been the perpetrators and to find ways in which we can support them and their families? For the first time, we have highlighted those individuals because of the detection that has been in place and we have forced them to live up to the expectations of the community.

First, Chief Superintendent Scott has said that no evidence exists of serious displacement from the Dennistoun area. Secondly, facilities are available at Whitehill secondary school, and all the churches provide facilities. The issue is the way in which information is presented to young people.

I thank all the members who have supported the members' business motion in my name and those who have stayed, after an extended day's business, to listen to the debate this evening. During my 13 years as an elected representative, I have never known a community to embrace a legal remedy in the way in which the Dennistoun area of my constituency has supported the dispersal order that has been in place for more than three months now. In the words of the local community, the dispersal order has been an outstanding success. On 11 January, the Evening Times quoted a number of the residents of the area. Marisa Fairweather, of Alexandra Parade, said: "We need the zone to be extended. The high police presence has had such a positive impact upon residents' quality of life. I'm no longer frightened to go to the shop at night. When I was growing up around here in the 1960s and 1970s there were police on the streets." Sally Barnett, a clerical assistant at Alexandra Parade primary school, said: "The community does seem like a safer place since the start of the dispersal zone. I've noticed that the bus shelter outside the school has not been smashed up for a while and neither has the one outside Ladbrokes. They used to be attacked quite regularly." There are a number of such quotes from local people who support the remedy that has been made available. I put on record my appreciation of the work of Strathclyde police's E division, Chief Superintendent Scott, Superintendent Marsh and  Sergeant Dougie Stevenson, as well as the work of the front-line police officers who have been involved in the enforcement of the dispersal order. Many members will have heard me criticise the Strathclyde police force when it has not lived up to the standards that have been expected of it. I believe that I was right to do so. However, it is important to commend it when it has ensured, in a constructive and creative way, that the legal remedies that are available to it are being enforced. The purpose of securing the debate is not only to raise awareness of the success of the dispersal order, but—given that the dispersal order expired on 13 January—to look towards the future. We have to consider the possibility of extending the dispersal order in some form. The local community representatives have raised concerns that the dispersal order has expired and that the local community will again become the environment that it was before. There used to be large groups of all ages—this is not just about young people—blocking pavements, preventing local residents from going about their lawful business, urinating on the pavements, gang fighting and causing traders and local people difficulties. In order to ensure that we do not go back to those dark days in Dennistoun, I am asking the minister to consider supporting us in our attempt to have the dispersal order extended in some form, even if that is not the form in which it has existed in the past three months. Doing so would promote the principle that we regard it as unacceptable for large groups to congregate and continue to cause problems of antisocial behaviour in our local communities. My proposal is, of course, resource intensive. However, I ask the minister to consider the suggestion that front loading this investment in local services will have a positive impact in the long run. If we prevent the kind of antisocial behaviour that we have not seen for three months, including graffiti and a number of other types of vandalism, we might make a cost saving in the long run. I ask the Executive to consider what work can be carried out to analyse the experience in Dennistoun in order to clarify whether there have been beneficial cost savings in the long run, which, anecdotally, seems to be the case. If there is one failure in relation to the dispersal order, it would be the fact that we have not been creative enough in communicating with young people. Activities are available to young people in the Dennistoun area and many other parts of my constituency but, given that we live in an age of the internet, iPods and mobile phones, we are not creative enough in getting across the message about those activities.  We have to get that right. We communicate with young people in the same way that we did 30 years ago. We need to be more creative and provide more effective information to young people. We should use our schools more effectively to provide the information. I have made the point on a number of occasions that schools should play a more integral role in providing information. Today, I call on the minister to consider introducing a youth charter that gives young people throughout Scotland a right to information via a website. At present, information is provided on an ad hoc basis. Voluntary groups do an excellent job in providing information, but they do not have the resources to continue doing that. I want information to be provided in a more sophisticated and creative manner that ensures that positive activities are made available to young people and ensures that there is no excuse for them or their parents. There are far too many excuses out there. We need to deal with those excuses and ensure that the information is provided. As I have said in the chamber a number of times—I make no apology for repeating the point—we should pay tribute to the voluntary organisations, including churches, that play a crucial role in providing services for young people in our local communities. I do not think that we give them half the support that they should get for doing that. They played a crucial role in the dispersal order in Dennistoun by ensuring that young people who were interested were involved in more constructive activities. It is important that the voluntary organisations are commended for that. We should also recognise the crucial role that local housing organisations have played in the dispersal order and ensure that they are continually supported so that they can continue to bring forward creative solutions. For example, they made proposals to subsidise the cost of overtime for police officers who continue to be involved in the dispersal order. I commend Milnbank Housing Association and Councillor Elaine McDougall for being involved in that. In the words of the local community, Dennistoun is once again a decent place to live. People can live there without fear. They can walk the streets and go about their law-abiding business. The businesses in Alexandra Parade say that they now operate in a much more positive environment. They want to continue to do that. Earlier today, during the stage 1 debate on the Prostitution (Public Places) (Scotland) Bill, we talked about accepting humility. I ask every member in the chamber to accept that, when dispersal orders are introduced in the right way  and with the proper preparation, they can work. I ask members to put their political differences aside, accept that fact, and continue the good work that has been done in Dennistoun and other parts of Scotland.

Fergus Ewing and Bill Aitken referred to the Executive's so-called U-turn. On many occasions in this chamber, members have criticised the Executive for lodging amendments at stage 3 rather than much earlier, so I welcome the fact that ministers are willing to make amendments to the bill at stage 2. Many commentators have expressed concern that ministers do not show humility, but I do not see it as a weakness that ministers intend to amend the bill in this instance. I see it as a strength. Their commitment at this early stage will allow the debate to continue. The clear purpose of the bill is to tackle something that I believe is unacceptable in our communities: the behaviour of kerb-crawlers. Many members have referred to the evidence that we heard from residents of Calton and other communities in Scotland that are concerned about such activity. We heard about the fear of kerb-crawlers that many communities experience, and about the effect that it has on local women.

I will let Margo MacDonald in if she will just give me a minute.

I will come to that shortly. I also welcome the fact that we will increase the sentencing tariff for purchasers of sex, because the parity that currently exists is unacceptable. Our sending out the message that we will not tolerate the behaviour of kerb-crawlers and that we will increase the sentencing tariffs that are available to sheriffs is a step in the right direction. We made that clear during stage 1. As I said on a number of occasions during the stage 1 evidence-taking sessions, if we want to deal with kerb-crawlers, we must ensure that a legal remedy is in place. I do not want to go back to the residents of Calton—or the residents of any other community in Scotland, for that matter—to advise them that we have introduced legislation, only to have heard, as we often hear from police authorities throughout Scotland, that the legislation is difficult to enforce. I want to ensure that we get the sections that deal with kerb-crawlers right at stages 2 and 3 of the bill, that we ensure that procurators fiscal and authorities throughout the  country recognise that and that we ensure that we deliver what we want to deliver.

As with any other crime, there is unreported crime. Despite the statistics that I am sure will be available, kerb crawling will take place. If we cannot ensure that legislation is available to deal with kerb-crawlers, many women will not feel the need to report the crime in the first place. The symbolism of ensuring that we have legislation available to deal with kerb crawling is a step in the right direction. I pay tribute to the hard work of Margo MacDonald on management zones. She has made her case in an effective and constructive manner. I have experienced her charm offensive on a number of occasions, although she keeps calling me "Michael". However, despite the charm offensive, we will have to agree to disagree. That would be said by almost every member of the Local Government and Transport Committee and almost every member of Parliament. The test for me is in considering the issues as a parent. Many of us here today are parents and we have shared the anguish of the parents of women who are involved in prostitution and of women who have been murdered in various parts of the United Kingdom, including the women who were murdered in Glasgow, to whom Bill Aitken referred. As a parent, I wonder what other parents want us to do as their elected representatives. Do they want us to promote management zones that would result in their daughters continuing to be involved in such activities, or would they support our examining ways of ensuring that their daughters' lifestyles are diverted and that they became involved in more constructive activities? I am a parent of two daughters and I support Routes Out's approach. Parents should not find themselves in anguish; many parents are not even aware that their children are involved in such activities, which is why I believe in the Routes Out approach. I agree with a point that was constructively made by Tommy Sheridan: there is a need to consider more effective means of ensuring that resources are available for organisations such as Routes Out. It has made interventions for many women, but has done so at later stages, so we must consider how we can intervene much earlier. However, that is not the purpose of the bill, and it would be wrong to go off in that direction. For the moment, it is right for us to say that we do not  accept the antisocial behaviour of kerb-crawlers and that we want to ensure that legislation to deal with them is enforced. We have to be able to go to the residents of Calton and other parts of Scotland that are affected by such behaviour and say that we will enforce legislation against kerb-crawlers. I will support the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will monitor the work of Community Service Volunteers in setting up the proposed Glasgow parks young park rangers scheme. (S2O-11629)

I am grateful for that detailed reply. Will either the minister or his future deputy minister, Sarah Boyack, take the opportunity to visit Glasgow to ensure that the scheme is a success? Will a minister also take the opportunity to visit the Springburn park facility in my constituency to meet the friends of the park, who have done an effective job in ensuring that pride is put back into the valuable community resources that are Glasgow's parks?

I welcome the significant investment in recycling in Glasgow. However, are there any specific initiatives to deal with the challenges that the roads infrastructure creates for the collection of material for recycling or with the difficulties with collecting material from tenements? What additional investment could be provided to meet those challenges?

We have had a robust debate on an important element of the bill. The issue of definitions has been raised. I can think of a number of definitions in sections of the bill and amendments that have been passed by the committee that have to be clarified. Some of them are quite straightforward. For example, section 15 says that the child should be "at least 19 weeks old". That is absolutely straightforward. However, section 17 says that the agency must submit a report on "the suitability of the applicants". How is the suitability of the applicants decided? There are a number of definitions that need clarification in the bill. I accept that there could be a number of interpretations of amendment 84: many members have interpreted it in different ways. However, the important thing about the  amendment is that section 9 deals with the preparation stages of the adoption process, which I believe to be the most important part of the bill. It is the section that deals with the time when the future of the child is considered. I make no apologies to Patrick Harvie when I say that that is the part of the bill in which we set the tone for the consideration of the future of that child. As Karen Gillon re-emphasised, children who are up for adoption will have been through a traumatic experience and some of them will have come from families that are not stable. I make no apologies for using the word "stable". The official definition of the word, in the "Oxford English Dictionary" is "not likely to give way or overturn; firmly fixed" I make no apologies for setting that in place. I think that we should make no apologies for ensuring that, at an early stage in the process, the child is given the best possible opportunity. I appreciate that we should consider whether to include in the bill a number of definitions, but I could say that in relation to a number of amendments that members have lodged.

Mr Rumbles did not give way to me, so I will not give way to him. I want amendment 84 to be included in the bill. It sets in place the tone for the future.

Amendment 84 would insert into section 9(4) the words: "the value of a stable family unit in the child's development". Section 9 will be important in the adoption process because it deals with the crucial preparation stages for adoption. It is important that the right tone be set during those stages. Amendment 84 emphasises the importance of a stable family and reflects an ethos that is in the best interests of the child. It would ensure that consideration would, by law, have to be given to "the value of a stable family unit in the child's development". During the bill's progress, we have had a number of debates about whether we should include such a provision in the bill. We should not take for granted "the value of a stable family unit in the child's development". Rather, we should be proud to emphasise it by including those words in the bill, which we hope will be passed today. Given that children are considered for adoption because their families are not stable, we should ensure that at the early stages of the adoption process there is a legal requirement to give consideration to the value of a stable family, which would set the right tone for the future and ensure that children are given every possible positive opportunity.

I expected that question. There could be many personal definitions among the wide range of members of Parliament, the public and organisations that will have a responsibility to deliver the legislation. It is important that we consider amendment 84 not in isolation but in the context of the wide range of considerations that are set out in section 9, and in the context of other amendments to which the Education Committee agreed at stage 2. A wide range of issues must be considered in order to ensure that a family can give a child an opportunity for stability in the future. The approach in amendment 84 alone would not give a child such an opportunity, but it would make a positive contribution.  I move amendment 84.

Will Fiona Hyslop clarify what she means by the term "enduring family relationship"?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many community police officers have been deployed to Faslane over the past 12 months. (S2O-11277)

Will the minister join me in commending the hard work of community police officers throughout the Strathclyde division? However, their hard work is being undermined by their constant deployment to deal with protesters at the Faslane facility. Will the minister write to the chief constable of Strathclyde police and call on him to ensure that the deployment of community police officers is kept to a minimum and that negotiations are undertaken with the protesters so that their activities do not have an effect on our ability to deliver community police officers for our local communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action can be taken to improve employment opportunities for recently graduated physiotherapists, in light of concerns raised by the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. (S2O-11023)

Will the minister join me in commending the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy for its highly informative and constructive lobbying of Parliament a few weeks ago? In view of the investment that has been made in those young professionals and the value of their skills to NHS services in the future, is there not a case for offering them the same employment opportunity assistance of one year's funding for an initial position that is already offered in the public sector to newly qualified nurses, social workers and teachers?

Probably like many other members, I have received a significant number of complaints about the standard of service that my constituents receive from property managers. Will the minister meet me to discuss the matter further and to discuss the possibility of regulating property management factors? Will she also consider how  best we might manage common areas that local residents have the responsibility of managing in the face of severe challenges?

The first think-tank that I want to mention is made up of the 56,720 constituents of Glasgow Springburn, whom I represent. Such people are missing from a debate in which the Greens make constant reference to think-tanks and organisations that do not reflect society. The vast number of organisations that I have represented since I became an elected representative in 1993 do not demonise young people. The vast majority of young people in our communities—99.9 per cent of them—are good, hardworking people from hardworking families that should be commended for supporting them. We have talked about the tiny minority of people in some communities in Scotland who have been allowed to rule those communities. Mary Mulligan referred to such people. The Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 was passed to deal with the tiny minority of people who cause difficulties, such as the problems that the Dennistoun community in my constituency experienced. Since a dispersal order came into effect in Dennistoun on February 13, I have received e-mails, letters and telephone calls. The vast majority of the community supports the use of the dispersal order and is delighted with the result.

I will come back to the member. We have heard from the database of excuses, but we should challenge the people who say that there is nothing for young people to do and who do a disservice to the people who support the clubs that Frances Curran mentioned. There is a wide range of activities for young people in Dennistoun. I printed off from the Dennistoun online website a list of the activities that volunteers, churches and many organisations provide in the community. The volunteers need support. We should challenge the parents and young people who say that there is nothing for them.

I will come back to the member. That is the challenge—

I will come on to the Green party.  We should ensure that parents channel young people into the activities that are available. It is intriguing that the Green party claims to be the champion of young people. I read carefully the 2003 Green manifesto, which cost £2.50, but I found no reference to children and young people—[ Interruption. ] I heard someone say, "What about the Labour Party?" The Labour manifesto did not contain as many pages on young people as it should have done, but it had four more pages on the matter than the Green manifesto had. Perhaps the issue will have more coverage in future. Our manifesto talked about how we would support young people.

I assure Patrick Harvie that I would not want the young people simply to be dispersed to other parts of my constituency. The focus of the dispersal was on not just challenging unacceptable behaviour but identifying the young people who are at risk in the community. I will not give confidential details, but one 11-year-old used to spend every night of his life outside the G101 Off Sales shop in Alexandra Parade. I do not want young people to spend time outside off-sales shops. As a result of intervention, that individual and others have been channelled into more constructive activity. That happened because there was a dispersal order; there was no other way of channelling that young person into more effective and constructive activities.

If other parties continue to oppose the use of dispersal orders and other measures in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004, they should say so in their manifestos. They should tell the people of Scotland that they oppose dispersal orders—

I will stand again on the Labour Party manifesto, which is in favour of defending the majority of people from the minority—

David McLetchie made a powerful point about the need to work with Westminster, but I remind him that, had there been a different scenario on 1 May 1997, there would be no Scottish Parliament for Westminster to work with because the Tories did not support the idea. Phil Flanders should consider that factor because, if there was no  Scottish Parliament, he would not have been able to lodge his public petition in the first place. He would have got as far as the lobby at Westminster. One of the positive aspects of the inquiry is the fact that it was initiated by the Parliament's public petitions process. The committee received a lot of helpful and good-quality evidence from all the industries that are involved. The haulage contractors were willing to come forward with their ideas about the challenges that the freight industry faces and they suggested a number of initiatives and ways in which progress could be made. I was most impressed by their commitment to the movement of freight to the rail network. However, I am not convinced that the rail industry and the haulage industry are working in collaboration as effectively as they should be. The rail industry needs to be more open about the opportunities that are available given the capacity of the network, and I call on the Minister for Transport to consider how we can ensure that more open information is available to the haulage industry. Such information will allow the industry to take forward the projects that it suggested during the inquiry. A number of points were well made during the inquiry, but some of them were contradicted by the evidence that was provided by our adviser, Professor McKinnon. For example, the points that we heard about driver shortages were contradicted by Professor McKinnon's evidence. We need further research on the matter. There are good training organisations—I know that Christine May has a particular interest in training—including Ritchies HGV Training Centre, which is located in my constituency. It provides good opportunities for drivers to enter the market in the first place, and we should ensure that we continue to encourage the initiative and innovation that such companies have shown. A number of members have strong views on increasing the speed limit on single-lane carriageways. Fergus Ewing has made well-informed comments on the issue on a number of occasions. However, I am not convinced that we have the evidence to make such a change. We need more independent research into the proposal and its implications for safety and logistics. We should consider the proposal, but we should be cautious. I note, however, that a number of witnesses made powerful points on the matter and that it should not be dismissed. We discussed the provision of roadside facilities for haulage contractors. The trade unions representing the contractors made the point on many occasions about the need for us to plan more effectively for good-quality and low-cost roadside facilities for haulage contractors. That is not an issue reserved to Westminster, but one on  which we can influence local authorities and road networks to ensure that we provide quality facilities for haulage contractors throughout Scotland. There are good examples of several areas in which the issue has been pursued, but much further work could be done. A number of contractors made a powerful point on a subject on which we perhaps did not elaborate in our recommendations—the demands that are placed on haulage contractors by their clients. In particular, they mentioned the supermarket industry, which has placed unreasonable demands on contractors on a number of occasions. I do not think that we addressed that effectively in our recommendations. The Minister for Transport should show leadership by calling a summit with haulage contractors and their clients and examining more effective ways of ensuring that they work logistically with the haulage industry to make more effective use of the loads that travel on our road networks. The haulage contractors raised many examples of their concern that they were perhaps not making best use of the load potential because of demands that are placed on them by clients. We need leadership from the Executive to ensure that clients take the issue seriously. The inquiry was lengthy, but we tried to reflect on the issues in Phil Flanders's original petition for which we have devolved responsibility. I assure the petitioners that we intend to ensure that the issue is carefully monitored and taken forward.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Transport last met representatives of First ScotRail and what issues were discussed. (S2O-10683)

During his discussions with First ScotRail representatives, did the minister remind them of the importance of everyone in Scotland having the right to access rail? Is he concerned that disabled people do not have access to Springburn rail station? That is an issue about which I have been corresponding with him for some time. Disabled people are advised that, if they wish to travel by rail, they should first travel to the nearest accessible station, at Queen Street. Will the minister ensure that everyone in Scotland has access to rail, regardless of disability?

Like other members, I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. Everyone acknowledges that he has been a champion of crossrail, which is an important project that will affect the future of not only Glasgow but north and east Scotland, as many members have said. Charlie Gordon referred to 1973, which I was thinking about. I remember Christmas 1973, when I became the proud owner of a train set. I am sure that we all recall from our youth that in any train set parts were missing and some parts had to be purchased later. I draw an analogy between that and the crossrail project. As was amplified in the recent debate on the Glasgow airport rail link, the rail link will be effective only if the missing link—the crossrail project—is supplied. We have made the case for crossrail based on the economic benefits for Glasgow. All of us who were Glasgow councillors in the difficult Tory years acknowledge how far Glasgow came in those years and has come in recent years. The importance of sustaining that growth and regeneration cannot be overestimated. Donald Gorrie made the point well that the crossrail project would involve minimal investment. It is not just a fancy project that would deliver for the whole of Scotland; it would deliver value for money. Patrick Harvie talked about shiny documents. I am no longer concerned about what shiny documents say; I have had enough of them. We talk about being environmentally friendly, but continue to produce such documents. I say to the minister that an environmentally friendly document that is committed to the crossrail project should be produced. I seek from him absolute clarity about the process that will be followed to approve the  project, the processes that have been followed to date and how matters will progress. The cross-party group on Glasgow crossrail has on a number of occasions discussed clarity about where we are going and the decision-making process to determine whether the project will progress. Charlie Gordon made the point very well that we have had enough of transport studies. Let us move forward. If the Executive does not support the project, it must make that clear; if it does support it, it must clarify how it will take it forward.

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive is doing to tackle youth crime. (S2F-2450)

Does the First Minister, like me, welcome the progress of a dispersal order in the Dennistoun area of my constituency? Does he recognise that, despite an unprecedented level of legal remedies and funding being available to police and local authorities, they continue to produce what I refer to as the unacceptable database of excuses as to why they are not able to deliver legal remedies? Will he name and shame those police forces and local authorities and consider imposing financial penalties on them if they are unwilling to use the available funding?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in tackling youth disorder in the Glasgow Springburn parliamentary constituency. (S2O-10602)

Does the minister, like me, believe that it is important that we deal with the perpetrators of youth crime, but also that we provide information to the vast majority of young people, who have constructive and positive lifestyles? Will the minister ensure that they are provided with information on local youth services, to ensure that they can continue those lifestyles?

I put on the record my appreciation of Jean Turner's support for the amendment that I lodged during the passage of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill on police powers to seize quad bikes. Her support was welcome. Will the minister consider not only reminding parents of the dangers of quad bikes but enabling the seizure of quad bikes? It appears that parents  are able to pay the fines that are imposed and, therefore, that quad bikes can be recovered. I ask the minister to consider ensuring that we are able to dispose of the quad bikes of those who cause antisocial disruption.

It will be a while before I qualify for a free bus pass, but I hope that it does not take that long to improve bus services for people who are already entitled to a free bus pass. The challenge that the Scottish Executive faces is to ensure that we get best value from the massive, unprecedented investment in free bus transport. More than £0.75 billion has been invested in public transport in the past three years and we must ensure that people get best value from it. I make a similar point to one that Pauline McNeill made in what I thought was a thoughtful speech: we will have to have some form of regulation to ensure that bus companies deliver best value for money. We have given them the opportunity to deliver a more effective public transport system through quality contracts and various other measures that we set out in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. However, I am afraid that my experience of dealing with the bus companies is that they do not want to comply. Therefore, we have to introduce some form of regulation. The issues that surround bus transport are threads that run through many of the challenges that the Scottish Executive faces. We will not tackle the economic challenges that my constituency faces unless we give my constituents a decent bus service to their place of work. We will not be able to improve health care in my constituency unless we give people decent bus services to their health facilities. There are so many social challenges that face communities across Scotland that we will not be able to deal with them if the bus companies are not willing to face up them. Pauline McNeill mentioned the issue of the few bus companies that are dominant in Scotland. Will the minister consider making a referral to the Competition Commission to investigate whether the companies are, in fact, dominant in the market? One of the aims of the deregulation of the buses in 1986 was that we would have a competitive market that would provide a wide range of options for those travelling on our buses.  However, in the bus industry in Scotland, certain companies dominate and there is a lack of competition. In responding to the debate, will the minister say whether he thinks that such dominance exists in the market? Will he refer the matter to the Competition Commission? I welcome the debate that Pauline McNeill has initiated. We cannot continue to talk a good game about tackling social exclusion and improving public transport unless some form of regulation is introduced.

To ask the Scottish Executive how much has been paid in public subsidies to bus companies in the last three years. (S2O-10360)

May I helpfully provide the collective figure from information that I have received from the Scottish Parliament information centre? Over the past three years, £530 million has been paid to bus companies from public funds. Does the minister accept what has been constructively amplified in the Evening Times , which is that people in Glasgow and throughout Scotland are not receiving best value from that £530 million? Will he join me and others in considering the possibility of some form of regulation to ensure that local people get an effective service? Will he consider the possibility of getting local transport associations to deliver transport locally where bus companies clearly do not give consideration to doing so?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many acts of vandalism have been detected in the Glasgow Springburn constituency in the last three years. (S2O-10300)

Perhaps the Executive could consider collecting statistics at a constituency level. Does the minister agree that it is appalling that vandalism costs Glasgow more than £10 million a year and that we need a more creative approach to detecting and successfully prosecuting vandalism through the use of closed-circuit television systems and covert operations? Does he agree that vandalism is as important as crimes such as drugs incidents and that the police should treat it seriously?

I, too, congratulate Wendy Alexander. Having  recently become a father, I am sure that we can share stories of sleep deprivation. Like other members, I welcome the committee's report, which interrogates carefully a number of challenges that the project faces. I use the word "challenges" because that is what we have described all the transport projects that the Parliament has considered as being, none of which has been a seamless project without challenges. A number of members have made constructive points about how to progress the Glasgow airport rail link. Brian Monteith made a number of reasonable points about patronage, but—although I strongly agree with what Tommy Sheridan said about it—I feel that concerns about patronage will be dealt with through the effective promotion of the link. The pricing scheme and the timetabling will also be important. I share other members' concerns that trains on the route will stop at 11.45 pm. We will have to consider how the rail link timetable integrates with the operating times of Glasgow airport. Before we reach the next stages of the bill, I hope that the promoter will consider further evidence. The cost of the project is important and we should ensure that the issues arising are given objective scrutiny. We had to face cost issues when this Parliament building was being built, and there is no reason why the rail link project should not be subjected to the same kind of scrutiny. Charlie Gordon made a passionate and robust contribution. When we first came to this Parliament, we thought that we could change the world. I still believe that we can, and I believe that my constituents would expect no less of me than that I would still think that. I would argue that the crossrail scheme would change the world and would change the opportunities for the world to visit Glasgow airport and then many parts of Scotland. I welcomed Charlie Gordon's support for transport projects when he was the leader of Glasgow City Council. I will not say that he wanted to rule the world when he was leader, but I will say that he played a positive role. As Sandra White said, there was a very constructive campaigning partnership with the Evening Times . The campaign for the Glasgow airport link had to be constructive and had to present a robust case. I think that we made that case. Connectivity has been mentioned throughout the debate. The committee convener made constructive points about it, and Brian Monteith—to be fair to him—has made such points consistently, as can be seen from the Official Report . However, I call on Brian and on all members to join the campaign for crossrail in Glasgow. It is an ambitious campaign to ensure that the Glasgow airport link is a success.  It has been suggested that we have not considered the economic issues relating to Edinburgh airport, but Edinburgh airport will face similar challenges if the Glasgow airport link is a success. If the Glasgow airport link and Glasgow crossrail are successful, Edinburgh airport will have to take competition with Glasgow airport into consideration. The committee has considered the arguments constructively. Bill Butler raised a number of serious issues and he has ensured that the details of the crossrail project have been laid out. The cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on Glasgow crossrail will continue to campaign on the project.

Estimates are always easily questioned. If my constituents afford me the opportunity, I will be happy to stand in this chamber in 2030 and scrutinise the figures that Brian Monteith refers to. Scrutiny is an important part of the process, and the committee and the Parliament will have to do that at the consideration stage and the final stage. I spoke earlier about the effective promotion of the route. Stewart Maxwell spoke about people in East Kilbride and elsewhere, and we will have to provide them with serious alternatives. If we promote the route effectively and consider the pricing scheme in the constructive way that Tommy Sheridan set out, people will choose to travel by rail. Let us remember one point. There is a perception that everyone who arrives at Glasgow airport has a truckload of suitcases with them, but many people who travel in business class do not have the suitcases to which we continually refer. The bill is to be commended. I welcome the work that the committee has done and the constructive comments that have been made. The promoter will be able to take up the issues that have been raised to ensure that we deliver a Glasgow airport rail link alongside a crossrail link.

I take on board the issues that Brian Monteith raises in relation to connectivity. Will he join the Glasgow crossrail campaign and the cross-party group?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to improve access to primary care in Glasgow Springburn. (S2O-10129)

I welcome the £2.6 million investment in Springburn health centre and the new investment in the adjacent Petershill health centre. What plans does the minister have to move away from the traditional concentration on general practitioners in health centres and to take a much wider approach to tackling some of the health inequalities that we have heard about so often in the chamber?

I welcome the wide range of measures that are being introduced under the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill. I will deal primarily with the amendments that were lodged in my name. The real challenge that the Parliament faces lies in evaluating the effectiveness of the legislation that we deliver. I think that the provisions of amendment 207 will be positively evaluated over time, and that crimes will be detected as a result of DNA that would not otherwise have been held on the database being available. That is how the legislation will be evaluated once it is passed. We face more difficult, challenges in evaluating the effectiveness of other legislation that we pass, but the effect of the provisions of amendment 207 will be clear. I look forward to evaluating and debating them in the Parliament. I hope that members—I include myself in this—will withdraw a number of comments that they have made should the measures not prove to be effective.

I do not have time. I asked Mike Rumbles to give way to me—I am sorry if that sounds childish. David Davidson made a point about there being two classes of innocents. I agree with him on that point: one class of innocents is the victims, who are innocent throughout the process, as I set out earlier. The 116 rape victims to whom I referred earlier are innocent. I accept Mr Davidson's point about the innocence of the people who have been accused, but we are not taking that away. We are providing an opportunity for police officers to retain a DNA sample that can be interrogated as part of the database. Those are the two types of innocents I see in the process, rather than those to which David Davidson referred. I have carefully examined the websites of all the main parties. They all discuss cutting down on the bureaucracy that police officers deal with. They all talk a good game in that respect. The measures under amendment 207 will cut down on bureaucracy. They will prevent innocent members of the public from being imprisoned and held on remand, as happened in the past, prior to the DNA process being put in place. We have a good bill, which will provide a more effective means of dealing with crime. I welcome a number of the measures that have been discussed throughout its passage.

Not moved.  Amendment 204 moved—[Stewart Stevenson].

Not moved.  Amendment 205 moved—[Stewart Stevenson].

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

I clarify that 198,000 DNA profiles would previously have been removed. From among those profiles, there have been 88 murders of innocent members of the public, 45 attempted murders of innocent members of the public and 116 rapes of innocent members of the public.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to improve bus transport in Glasgow. (S2O-9946)

I remind the minister that, under the current non-regulatory scheme, we do not meet local needs. Will he consider some form of regulation similar to that which is in place in the London transport system and consider funding some form of community transport, which I understand has been adopted in other parts of the United Kingdom, to ensure that we deliver a local service and avoid the cherry picking of routes that takes place in Glasgow and the rest of Scotland?

I will come to the issue that Mike Rumbles fairly raises. The issue of civil liberties has been tested by the law lords. I agree with Lord Steyn who, in a House of Lords ruling, made it clear that retention of samples does not breach the right to privacy that is enshrined in the European convention on  human rights. The key point that Lord Steyn made is that even if it did, it would "not affect the appellants unless they are implicated in a future crime, by a DNA sample found at the scene." For too long, Parliament has tried to balance civil liberties and the rights of victims. I remind members that victims are also innocent members of society. I make no apology for presenting the case of victims or potential victims. In view of what happened to my stage 2 amendment, I fear that amendment 206 will not get the agreement of Parliament. After reflecting on the concerns that were raised constructively by members at stage 2, I have lodged another amendment—amendment 207—which focuses on those on whom criminal proceedings have been instituted for a relevant violent or sexual offence. Those alleged offences include rape, murder, child abduction and lewd and libidinous behaviour. I hope that that clarifies the question that was raised by Bill Aitken. I have considered the concerns that have been expressed in respect of people who have not been charged with a crime but have had their DNA retained. Again, amendment 207 will apply only to those on whom criminal proceedings have been instituted. Concerns were also expressed about the period of retention of DNA. I have chosen to allow a period of three years, with the proviso that the chief constable could apply for an extension of up to two years.

There has to be some clarity around the point that Patrick Harvie raises about notification of the individual. The bill is ECHR compliant and I understand that it contains provisions that will allow that to happen.

We have to be careful when entering into the area of police intelligence and the information that can legitimately be shared. My understanding is that there will be an opportunity for such an appeal to take place. That will have to be clarified, but I have laid out the framework that would allow that process to take place. Perhaps amendment 207 does not go as far towards protecting the rights of victims as I want, but I believe that it would mean progress in the right direction. I do not believe that amendment 207 would result in an erosion of civil liberties; rather, it would ensure that everyone in society would have a right to civil liberties, including victims.

I will speak to my amendments in the order that they are set out in group 12. Amendments 204 and 205 would give police authorities a right to retain the DNA of juveniles who are dealt with through the children's hearings system. Those retention powers would be in line with my proposals in respect of adults. It is important to acknowledge that some of the offences that could be involved are serious and include rape, murder, child abduction, indecent assault and other grotesque crimes that are reported in our communities. I believe that tackling and detecting those crimes requires a proactive and forensic approach. As I said, amendments 204 and 205 are in line with my proposals in respect of adults. However, I acknowledge the challenges that the minister set out and the complexities of integrating the proposals with the children's hearings system. I understand the technicalities that would be involved in delivering amendments 204 and 205.  I ask the minister to reflect on the concerns of many communities throughout Scotland that we should detect at an early stage juveniles who are a serious threat to society, not only for the sake of their communities but for those individuals. An opportunity to do so would prevent the difficulties that are experienced in communities as a result of the behaviour of those juveniles. The retention of DNA would enable us to detect such individuals. At stage 2, I lodged an amendment that was similar to amendment 206 and which would have given police authorities the power to retain the DNA of all those who are arrested or detained on suspicion of an arrestable offence. That would bring us into line with current legislation in England and Wales. As we have heard on many occasions, there are issues concerning the effectiveness of the legislation. Despite the challenges to the figures that have been set out by the Home Office, one offence being prevented is not one offence too many. If it is disproportionate, that is a chance worth taking.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many reparation orders have been served since the enactment of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. (S2O-9695)

Will the minister join me in condemning the mindless idiots in Glasgow who attacked people who were carrying out a public service by repairing water hydrants? The incident was reported in the Evening Times . Will the minister consider using a reparation scheme in Glasgow to ensure that such people pay something back to the communities that their antisocial activities have damaged?

Like many members, I think that we would be doing a great disservice to our constituents who are members of the local government pension scheme if we did not seek to form a cohesive vision of the way forward. Members have made some suggestions, but we should also take into account the skills of many shop stewards in the trade union movement and ensure that there is co-operation with the tripartite group to which the minister referred. I have reflected on the representations about the loss of service conditions that various unions have made. I have been a member of the Labour Party for 23 years, since I was 16, and am proud that we have ensured that conditions have been taken into consideration over the years. I always respect the rights of individuals to make representations to their elected members. Many of us have received representations on the issue that we are discussing and we should give measured consideration to those representations as well as showing leadership. Since members of the Scottish Parliament were sworn in on 6 May 1999, the issue of compliance with European law has touched the Parliament in many areas—it has affected fishing quotas and housing issues, for example. However, too often, some members think that only the Executive is responsible for considering compliance with European law. All of us must ensure that such compliance is considered. Members have said in the chamber that we should ignore compliance with European law. Some have said that they do not care about it in the first place. Some have said that they do not want to be part of the European Union and that we simply should not care about compliance at all.

In the minutes that are available to me, I will focus on the local government pension scheme; Tommy Sheridan and I can discuss the issue that he has raised when there is an opportunity to do so in the Local Government and  Transport Committee. We should not ignore whether we are complying with European law, but a wider debate on compliance is needed. We should reflect on issues relating to compliance after the debate. I welcome the fact that the minister has committed himself to having an open dialogue, but members seem to be concerned when we discuss the possibility of reforming the local government pension scheme. I am not frightened of reform. It would be interesting to find out how many of my constituents have benefited from the rule of 85. Not many directors of education or people who are on salary scales that have led to their benefiting from the rule of 85 live in Glasgow Springburn. I would welcome reform of the rule of 85 and the involvement in that reform of domestic assistants and the many other workers in my constituency who have not benefited from the rule of 85. We should not be frightened of reform.

I do not have enough time. In conclusion, I am proud of my party's links to the trade union movement, which will continue. We have delivered the minimum wage, which was a pipe dream for many union members over the years. I assure union members that we will work closely with them and that we will ensure that Executive ministers work closely with them to resolve the issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will support the Glasgow crossrail project as a major component of the Glasgow bid for the 2014 Commonwealth games. (S2O-9483)

I know that the minister has recently been acquainted with the details of the crossrail project, which will serve not just Glasgow but other parts of Scotland. Does the minister agree that there is a powerful case for the crossrail project in relation to the Commonwealth games bid? Will he ensure that the appropriate officials from his department are allocated to ensure that the Commonwealth games bid and the transport network that is to service it are given the appropriate resources?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many interim antisocial behaviour orders in Glasgow have been applied for and granted by the courts. (S2O-9381)

First, it would be helpful to have information on the number of applications for interim antisocial behaviour orders. Secondly, will the minister write to a number of authorities throughout Scotland to remind them of that legal remedy, for which many members in the Parliament campaigned? Will he ensure that interim ASBOs are used as an effective mechanism to tackle antisocial behaviour?

Much has been said in the debate about the link between poverty and drug addiction. However, I want to pay tribute to the people who live in poverty but make positive life choices and care effectively for their children. We do them a disservice by saying that everyone who lives in poverty will find themselves going into prostitution, for example, and developing drug and other addictions. I pay tribute to the good parents I see every day in my constituency, who live in real poverty but make positive lifestyle choices. We should pay tribute to such parents, who are in the majority. However, I accept that there are those who suffer because of drug addiction and that they should be supported by an appropriate process. I was enthused by the report that we received from Children 1 st , which talked about the need to focus on the support of the wider family for those who suffer from drug addiction. From my experience of being an elected member for 13 years, I know that the support that is provided to the wider family could be improved throughout local authorities in Scotland. A great deal needs to be done to improve the systems that are in place. I welcome the fact that the social work review will consider the mechanisms that support families and try to ensure that they are supported more effectively. I do not think that we take sufficient account of the financial implications of not supporting families through the process and ensuring that wider family networks can support the parents and children of drug abusers. Too often in the Parliament we do not recognise that we do not have all the answers on this issue, although we tend to say that we do. A wide range of organisations throughout Scotland, in addition to those that support drug users, can play a role in this area. We have talked about the methadone programme and Annabel Goldie raised relevant points around the need for us to assess how effective that programme has been throughout its existence. More effective research must be put in place to ensure that such assessment is done. The majority of youngsters in our schools do not involve themselves in drug addiction; we must recognise that and pay tribute to them. However, we must ensure that we support those who face challenges because of drug addiction. I support the amendment in the name of Hugh Henry.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Transport and Telecommunications last met representatives of First bus and what issues were discussed. (S2O-8950)

When the minister next meets representatives of FirstGroup, will he remind them of the significant public subsidy that FirstGroup receives, especially from the Parliament, in respect of the concessionary fares scheme? Will he ask them to take some responsibility for providing the many services that are required to meet social needs throughout Scotland, including  those in my constituency? If they are not willing to do that, but continue to cherry pick routes in Glasgow and other areas, will he consider introducing legislation to regulate an industry that appears to suit itself rather than its passengers?

It is important that we acknowledge the efforts of a member who has introduced a private member's bill. In his speech, Alex Neil spoke about the SNP's so called long-standing policy of opposition to the council tax. The SNP has had seven years to propose an alternative to the council tax but has not done so. I give credit to Tommy Sheridan when it is due; he deserves credit for his proposal for a Scottish service tax. I note that Alex Neil has not stayed in the chamber to continue his long-standing opposition to the council tax. The Local Government and Transport Committee reached the correct decision. The bill is  flawed and would not meet its aims and objectives. I will first address the aim of tackling poverty. For the SSP to suggest that we will tackle poverty through a debt write-off is an extreme slur on people who have lived in poverty over the years. My grandparents lived in extreme poverty, but were able to pay their poll tax and council tax. They may not have been happy about paying the poll tax, but they paid it and found themselves in extreme poverty as a result. Tommy Sheridan does people such as my grandparents a great disservice when he suggests a debt write-off for people who were able to pay their poll tax and council tax but did not.

Give me one moment. I will come back to the member. I will not take any lectures from Tommy Sheridan on tackling poverty. I am proud of the Labour Government's record on delivering the minimum wage, achieving the highest employment in living memory and reducing youth unemployment in my constituency by 75 per cent. We now have the most vibrant economy that I have seen in all my adult life. We should be proud of that record; we need no lectures from Tommy Sheridan. The most effective way of tackling poverty is to direct council tax benefit more beneficially to people who are living at the level of deprivation. We can do that, and the introduction of the SST or a local income tax would not help us in that respect. I turn to the issue of fiscal flight. The convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee has been persistent in addressing the challenges that we could face in that respect. I disagree with him on one point, however. The removal vans would not arrive the day after Tommy Sheridan's bill was enacted. Instead, no removal vans would arrive in Scotland as a result of Tommy Sheridan's claim that he does not care about the people who would leave Scotland because of his bill. Let him say that to the people who work for Tom Farmer, Brian Souter or Tom Hunter; the successful entrepreneurs who have brought a great deal to Scotland. I am sure that those employees are concerned about Tommy Sheridan's scepticism about their employers.

I have had in my surgeries many pensioners who live in extreme poverty and who  pay their bills. I am proud that they do that, even when they disagree with some of those bills. Those people take exception to others who do not pay their bills. It has long been the tradition of working-class people in Scotland that they pay their bills despite the challenges that they face. One major flaw in the bill is that it would lead to the loss of local accountability because local councils would be stripped of decisions. One positive aspect of that would be that we would not see the kind of protest and manning of the barricades that Tommy Sheridan carried out during the setting of the budget in Glasgow in 1995, in which Tommy Sheridan, Bill Aitken and others were involved. The bill would prevent local politicians from setting the local council tax.

I am sorry—but I cannot let the member in. I have always believed strongly in retaining the rights of local councils and I have defended local councils in Parliament on many occasions. Tommy Sheridan has tried to divert attention from the loss of the right to set the tax by talking about business rates. However, in the words of Professor David Bell, "the redistribution focus of SST weakens the view of the local authorities as being the providers of services to paying customers." The poll tax was despised for many of its attributes, but it was hated particularly for its personal nature, in that it was levied on individuals. In my constituency, many households with multiple occupants suffered as a result of that. Tommy Sheridan's correspondence to Unison states that the tax that he proposes "is an individual tax", which is the sort of comment that we would have heard from Margaret Thatcher when she launched the poll tax, or from Michael Howard. I rest my case: the bill proposes a Scottish poll tax number 2.

This is an annual event in the Scottish Parliament. We discuss the local government settlement, and it is as predictable as the Burns dinner in January or February every year. The hypocrisy from the SNP is also pretty predictable. I remind SNP members that if they introduced a local income tax, we would not have these debates in future, because the decisions would be taken centrally and local government would not be involved in them. We would not hear from COSLA or council leaders about the local government settlement, because the Parliament would decide the local income tax. SNP members might seek to portray themselves as representing councils throughout Scotland, but I remind them that they would not represent them but would take the decisions under the SNP's proposals. I will respond to the points that David Davidson made about the man in the street. In the spirit of David Cameron's new style, will David Davidson ask him to apologise to the man in the street in Glasgow for the council tax increases that occurred during the Tory years? I remind him that, in 1996-97, there was a 21.9 per cent increase. Will he apologise for the increase in 1998-99 of 9.3 per cent? I congratulate my new colleague, Charlie Gordon, on what he delivered for Glasgow in 2000. After the Scottish Parliament was formed, there was a 0 per cent increase in council tax. In every year following that, there have been only inflationary increases.

From looking on the SNP's website for details about the process for setting the local income tax, I think that much work has to be done. I give Tommy Sheridan credit for making his proposal to Parliament and allowing us to interrogate it. That cannot be said of the SNP's proposal, which was set out only in a manifesto. If the SNP introduces a bill, we will scrutinise its proposals for collecting a local income tax. The Parliament has on many occasions shown great pity for those who live in deprived areas. We talk about league tables. Our civil servants are obsessed with presenting in glossy documents and on websites the terrible statistics on what faces Glasgow. We spend a lifetime on providing league tables that show the educational attainment challenges that face Glasgow and we talk about the health statistics that face Glasgow and many other local authority areas. However, we do not talk about how the local government settlement should attack those deprivation figures, so I call on COSLA's leader, who I know is considering the matter, to examine the proposals that Charlie Gordon made to COSLA in his former capacity with Glasgow City Council and the case that other local authorities have made for deprivation figures to be taken into account in the allocation of local government funding. The challenges that face not only Glasgow City Council, but other local authorities, should be considered at the same time. Of course, tackling deprivation costs money. If we are serious about tackling educational attainment figures in Glasgow that are not at the levels that they should be, we need money. That is why I am willing to consider whether efficiency savings, if they can be recovered, should be redirected to deal with deprivation. We might not allocate such funds through the local government settlement, but we might be able to tackle deprivation in other ways by using the budget that is available to the Scottish Executive. I would commend the Executive if it used the efficiency savings from local government to tackle deprivation in other ways. We talk about siphoning off funds, but I would commend the Executive for redirecting funds to tackle deprivation. I would also commend local government leaders throughout Scotland if they were willing to make efficiency savings to tackle deprivation. Tommy Sheridan's amendment refers to "uneconomic public private partnership deals".  We talk about the man in the street, whom David Davidson mentioned. All five secondary schools in my constituency have been rebuilt or refurbished under PPP schemes. Not one teacher, constituent or pupil has complained about a public-private partnership. Every head teacher involved in a partnership has commended the programme. Time will tell whether the partnerships have been economic, but the man in the street supports the proposals and commends us for the improvements in schools as a result of public-private partnerships.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Glasgow City Council and what issues were discussed. (S2O-8542)

Almost every league table and academic report that refers to Glasgow mentions the deprivation challenges that face the city. Does the minister think that the time has now come to carry out a radical overhaul of how the allocation of council funding is calculated, ensuring that, when funding is distributed throughout Scotland, deprivation is the main factor that is taken into account?

First, I thank the 45 members from all parties who have supported the motion in my name. I also thank Help the Aged, and particularly Richard Meade of that organisation, for providing a helpful briefing and for campaigning so effectively on winter deaths of the elderly. The statistics speak for themselves. More than 2,760 people in Scotland—2,550 of whom were elderly—died of winter-related illnesses in the past year. In the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area—which covers the Springburn constituency that I represent—there were 450 winter-related deaths, of which the majority were of elderly people. The tragedy that lies behind those statistics is that with the right strategy and effective action plans, those numbers could be drastically reduced. I do not want to use my speech to applaud the Executive, the Parliament and the utility companies for the very good work that they have done so far; that would be an opportunity missed. The briefing document describes the good work that has been done. Instead, I will make the point that more has to be done to tackle the statistics. If all was right, the figures would not be at their current levels. What action can we expect from our utility companies? Their collective profits come to £6.7 billion. I do not grudge any public limited company the opportunity to make its profits, but I want the  utility companies to do more to target those who are most at risk. Direct payments should be made to those whom we can identify on a postcode basis as being most at risk. I welcome several of the initiatives that have been made by some of the utility companies, but I want there to be more direct targeting of subsidies to those who are in most danger because they live in fuel poverty. For far too long, public limited companies have discriminated in favour of those who are economically active and who have the most disposable income. That is true of banks and many other PLCs. Here is an opportunity for our utility companies to set an example by discriminating in favour of those who are most at risk because they live in fuel poverty. I want those companies to lay out their plans for discriminating directly in favour of those who live in fuel poverty and I would welcome the minister's response to that possible initiative. From various initiatives, we have seen that community action plans can make a difference, and I would like local communities to set out such plans. Consider the success of many organisations that are in regular contact with the elderly. For example, the alive and kicking project, which is based in the Red Road area of my constituency, provides a range of opportunities to target those who are most in need as a result of fuel poverty. The project provides benefits advice and ensures that people take up their council tax benefits. It also provides advice on healthy living; the Help the Aged briefing makes it very clear that such advice can reduce winter-related illnesses. The project puts on concert parties and members take trips to Spain, Ireland and many other parts of the world as part of the healthy living and active lifestyle that the project encourages for the elderly. I commend another excellent project—the north of Glasgow good morning project—in which direct contact is made with those who are most vulnerable in the local community. We live in an age in which we have to deal with unwanted calls from call centres. In that project, the reverse happens: the workers make direct contact with the elderly. We should consider doing that in a more concentrated and sophisticated manner; I would like initiatives such as the good morning project to be rolled out to other parts of Scotland to ensure that those who are most at risk are contacted and that their needs are met. We have missed an opportunity to take advantage of the advances in information technology throughout the world in recent years. Some time ago, I spoke to an 83-year-old constituent who advised me that she wanted me to contact her by e-mail. She was offended when I registered surprise that she had an e-mail address—she was very proud of being a silver  surfer. That made me realise that IT could be a very effective way of getting information to the elderly and of communicating with them. Advances in IT could provide a more targeted approach to delivering health advice and information about activities in their communities to the elderly. I look forward to hearing the minister's response to that suggestion. Sometimes in the chamber and in committee we hear calls for research to be done into a particular subject. I am not always happy with that approach, because it can be used as an excuse to introduce a stopgap and to defer the setting in place of action plans. However, I recognise that on this issue there is a need to clarify the challenges that we face. We must also recognise the contribution of all those who help the elderly—the unsung heroes such as home helps, concierge staff and the many other workers who are in contact with the elderly and who play a crucial role in tackling fuel poverty and ensuring that people are given effective advice. We should conduct research into the effective work that those people do in tackling the number of excess winter deaths. It would be wrong not to applaud the good work that goes on. We should recognise that there are partnerships, but also that there is a need for a more holistic approach to them. We need to look at the statistics and at targeting those who are at greatest risk on a postcode, street-by-street basis. After all, many credit card companies target people on such a basis—let us use such methods to target those whom we believe to be most in need. I would like to see a more effective partnership between the utility companies, the Executive and everyone else who has a role to play. That would ensure that we could reduce the appalling statistics on deaths during the winter months.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to reduce the number of non-departmental public bodies. (S2O-8306)

My question to the minister concerns those who represent our non-departmental public bodies—otherwise known as quangos—in Scotland and it relates to two issues in particular. First, none of my constituents is represented on any public body in Scotland—I think that the same applies to constituents in most deprived constituencies in Scotland. Secondly, would it not be helpful if those who represent quangos in Scotland resided in Scotland? Three of  the five board members who represent the Water Industry Commission for Scotland live outside Scotland.

Tommy Sheridan accused me earlier of talking a good game. I note that neither Tommy Sheridan nor any of his colleagues are here to talk any game. I make no apologies for the talking that I have done on the Licensing (Scotland) Bill on behalf of the party that I represent and my constituents. As a result of the amendments to which Parliament has agreed, there will be a legal requirement for  antisocial behaviour reports to be provided. That is an important measure. As a former licensing board member in Glasgow, I know that a large number of people appeared before licensing boards to be advised that there was no police report, despite the fact that there was antisocial behaviour in local communities. That has been confirmed by representations that I have received. I welcome Bill Aitken's point about the need for consistency in reporting. I also welcome the fact that, in partnership with Andrew Arbuckle, we have agreed to an amendment that ensures that a sentencing option of up to three months in prison will be applicable to people who sell alcohol to under-18s. Selling alcohol to under-18s is the most appalling act that people can carry out against communities and we must deal with it. The amendment will deal with some antisocial elements. I turn finally to the issue of licensing hours. There is a famous political saying that we are where we are. There was development on the bill. I started with the view that we should allow boards to develop their own positions, but I was persuaded informally by board members that they welcome an inflexible approach, because they could otherwise be subject to challenges from applicants' legal representatives. The fact that there will be fixed hours from 10 am to 10 pm will assist boards to deal with the issues that they face. I commend the Executive on an important piece of legislation that will make a difference in communities.

Amendment 38 seeks to delete an amendment in my name that was agreed to at stage 2 in relation to the recovery of public service costs. I make no apology for that amendment. Fergus Ewing is concerned about business tax payers—I, too, am concerned about them, but I am also concerned about council tax payers, who, indirectly and directly, have to meet increased policing and other public service costs. I make no apologies for raising the issue, which I believe we must tackle soon. I accept that the recovery of costs would present difficulties. However, under section 127, the ministers must enable the fees process, so they would have the opportunity to devise a recovery process. I do not seek to lay out exactly how the measure would work in practice, but I want members to accept the principle that local residents and business tax payers who are not a burden on policing costs should not have to pick up increased policing costs. In my stage 2 amendment, the approach that I proposed was not a blanket one, but one that would deal with premises that encourage antisocial behaviour in  local communities. Let them, not law-abiding citizens and businesses in local communities, pay for the policing and other service costs.

Will the member give way on that point?

I use the analogy of the professional football clubs, many of which contribute to policing costs. Measures that aim to prevent antisocial behaviour—they do not necessarily need to deal with the results of antisocial behaviour—also have a cost.

It is a most appalling act for an adult to sell alcohol to someone under the age of 18 for that adult's financial or alcohol gain. Not only does it endanger the life of the young person, but it presents dangers to the local community in the possibility of antisocial behaviour. I lodged my amendments in the group with the intention of providing the courts with the option of imposing a sentence of up to three months' imprisonment. That would send out a serious message that such an appalling act is most unwelcome in our communities and is antisocial behaviour of the highest calibre. The sentencing option I propose is in line with the sentencing option for the sale of fireworks to under-18s—an offence that carries the possibility of a six-month prison sentence. It is also similar to the possible sentence for someone who sells knives to someone under the age of 18. In partnership with me and the Executive, Andrew Arbuckle has kindly lodged manuscript amendments that seek to clarify whether a sheriff could impose a level 5 fine of up to £5,000 or a sentence of up to three months. I welcome those amendments and if they are agreed to, I will not press my amendments. I move amendment 1.

I welcome the fact that the minister has reached this conclusion on group 13 and believe that Andrew Arbuckle's manuscript amendments achieve my aim when I lodged the original amendments on this matter at stage 2. I also welcome clarification that the options for sentencing include imprisonment and the possibility of a level 5 fine of up to £5,000. On that basis, I seek the chamber's agreement to withdraw amendment 1.  Amendment 1, by agreement, withdrawn.

Will Tommy Sheridan confirm that the hours that he proposed for off-sales—a closing time of 11 pm and an opening time of 8 am—were the hours that Bruce Crawford proposed?

I have evidence that suggests that some local boards do not want this flexibility or window of opportunity. Does the member acknowledge that some boards want the 10 am to 10 pm period for licensing hours to be mandatory?

Will the member give way?

I welcome amendments 9, 10 and 11 and the principle that every community will now be guaranteed that the police will be legally required to provide antisocial activity reports that relate to licensed premises in their community. The measure was introduced in response to concerns that the Ruchazie strategy group raised with me. I am sure that that group and many other community groups and representatives throughout Scotland will welcome the fact that the information will be provided. I commend the minister for the amendments.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will implement the recommendations of Professor Irving's report "Registering the Risk: Review of Notification Requirements, Risk Assessment and Risk Management of Sex Offenders". (S2O-7948)

Volumes of evidence have been produced on the issue and a number of review groups have been established. It is time for the Parliament to show leadership and to implement the volumes of recommendations that have been made. I appreciate that the issue is evolving, but I ask the minister once and for all to implement the recommendations and to legislate as a matter of urgency to ensure that we maximise the protection of adults and young people who are at risk from sex offenders.

To ask the First Minister what measures will be taken to ensure that Glasgow Housing Association housing stock is retained under the control of community ownership. (S2F-1899)

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to community ownership, but I raise with him the concern that European procurement rules could put community ownership at risk. Will he meet the European authorities to remind them of the need for tenant rule, not European rule?

I congratulate the youth group from West Lothian. They have reached out to many other parts of Scotland, including Glasgow, and have shown their peers and other people in society how to use local elected members, such as Mary Mulligan, to make their case constructively and creatively. Scott Barrie made a powerful point about the need to recognise that, just because someone is cared for, that does not mean that they will not have opportunities to further their own expectations. There are positives. I agree with Fiona Hyslop on one point, but I am afraid that I have to disagree with her on another. The idea of a season ticket for the public gallery is a positive one, although we might not get the same queues that we see at Parkhead or Ibrox—or Livingston. However, I disagree with her about the need for a radical overhaul of the current system for looked-after children. In particular, I refer to how we can support young people so that they do not end up in care in the first place, for example by giving them opportunities to be with the family network that surrounds them and which could prevent them from going into care. That is where I would wish to place the focus. I am dealing with three cases relating to the drug issues that people in my constituency face. The aunts, uncles and grandparents concerned have ended up having to support the young people involved in their families. The current social work support network is appallingly inadequate in many ways. A number of families have raised issues involving not only financial assistance but the very basics of support that are needed to allow them to care within the family for the young people who find themselves in difficulty.

I thank Fiona Hyslop for that helpful intervention. I ask the minister to accept that, for financial reasons and to ensure that young people can, where possible, remain within the family network, we should support the various organisations that can support people in that process. A top-to-bottom review is needed of how we deliver social services throughout such networks to ensure that we give those young people the opportunity to remain with their families, because many young people who end up in care could have been supported by their families. I congratulate again the group from West Lothian from whom we have heard and Mary Mulligan. I hope that we can build on the positive and creative subjects that the group raised and on the speeches that have been made.

To ask the Scottish Executive, in light of the release of figures stating that 148,000 people in Scotland suffer from diabetes and that up to 500,000 women in the United Kingdom may have diabetes without realising it, what measures are in place to offer diagnostic checks more widely. (S2O-7672)

Will the minister consider a more creative approach to providing information to people who may suffer from diabetes and to those who need to undergo the diagnostic process? Will he build on the examples of good practice in Greater Glasgow NHS Board?

I listened carefully to Jeremy Purvis's speech. It is none of my business where he lives, but I know that he does not live in the Croftcroighn Road area of Ruchazie. If he did, he would have welcomed the respect campaign of the Prime Minister and Jack McConnell. The people who live in that area deserve respect. The majority of people in Glasgow and other parts of Scotland are good and hard-working people and the people in my constituency, although a minority, deserve to be represented in this Parliament. I made it my business to represent them by helping to deliver the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Those people are entitled to have bus services that others do not stone. FirstGroup is entitled to run its bus service and not face £1 million of damage to its buses. We are entitled to represent those people. I welcome the respect campaign and the campaign that we have launched here today in that regard.

Absolutely, and I will return to that point later if I have time. I agree with Pauline McNeill on a lot of issues, but I would like to clarify a point that she made about knee-jerk reactions. Mark Cummings was murdered last July. Any proposals that are made in the Parliament today to deal with sex offenders are not knee-jerk reactions. Let us make that clear. I note Pauline McNeill's concerns about the existence of some form of interim register. She is entitled to her point of view. However, I think that victims are also entitled to their views and to the maximum protection that we can afford them. I take the issue that Jeremy Purvis raised seriously and I think that these matters can be worked through. In particular, I believe that the sex  offenders register can be made a permanent register. To reiterate a point that the First Minister made, bail conditions alone will not manage sex offenders or potential sex offenders. There must be the maximum opportunity to consider legislation in this area. I would like to make a proposal similar to one that Stewart Maxwell made in respect of another issue. The Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency is one of the most successful models in the world in tackling the issue of drugs and I ask the minister to consider the establishment of a similar agency for dealing with sex offenders. Our current approach to managing offenders is well meant, but we do not have a co-ordinated way of dealing with offenders in the most effective manner.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. I ask the Minister for Justice to consider an approach in which a wide range of bodies could co-operate to ensure that we monitor—and enforce legislation dealing with—the most dangerous individuals in our communities. Cathie Craigie set out the concerns of her local community—many other communities throughout Scotland have similar concerns. The formation of an agency to share expertise throughout Scotland would give us the opportunity to manage the individuals concerned rather than allowing them to manage us. I have made that point on a number of occasions in the chamber and I make no apologies for making it once again. We need to manage the offenders. Far too often, they manage our communities. Civil liberty issues will arise. As a socialist, I have always respected those issues, but I point out to Patrick Harvie that the balance must be in favour of maximising the protection that is afforded to our children. The minister spoke about the consideration of Margo MacDonald's Prostitution Tolerance Zones (Scotland) Bill. I continue to be utterly opposed to that bill, which I do not think offers the way forward. However, I welcome proposals to take to task those who are involved in the purchase of sexual services.

I do not want the minister to perform the same evasion as Nicol Stephen did. Will the minister confirm that he will process the request that was made about a meeting with John Stewart, who is the National Australia Bank Group's chief executive?

I remind Nora Radcliffe of a point that I made during my speech. It is important to recognise that there is no perpetuity attached to the proposal. Even if the Post Office were not going through a closure programme, the contract that is in place is not a programme in perpetuity. At some point in the future, the Post Office might decide that it does not want to handle deposits and withdrawals.

Will the member give way?

I take the opportunity to thank the 47 members of the Parliament—cross-party—who have supported the motion in my name. The Clydesdale Bank—or the National Australia Bank—might want to consider that as there are 47 signatories to the motion and as it has received cross-party support, that shows the strength of feeling in the Parliament. I recognise the Amicus trade union representatives who are with us this evening: Mary Alexander, Hugh Scullion, David Bell and Richard Meade, of the campaign for local banking facilities, who have made a robust case on behalf of their membership. I also welcome the interest that I have received from the media throughout the world. In fact, I had inquiries from The  Australian Financial Review magazine, which showed an interest in the issue. My motion sets out my concerns about the closure of 60 Clydesdale Bank branches throughout Scotland and the devastating effect that those closures will have on local communities and the staff, who have so loyally served those branches over the years. I put on record my appreciation of the staff who have served in the two Clydesdale Bank branches in my constituency: Springburn and Duke Street, where closure is proposed. The staff have established an effective relationship with the community in the Duke Street area. I thank them for the dedication that they have shown.  From time to time in the chamber we hear about companies that face economic challenges and about the need for the Parliament to assist companies during that process. I have supported the Executive in the way in which it has engaged with such companies in considering their future and the difficulties that they face. The proposed closure programme has not been a partnership process with the Parliament. I say that because there has been no consultation with elected members. I received no correspondence on the issue until after the announcement and I know that that was the experience of other members whose constituencies will be affected. The bank's approach demonstrates contempt not only for the Parliament but for local communities, which should be consulted. It also shows disloyalty to staff. We face a challenge, because we must stand up to a culture of greed and to the bank's disloyalty to its staff and customers. On its website, the Clydesdale Bank proudly boasts: "People are the very heart of our business." However, people in the deprived area of Springburn and in other deprived areas, such as Alexandria, will not be the heart of the bank's business. The hard-working families who are returning to work with the help of the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Scottish Executive expect more from banking institutions in Scotland. I represent a constituency that fights the regeneration battle every day with the help of partnerships, the local authority and local economic development companies. The Executive can take credit for fighting that battle in my constituency: unemployment has been reduced by 50 per cent and by 75 per cent among young people. I am proud of those achievements, but regeneration will not be assisted if there are no good local banking facilities. We do not want people to have to have recourse to local loan sharks and we do not want furniture shops that charge an annual percentage rate of more than 38 per cent; we need good banking facilities. However, the proposed closures will not deliver such facilities to us. I welcomed the opportunity to meet representatives from the bank last week. The bank has said much about alternatives whereby people can make deposits into and withdrawals from their accounts via the local post office. It will not have escaped members' notice that the Parliament has debated proposed post office closures. The bank has not been able to say what would happen if the post office also closed. Nor has it said whether the proposed arrangements with post offices would remain in place in perpetuity. If the bank cannot guarantee that the arrangements will continue, the  Parliament should not accept the proposals. I mean no disrespect to the diversification of post office activity or to the dedication of post office staff when I say that a post office is not a substitute for a bank. Banks are financial institutions and have qualified staff who can provide effective on-site advice. We must accept that post offices cannot offer such services. Richard Meade made a powerful point when he described the rejection of the campaign's proposals for banking facilities to be shared locally. The banks roundly rejected the proposals. A challenge faces anyone who suggests an alternative approach. Richard Meade works for Help the Aged and told us that elderly people, as well as local businesses, need local banking facilities. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is aware of how strongly communities and elected members feel about the matter. I ask the minister to answer two specific points and I hope that he does not go down the road that Nicol Stephen takes and indulge in the art of evasion. First, will the Executive name and shame the public limited companies that do not contribute to regeneration? The Executive cannot preach to local companies that they must play a part in regeneration and tackling social exclusion if it does not commend the organisations that play their part and expose the ones that do not do so. I ask the minister to consider having a naming and shaming programme. Secondly, I ask the minister to consider requesting a meeting with the chief executive of the National Australia Bank, John Stewart—an Edinburgh man I understand, who will, no doubt, be paying a visit to Edinburgh at some point; I hope that it will be soon. I ask the minister to consider meeting him in Australia at his headquarters, expressing the Scottish Executive's commitment to the regeneration battle and the key role that local financial institutions such as the Clydesdale Bank play in it and requesting that the bank reconsider its position. The Parliament has a key role to play in the regeneration of our communities. It is time that we stood up to the banks and advised them that they need to play their part—we need to preach the need for them to do so. If they do not want to play their part, we will take these issues to the people and ensure that we work in partnership in future.

At stage 3, we may reflect that exchanges between members and the minister have been constructive and robust. I hope that those exchanges did not result in the minister seeking from the First Minister a transfer to his new portfolio, but I am sure that he will give his successor, Tavish Scott, much advice before he meets the Local Government and Transport Committee as the new Minister for Transport and Telecommunications. As I said, exchanges have been robust, but I commend the minister for taking on board a number of issues that members raised forcefully in the committee. The committee wanted a multimodal system of passenger representation to be in place, so that there would be a powerful lobby to take on the Richard Bransons, FirstGroups and Stagecoaches of this world. I believe that the new, powerful lobby that the bill will create will do that. For the first time, legislation will be passed making the consideration of health facilities throughout Scotland a legal requirement in relation to transport issues. That requirement does not apply in other parts of the United Kingdom. The measure has been delivered by the Scottish Parliament, which does not receive much credit out there for such things. The people of Scotland have recommended such a measure to us on a number of occasions—certainly, there have been representations on the issue at a number of public meetings that I have attended. David Davidson has been disingenuous. We must recognise what is good in the Parliament and what we can build on. As Pauline McNeill said, the bill's provisions on quality contracts for bus services may require further development at some  stage in the future—I say to the minister that that is one issue that he should consider. However, we can build on the bill. In conclusion, I ask the minister to deal with two issues as his final act. First, I ask him to confirm that he will consider the proposals that SPT has made to him about moving forward to the new regional transport partnership much more speedily and economically than it previously believed would be the case. Secondly, I ask him to confirm that the Dumfries and Galloway model, which is based on the particular circumstances of that area, will be unique and will not be replicated in other parts of Scotland.

At stage 2, the Local Government and Transport Committee passed an amendment in my name. The principle behind the amendment was to ensure that all the relevant agencies would retain their identity within the proposed new model. The minister assured the committee that he would consult those agencies to ensure that that principle was adhered to. The Local Government and Transport Committee was impressed by evidence from the Rail Passengers Committee Scotland, which was  able to represent passengers very effectively. We wanted to ensure that that ability was shared with other modes of transport so that we could have a representative body that could take on the PLCs out there. The PLCs often do not have the capacity to deliver an effective transport service. Now we can have a new passengers committee that will lobby effectively on behalf of passengers. Such a partnership approach towards lobbying effectively on behalf of passengers should be commended. The minister has listened to the Local Government and Transport Committee's concerns and has lodged another comprehensive amendment that will ensure that passengers—on whatever mode of transport—are represented effectively throughout Scotland.

All too often a committee can be accused of being critical of a bill that is put before it. On this occasion we were critical, but I welcome the fact that the minister has come back with what I think is a very constructive and comprehensive amendment to the bill to deal with the points that our stage 2 amendments addressed. Amendment 17 is comprehensive and will deliver much more effective transport services to health facilities and the other facilities that are mentioned. It is important that we ensure that those strategies are enforced and are not seen as welcome additions to bookcases in RTP headquarters throughout Scotland.

On amendment 10, the minister knows that I successfully raised concerns at stage 2 in the form of an amendment about voting rights of non-elected members of RTPs. I felt strongly that such members should have the same voting capacity because I did not see why they should be prevented from voting on financial matters, but could take part in other aspects of the regional transport partnership. My colleague Richard Baker made a powerful case that the partnership with non-elected members works successfully in the regional transport partnership in his area. I am satisfied that it will be up to the elected members whether they want that power to be exerted. I will support amendment 10 on that basis.

I will oppose the amendments for reasons that are similar to those which Bristow Muldoon gave. It is all well and good for David Davidson to support Strathclyde Passenger Transport, but it is a pity that such support was not given in the mid-1990s to Strathclyde Regional Council. I make the serious point, which Bristow Muldoon made well, that we must replicate SPT's success throughout Scotland. The bill gives us the opportunity to do that. I seek assurances from the minister that while we follow the process of examining the new model of regional transport partnerships, solutions that organisations such as SPT produce will be considered seriously. I make it clear that the Dumfries and Galloway model is specific to Dumfries and Galloway. Elsewhere in Scotland, we will look for a uniform approach to regional transport partnerships.

I, too, welcome Derek Brownlee to the Parliament. I give him one warning: he should not allow his party leader to recruit him to the parliamentary golf team, which was soundly beaten 8-0 on Saturday. Derek Brownlee should stay away from the team if he can. Like others, I think that we should welcome the bill. All too often, we are accused of not reflecting public opinion. This is a serious piece of legislation that was launched in 2001. It has been long in coming to the Parliament, but it will genuinely make a difference not just in changing how we sell alcohol but in dealing with the most appalling  statistics, which have been the subject of great debate in the Parliament on a number of occasions. We do not always take direct action to deal with the appalling statistics that exist in my constituency and in many other parts of Scotland, but in this case, as well as talking about what we have got to do, we are taking direct action. Bruce Crawford is being slightly disingenuous on the requirement for clarity. The committee sought further clarity, but that was no different from any other stage 1 report that has been produced in the Parliament. If there was absolute clarity, I would be concerned that the minister was not willing to show any flexibility in allowing the committee to develop what the licensing standards officers should be doing. An important part of the Parliament's work will be to develop what those officers should do. I am not here to decide what salary they should get; that issue should be developed by the civil servants. However, we should subject it to effective scrutiny. A couple of issues, which are out there in the public domain, were the subject of great debate during the committee's evidence sessions in Glasgow and in other parts of Scotland. The first of those issues is the current police reporting mechanisms. I welcome the commitment that we will develop the police reporting role with ACPOS; however, crucial to those discussions will be our ensuring that there is absolute continuity and continued clarity with regard to how the police officers will report to the licensing committees. All too often, I hear of communities attending the licensing board or committee to be advised by the police authorities that there is nothing to report, although that has not been the local experience of the premises. There must be a standard format whereby all activities that take place in a certain premises are reported to ensure that the police report does not just say whether an offence has been detected, but creates a profile of a local facility in a community. I would welcome a commitment from the minister that whatever is developed will be developed effectively. Another issue on which we received evidence, particularly in Glasgow, was the concern of communities about the pressures that they faced as a result of night clubs. We heard about not only the pressures that night clubs put on communities, but the pressures that they put on police authorities and council services. I do not believe that the tab should be picked up by the council tax payer, or by the taxpayer in the case of the police authorities; I think that the tab should be picked up by the night club facility or any other licensed premises that brings that additional pressure to a community. Will the minister ensure that the legislation will enable authorities to serve a levy on a night club or any other licensed premises that creates an additional requirement for services? All  too often, communities have been attacked as a result of the activities that take place and I do not see why they should pick up the tab for that. The committee received powerful evidence on that in its Glasgow session. The issue of family-friendly premises was raised during evidence taking, particularly in the evidence that we received from Niall Stuart of the Federation of Small Businesses. I have been encouraged by the condition of a number of family-friendly premises throughout Scotland, which have developed their services very well. Niall Stuart said: "From a practical point of view, a baby can be changed without the availability of baby changing facilities."—[ Official Report , Local Government and Transport Committee , 3 May 2005; c 2456.] If I had heard that before I became a father 15 months ago, I would have said that it was a possibility. However, I can now tell Niall Stuart that that is not the case. If we are to encourage a family-friendly environment, we must have a charter that delivers a basic standard. It was crass of Niall Stuart to suggest that that can be done in any other way. If we are to bring families into the licensed environment, that must be done responsibly and with commitment. I do not welcome Niall Stuart's statement. However, I must say again that licensed premises throughout Scotland have moved in the right direction on the issue. On the ACPOS proposal for a database of licence holders, I was surprised that we did not already have a database to collect information on licence holders. It is a serious concern that no such database is in place. A number of opportunities in relation to databases that already exist in the justice system have been talked about, but we should ensure that there is a national database that allows information to be shared. I ask the minister to ensure that funding is made available at least to develop the opportunities. I welcome the bill, subject to changes at stage 2. We can deliver legislation that will make a difference to communities throughout Scotland and will tackle the appalling health statistics in many parts of Scotland.

Will the minister give way?

I have asked the minister before about a number of reviews of housing allocation in respect of registered sex offenders. I ask him, once and for all, whether we will reach a stage at which a policy is in place for all authorities in Scotland in respect of that allocation.

Will the minister refuse the response that he received from Mr Thorburn of the Clydesdale Bank, which is  an attack on socially excluded communities? Will he also write to all the major banking organisations to remind them of their social responsibility to provide services to a cross-section of communities, which depend on such services to stop loan sharks continuing with their activities?

First, I condemn the comments made by Annabel Goldie, which generalised some of the antisocial activity of young people as being down to their not having a father. My father's father was a merchant seaman, so he was an absent father. Previous generations of war widows brought up their children in the most difficult of circumstances. Some of the most hard-working individuals I have ever met are single mothers who have put their children through university. To generalise the reasons for antisocial behaviour is typical of the views of some of the chattering classes.

Individuals who seek to involve themselves in those statistics should get themselves into the real world of the hard-working individuals out there and the difficult circumstances that they face. I commend the minister for delivering the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. The Labour-led Executive has delivered legislation that will make a genuine difference to communities throughout Scotland. There are two main areas of enforcement of the legislation that I think require attention. One of them is youth services, to which Patrick Harvie referred and to which I will return. However, I turn first to the police authorities and how they enforce the act. The minister and the deputy minister will know that on a number of occasions I have raised the issue of policing and the need to review how we deliver our police services. I believe that there is a need to modernise the way in which our police forces are mobilised and structured. I have been an elected representative for 11 years and the very same policing issues that were raised with me on 17 December 1993 were raised with me last night at a public meeting—issues relating to the deployment of police services. I do not think that  our police forces have moved on in the new era of closed-circuit television systems and the internet. We need to consider how we modernise the approach that our police authorities take to delivering services to deal with many of the antisocial activities that have been mentioned. There are a number of measures that do not require additional resources. We are obsessed with increasing the number of police officers, but that will not necessarily make a difference to my constituents who call the police office only to be treated in the most appalling manner when they report incidents in their community, a number of which are not followed through effectively. I have dealt with a number of individuals over the phone who have been dealt with in an appalling manner. Problem solving saves police resources, but I do not see enough evidence that our police forces are considering ways in which they can solve problems. It would not require additional resources to ensure that there was stability in the police force, rather than the constant turnover of senior police officers. Our obsession with police numbers is a red herring. We have to deploy our police resources in the areas where they are needed most. That might mean that the leafy suburbs do not get the same number of police officers as do areas such as Ruchazie in my constituency. We will have to review the way in which our police resources are deployed. I turn to youth services. It is important to acknowledge that an element of the act was to ensure that we dealt with youth disorder. Parental accountability is an important issue. Too often I attend public meetings at which it is clear that parents believe that it is our role as politicians to deliver local youth services. I see a role for parents in that process. People do not have a God-given right to be a parent; parents have to play a role in partnership with communities in delivering services for their children. We will have to improve the youth services that we deliver and acknowledge that although many of our services are of the highest standard, they are not being promoted in the way that they should be. I call on the minister to ensure that our local authorities modernise their approach to how they promote local services. I have attended public meetings on a number of occasions and told people that we have Olympic-sized swimming pools in Glasgow that are not being used to the extent that they should be and people have appeared to be surprised. Sometimes it is convenient for parents to be surprised because they do not always want to live up to their responsibilities. We should do more to ensure that they do so and to provide a national standard that young people can expect of their local youth services.  I welcome the act but plead with the minister to ensure that we can enforce it by modernising the police force and other authorities that are involved in its enforcement to ensure that we make progress.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Some specific issues were raised during the debate, and I think that it is only courtesy for the minister to give members a response to those issues. I ask the Executive to reflect on the fact that it should respond to specific issues that are raised by members to ensure that there is a purpose to the debate.

I put on record my appreciation for the convener of the Local Government and Transport Committee, Bristow Muldoon, for his indulgence during the inquiry. None of us should make any apologies for the issues that we raised in the inquiry, because the effectiveness of our bus network throughout Scotland affects many people, particularly the disadvantaged groups who depend on an effective bus network. Many people in my constituency and throughout Scotland need a decent bus network to get them to hospitals, health centres and leisure facilities, and even to get them to work in the early hours of the morning. I do not see any evidence that, under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, our bus  companies are motivated by the need to deliver for the social needs of our communities. They are motivated only by the need to ensure that they make a nice tidy profit from every route that they deliver. Social conscience may have nothing to do with the concerns that have been raised, but the specific issue that I want to raise is the cherry-picking process that the bus companies involve themselves in. I ask the Minister for Transport not simply to take my word for that. I quote from the minutes of a north Glasgow FirstGroup transport liaison group meeting, at which David Robertson, the network manager of FirstGroup, said: "Unfortunately bus operators cannot afford to be suppliers of Social Services", as previously delivered by the SPT. The minister said in response to our inquiry that the bus companies should not always look at the bottom line, but should deliver social services throughout Scotland. I agree with that, but unfortunately that is not what is being played out in our communities. I find the cherry picking that goes on throughout the bus industry unacceptable, and the quality partnership and quality contract process, which was well meant in 2001, is not playing out effectively. There will have to be a process to ensure that we can regulate to deliver the social needs of our communities. In relation to concessionary fares, we have seen significant investment by the Executive of £156 million; I know that all members welcome that. However, the evidence that we received during our inquiry showed that there is no purpose to that scheme unless people can access the bus services in the first place. Once again, I must mention the need to ensure that the elderly and, in particular, the disabled can access those services. We are advised that many of the buses that are being developed will not be ready to comply with the amended regulations under the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 for another 20 years. We should introduce legislation timeously to ensure that everyone can get access to bus services. I have spoken a number of times in the chamber about the need to ensure that we deliver to many of the facilities that require bus services for people who have no alternative but to access the bus network. I welcome the minister's response on that point during stage 2 of the Transport (Scotland) Bill, when we ensured that the new regional transport partnerships will take health facilities into consideration. I believe that the minister will, at some point, have to address the need to regulate to ensure that bus companies take those issues into account. I want to address the constant need for companies to consider a subsidy before they will  deliver a service. David Robertson, whom I quoted earlier, also said to the north Glasgow liaison group, "Why don't you make representations to your MSP to see how that subsidy can deal with delivering some of those social services?" FirstGroup asks us to provide funding from the public purse to deliver social services when its turnover, according to a recent announcement, has increased by 8 per cent from £2.29 billion to £2.47 billion. It is time for such companies to move away from the cherry picking of routes and to ensure that they deliver a cross-section of services to the people who need them in the most disadvantaged areas. They should get the reality check that, in business, it is necessary to take the good with the bad. Many other public limited companies in various industries have to do that; it is time that the bus companies woke up to that and ensured that they deliver services to the most disadvantaged groups throughout Scotland.

Will the minister also take the opportunity to regulate the property factors who are responsible for maintaining many of the developments throughout Scotland to which Cathie Craigie referred?

Will Hugh Henry give way?

I will ask the minister about two points. First, will he make representations on the tariffs that are available to sheriffs? Secondly, will he legislate on housing allocation policy to ensure that we have in place not voluntary partnerships, but a specific framework that ensures that, when housing is allocated, information is shared between authorities, such as housing authorities?

I thank members who have supported my motion and the large number of organisations and individuals outwith Parliament who support the ethos of the motion. I also pay tribute to the courage and determination of Margaret Ann Cummings, who is with us this evening. Tragically, she lost her son, Mark Cummings, who was murdered by Stuart Leggate, a registered child sex offender. I commend her patient and constructive approach to ensuring that lessons are learned from the tragic murder of her son. I want to highlight several issues. First, I will consider how the housing allocation system deals with registered child sex offenders—I stress "registered". There is a myth that registered sex offenders are carefully managed in the housing allocation process and that housing providers are informed of the history of such offenders. I am sorry to inform members that that is not the case. Stuart Leggate, who had served two years of a four-year sentence for sex acts against children, was able to choose to live in the Royston area of Glasgow. He was not managed through the housing allocation process and he was housed in an area that has a high population of young children, and within 100 yards of a nursery and two primary schools. When someone has been convicted of sex acts against children, they should forgo many of the life  choices that are available to law-abiding citizens, including the choice of where to reside. We need to create a rigid and efficient environment to ensure that we manage sex offenders and that they do not manage us during the process. The minister should ensure that legislation is introduced to establish a structure that will deliver the basic requirement of managing sex offenders through the housing allocation process while dealing with sex offenders' being able to assume aliases. It is unacceptable that both Ian Huntley and Stuart Leggate assumed aliases. Parliament should investigate a possible partnership with Westminster to consider withdrawing the right to an alias. I will refer to sentencing policy. Stuart Leggate served two years of a four-year sentence for sex acts against young children. It is unacceptable that he should be released only two years into his sentence. Many academics and world-renowned experts on the subject tell us that dealing with registered sex offenders is a difficult and complex issue—I agree with them all. Why, in that case, should we release sex offenders halfway through their sentences? We should significantly increase the sentencing tariffs that are available to sheriffs in respect of registered child sex offenders. Moreover, a life sentence should mean life for individuals who have shown during the process that they are not capable of being treated. I ask the minister to respond to the specific question of how we can ensure that tariffs are increased. On neighbourhood notification, much has been said about how we notify communities of the presence of child sex offenders. A lot has also been said about vigilantes. I do not represent a community of vigilantes; I represent hard-working men and women who wish to live in harmony in their communities, and who care deeply for the safety of their young children. There have been no vigilantes in Royston. Although there are examples of vigilante action, we are dealing with people who want to work constructively with the authorities to examine ways in which they can protect their children. I have always maintained that to take this issue forward, we, as elected members, should not be so arrogant as to dismiss any opportunity that is presented to us on the ways in which we can protect children from registered child sex offenders. The Executive should at least investigate opportunities that are available to it worldwide, and it should examine international examples of cases in which information on registered sex offenders has been shared with communities. The intention would be to use the information in a controlled and responsible  environment, in which the safety of the child is paramount. An issue also arises in respect of how we share information, not only with communities but with authorities such as housing authorities. The fact that this gift is in the possession of only the police authorities is unacceptable. We have to consider the various authorities that deal with sex offenders, sometimes indirectly, and we must ensure that relevant and accurate information is provided to them. We hear far too much about information-sharing partnerships and the existing partnerships that are in place. We should introduce legislation to ensure that information partnerships are established to deal with how we share information on registered sex offenders. It is important that we learn from the experience of young Mark's death. Margaret Ann Cummings has made it very clear that she does not want a blame culture to follow Mark's death, but a culture in which all of us accept with humility that we could have got it much more right than we did. Let us show humility and introduce a "Mark's law" that will ensure that everything possible is done to protect our future generations.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in increasing pupil attainment. (S2O-6431)

Does the minister accept that the public-private partnership programme, which, in my constituency, has developed five brand-new secondary schools, has led to a significant increase in pupil attainment? Will he extend that programme to Glasgow primary schools? I believe that Glasgow City Council has submitted proposals for such a programme to the Scottish Executive.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will increase the number of subsidised low-cost homes. (S2O-5868)

Are representations being made to the lending organisations? The initiative gives them an opportunity to consider how, instead of imposing bank charges, they can assist people in the early stages of taking up home ownership.

Sometimes politicians can be a bit shy when we introduce measures that are universally popular, but I am delighted to overcome my shyness by saying that the Parliament and the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition should be commended today for delivering universal free concessionary fares throughout Scotland. I echo Bristow Muldoon in saying that the people of Scotland should understand that if members do not vote for the bill today, the universal concessionary fares scheme will be rejected. I would like to deal with two aspects of the bill on which I think the minister should reflect. Members have referred to the regional transport partnerships and to the minister's proposal that we should consider business representatives or other non-elected members being involved and having voting rights in regional transport partnerships. I totally oppose such a proposal, in similar terms to those that Tommy Sheridan used in his speech. We should seriously consider the precious resource of our elected members, who represent their constituents, not shareholders. We should ensure that the status of elected members is retained and that we give them absolute priority. We should, of course, ensure that businesses are given the opportunity to form partnerships with the regional transport partnerships, but I think that it would be wrong to introduce a measure that would give them voting rights. If we wanted to extend such a principle, why does the Parliament not give businesses voting rights in the Parliament? That would be equally wrong and I believe that we should oppose such a measure for the regional transport partnerships.  However, we should build on the existing principles of working with businesses throughout Scotland. Councils throughout Scotland have a proud record in that respect. It was good to hear Phil Gallie and David Mundell supporting the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive. It is a pity that we did not hear from them in the 1990s, or people such as Des McNulty might still have been regional councillors. It would have been more fitting if Phil Gallie had been so vocal during that period, although he appears to be suffering a loss of memory in that respect today. The most important aspect of the bill, and something that we must consider in introducing free concessionary fares, is accessibility. I raised that issue continually with the minister and other witnesses at stage 1. Organisations such as the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland advised us that there is no purpose in delivering free concessionary fares if disabled people are not able to get access to the mode of transport in question—that is unacceptable. The Parliament has been successful in raising the profile of antisocial behaviour, homelessness and other issues that affect certain groups in Scotland, but it is time that it stood up to the transport providers, who are open about the massive amounts of money that they accrue from public subsidies, to demand that they give us something back. In particular, we should demand that they give something back to disabled people by delivering accessible transport and ensuring that people are able to use public transport in comfort. We have delivered stage 1 of the bill. There is an issue concerning the detail of stage 1, which the minister will have to work on, and he must come back with more details in respect of some of the issues that we have raised. I look forward to stage 2, but I will support the bill on the basis that we await those further details at stage 2.

I accept that we should not allocate police resources, but we should be able to make representations on where police resources should be allocated. Does the minister find it unacceptable that two police officers have been allocated to the new Fort complex in Easterhouse and six police officers have been allocated to the Braehead shopping centre, when one police officer serves the Blackhill and Ruchazie areas of Glasgow? Surely we should focus our police resources where they are most needed.

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional training will be provided to police officers and social workers to help them to deal with sex offenders. (S2O-5421)

I have two questions for the minister. First, does she agree that we need to consider how we manage sex offenders, instead of allowing them to manage the system? Secondly, does she accept that there is a need to train a wide range of agencies and staff who deal with sex offenders to ensure that we can effectively monitor registered sex offenders?

As someone who was born and raised in the Springburn area of Glasgow, I genuinely do not fear the so-called hard-man reputation of Tom McCabe—or, for that matter, that of Tavish Scott. If that is Peter MacMahon's representation of a hard man, he should get a life. I have never claimed that Glasgow has had a fair deal. I do not know whether it is because I am a Glaswegian, but I think that our city faces severe and complex challenges. A large number of studies on Glasgow have been carried out by underemployed consultants. I respectfully suggest that they should consider how services in Glasgow could be delivered more effectively instead of telling us the problems of which we are all well aware. We need to examine how to tackle the problems. Although Alasdair Morgan finds it difficult to do so, we must remind ourselves of the Tory years. I make no apologies for doing that, because the people of Glasgow suffered during those years. In 1996, a massive secondary school building project was required. That was delivered in 2004, when 29 brand new secondary schools were built in Glasgow. In 1996, there were no proposals on investment in Glasgow's housing stock. In 2004,  £700 million was provided for that. In 1994, full employment was a fantasy for politicians in Glasgow, but in 2004-05 it is a reality—we can deliver full employment. In 1996—the year before Labour came to power—the increase in council tax in the Glasgow City Council area was 19 per cent; in 2004-05, the corresponding increase was 1.9 per cent. When I was preparing my speech, my researcher asked whether 19 per cent was the correct figure for this year. I had to ask that the point be put in. Let us continue to move forwards. We must keep an eye on the Tories, who were the constant enemies of local government services. Councils strove to deliver front-line services in our communities in spite of the predatory approach that the Tories took to them during their years in Government. The balancing act that the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform has to perform is a serious challenge. He has committed to scrapping the bridge tolls for the 12,000 inhabitants of Skye, but when he makes such decisions, he has to take into account the fact that he is removing the opportunity to provide additional funding for Glasgow to deal with the serious challenges that it faces. I am conscious of the balancing act that the minister has to carry out, but I think that he should take into account the complex problems that Glasgow faces, such as the serious health situation that the statistics remind us of daily. I welcome the commitment to provide an additional £64 million to police forces throughout Scotland. However, on a number of occasions I have called for a top-to-bottom review of how police services are delivered in our communities. It is all very well to provide additional investment for police officers and to use the buzz words, but it is important that local elected members have a role in examining how policing is delivered. It is crucial to ensure that the investment that is made in the police force is used to best effect. I welcome the additional £227 million increase in funding for education. As I have said, I welcomed the investment that resulted in the building of 29 brand new secondary schools in Glasgow, five of which are in my constituency. That has resulted in a significant improvement in pupil and teacher morale in those schools. It is now time to consider primary school provision in Glasgow, so that we can raise educational attainment in that area. In my constituency, the number of people who leave school with no qualifications is 240 per cent above the Scottish average. We must invest in our primary school education to ensure that we deal with that issue. The debate has been welcome. I welcome Brian Monteith's after-dinner speech, but it is unfortunate that, like the other Opposition  members, he was unable to provide proposals for alternative, more effective means of funding local government. It is time that the Opposition put up or shut up and allowed us to get on with the job of delivering for local government in our communities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to increase water and sewage capacity in areas where acute housing shortages have been identified. (S2O-5266)

In the Robroyston area of my constituency, people are experiencing severe difficulties with connection to water and sewage services. Since last August, a business that aims to locate to my constituency and which will provide 130 jobs has experienced difficulties with Scottish Water in connecting to water and sewage services. Can I meet the minister to discuss the issue and to ensure that, once and for all, Scottish Water deals with the administration of ensuring connection to water and sewage services?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it is currently providing to people who wish to give up smoking. (S2O-5269)

Does the minister accept that a number of initiatives that have been undertaken in the past have failed and that we have to learn some lessons from those failures while building on the successful programmes? Will she consider engaging with publicans who will experience difficulties as a result of the initiative involving no smoking in public places, to investigate the possibility of using their premises to give people an opportunity to access information on the cessation of smoking?

We should use the opportunity that the debate presents to focus purely on what Parliament can deliver for the elderly. In my experience, elderly people are not worried about what they are called; they are more concerned about what Parliament delivers for them. People out there look to Parliament to deliver. As well as focusing on the areas in which the Executive's schemes must be applauded, I will—as Donald Gorrie did—highlight areas in which delivery of services to the elderly needs to be improved. I make no apologies for applauding the Executive for its central heating programme, which has benefited 12,000 households throughout Scotland. When I was first elected as a councillor in 1993, the idea that anyone could receive a free central heating system without being means tested was unheard of. By delivering the central heating programme, the Executive has moved the debate on a great deal. However, we must develop the central heating programme. Ministers must reflect on the need to improve the criteria for access to the programme. We need a much more effective scheme to ensure that we deliver central heating systems in areas that are densely populated with elderly people. However, we have taken direct action to assist those who need central heating systems; we have not just talked about energy advice and provided glossy leaflets. We should applaud the introduction of free concessionary fares and the progress that has been made through the decision to remove the restriction on the times at which people can use the concessionary scheme. My only concern about smart cards is that that they should say "Free" on them. The mass of elderly people are not concerned about what the smart cards say; they simply want free travel. However, there is no point in providing free travel if we do not have a reliable bus service to deliver it. It is time for Parliament to get tough with the bus companies—the multi-million pound plcs—that are failing to deliver services in many of our communities. We have heard many kind words from the Minister for Transport about how he will consider that issue and disabled access—about which David Davidson expressed concern—but it is time for action. I do not want to attend the Local Government and Transport Committee day in, day out to hear the minister say that he will consider the issue, or to take evidence from organisations such as the Mobility and Access Committee for Scotland; I want Parliament to take direct action, given that we have the power to do so. We should also consider the technology that is available in this day and age. I do not know about other constituencies, but even in the deprived  community of Springburn, which I represent, the number of people who communicate with me by e-mail has increased. Elderly people have taken the new technology in their stride—they often use e-mail, for example, to communicate with their families overseas. We must consider the latest broadband technology. If it is possible to provide free internet access for silver surfers, we should do so because it would present opportunities to provide information on local health services and to communicate with the large elderly population. We should never dismiss the elderly when we consider technology advances in Scotland. All too often, organisations dismiss the opportunities that technology provides in relation to elderly people. In every debate on the elderly in which I have spoken, I have referred to the alive and kicking project in the Red Road area of my constituency, which is a one-stop shop for services for the elderly. I commend that project for the services that it provides. It has become a dating agency in Springburn—many people have married in the later years of their lives. I would welcome a visit from the Minister for Communities to the project, which provides a wide range of services in Springburn and which has allowed many people who have been isolated for many years to access services. The "alive and kicking" title is one that Parliament should consider harnessing in considering the future of our elderly population. People will not have to live in cold homes, because we will deliver central heating systems; they will not have to worry about access to public transport, because we will deliver more effective, reliable and accessible public transport; and they will not have to worry about paying for personal care. Let us ensure that elderly people in Scotland continue to be alive and kicking.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether attracting the 2014 Commonwealth games can provide economic and social benefits to Glasgow. (S2O-4767)

I welcome the minister's positive response. However, will she assure me that if Glasgow's bid is successful, the Executive will make additional funding available to allow us to create a lasting legacy in some of the city's more socially deprived areas?

I, too, congratulate Frank McAveety on lodging what I think is an important motion that deals with an issue that affects many parts of Scotland. It is unfortunate that, because of the gravity of the situation in Glasgow, I can be parochial. Like Margaret Curran, I congratulate the Evening Times on its constructive campaign in raising awareness of the seriousness of knife crime and of a number of the challenges that we face. The human element has been brought home to me when I have dealt with families who have been affected by knife crime and who have lost their loved ones. A family that comes to mind from my own experience is the Watson family, who tragically lost their daughter—and then their son—as a result of a playground murder in the Dennistoun area of my constituency. Margaret and Jim Watson have been devastated by the ruthless murder of Diane and the subsequent suicide of their son. When we reflect on such cases, we realise the need to think about how we tackle knife crime. For the first time ever, I agree with everything Tommy Sheridan said—we are united in our views. His speech was valuable; I wonder whether he was speaking for the Scottish Socialist Party. There are two issues I want to deal with. The first is regulation. In the Parliament, we have considered what some people regard as serious restrictions of liberty, such as the banning of smoking in public places. In my view, we must consider the sale of knives in a similar fashion. When I look at many of the weapons that are sold by retail outlets such as Victor Morris in Argyle Street in Glasgow, I wonder why anyone would have to purchase them. I argue that people should have to make a case for purchasing many of the  knives and other weapons that are on sale. In common with Des McNulty, I think that we should consider more regulation, whereby someone would have to show why they needed to buy a particular weapon rather than simply have the right to buy it for whatever purpose they want. Sandra White spoke about policing schools, which I think is the way forward. At Whitehill Secondary School in my constituency, pupils and police officers have been most impressed by the response that they have received. Such initiatives are an opportunity for police officers to make contact with young people in a way that they have never been able to before. The times when young people would not communicate with community police officers are long gone. In my experience, young people are moving on; they want to establish a dialogue with police officers in more creative ways. I argue that that is the way forward. We need to direct police resources to the areas that are under pressure as a result of the serious challenge of knife crime. From day one, I have said that the leafy suburbs of the Strathclyde police area have the same number of police officers as places such as Ruchazie, Shettleston and Easterhouse. We should direct our police resources at the areas that face the challenge of knife crime so that we can detect the people who are involved in it.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to reduce packaging waste. (S2O-4502)

Will the minister consider the serious challenges that face the elderly and infirm when they have to deal with the unnecessary packaging that we see in many retail outlets, especially at Christmas time?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is considering to better protect children and communities from registered sex offenders. (S2F-1227)

I welcome the commitments that the First Minister and the Minister for Justice have given. I seek assurances from the First Minister that the Executive will keep an open mind in dealing with a number of issues that local communities have raised. I refer in particular to housing allocation policy, which is currently appalling, and the widening of access to the sex offenders register. I seek assurances that the Parliament will have an opportunity to interrogate every possibility to ensure that registered sex offenders pose the minimum risk to our children.

The most cherished day of my life was 25 February this year—the day of the birth of my baby daughter, Abbie. I do not know whether I will be saying that at 3 o'clock tomorrow morning, but there is no greater gift to anyone than the gift of life. It is not up to Jeremy Purvis, any other MSP or any other person to decide that the gift of life should end. I disagree with Jeremy Purvis's motion in the strongest possible terms. I do not think that he set out the argument compassionately; he set out a legalistic view. The birth of life is a natural process and death should also be a natural process. Members have all said that the process of death is difficult; many of us have seen close relatives experience that process in very difficult circumstances. However, that process is not helped by a legal document such as the one that Jeremy Purvis says he set out for himself 15 years ago. The process is  assisted by the hard work of those who provide support and attention to people during that difficult time of their lives. I pay tribute to the Marie Curie hospice that is based in my constituency, which provides valuable support for people during that difficult process. I add my support to those people. The focus of today's debate should be on the work of Michael McMahon and others in the cross-party group on palliative care in relation to how we can support people properly during the process instead of on a legal document that aims to ensure that we can assist people to die. There are many medical and legal arguments about which I hope we will hear no more during the debate; I do not want that debate to take place. I do not always agree with Mike Rumbles. He and I are not known to share a platform in the Lib-Lab coalition, but he set out clearly the arguments against Jeremy Purvis's motion. I will stand shoulder to shoulder with Mike Rumbles for the first time ever as part of the coalition against the principles in Jeremy Purvis's motion. Given the motion that Jeremy Purvis has lodged, I do not think that this is a proud day for the Parliament. I ask Jeremy Purvis to accept that the majority of Scottish people do not support the motion and that, certainly from what I have heard so far, other members do not support the motion. I ask every member in the Parliament to oppose Jeremy Purvis's motion in the strongest possible terms.

As an MSP who represents a constituency where the incidence of lung cancer is 93 per cent above the Scottish average, I welcome the First Minister's statement. In respect of future generations, Patricia Ferguson and I were joined by pupils from Chirnsyde Primary School and St Philomena's Primary RC School, and a straw poll of those pupils made it clear that they would also like to see a ban. Today we are reflecting public opinion, young and old.  The First Minister wants people to give up smoking, but there have been no specifics on how he will direct resources. Helplines and glossy leaflets do not work in this area, so how will the First Minister ensure that we assist people to give up smoking?

Does the First Minister support the call for an inquiry into the circumstances of the tragic murder of Mark Cummings by child sex offender Stuart Leggate? Does he also recognise that there is a need for a wide-ranging review of how we deal with convicted child sex offenders and does he think that such a review should examine whether people such as Stuart Leggate should have been housed alongside young families such as Mark Cummings's family?

In recent weeks, members have been accused of a tendency to say, "It wisnae me." However, I confirm that it was me—I raised the issue of protection for emergency workers in the previous session of Parliament, during the passage of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, when I lodged amendment 75 at stage 3 in response to concerns about attacks on firefighters in my constituency. I remember receiving widespread support from members and I am delighted that the Lord Advocate's guidance on the matter has been well received in courts throughout Scotland. Experience has taught many of us that if we become complacent about how we implement guidelines, things fall by the wayside. The Executive should be commended for not being complacent on the issue. I appreciate a number of the points that Margaret Mitchell, Pauline McNeill and others raised about the complexity of the issue, but the fact that complex issues present us with serious challenges should not prevent Parliament from raising its game and ensuring that it takes on the serious issue of public sector and emergency workers being attacked in their communities. It is unacceptable and repugnant that people who work in emergency services, particularly firefighters and paramedics, should be attacked. I welcome the Executive's approach.  The detail of stage 2 should be left to the Justice 1 Committee. I will raise a number of important issues that should complement the bill. First, we must consider how we educate young people about the importance of public services that are delivered in communities. All too often, the curriculum in educational establishments does not cover the importance of public sector workers, but the bill presents an opportunity to inform young people about the important role that firefighters, police officers, paramedics and other emergency workers play. The Minister for Education and Young People and the Minister for Finance and Public Services could work in partnership to consider complementing the legislation with measures to tackle unacceptable behaviour in communities. It is not just young people who become involved in attacks on firefighters and paramedics; people who belong to various age profiles give our public sector workers a hard time. I agree with Tommy Sheridan that housing officers have a difficult time of it out there and I would not oppose attempts to explore the possibility of extending the bill to cover such workers and others who are affected in their daily lives. Traffic wardens were mentioned. They are perhaps not the most popular individuals but they, too, serve communities in one way or another.

Tommy Sheridan has a sense of humour—that is welcome news. There is a serious issue about how we ensure that organisations put in place procedures for staff to report attacks. I have met staff from a number of organisations—particularly health organisations—and it is evident that staff are not confident that their reporting of attacks will be taken seriously. I welcome the Executive's proposed requirement—as stated in the explanatory notes to the bill—that organisations set in place a method to ensure that members of staff are taken seriously when they report concerns or attacks at their places of work and that such incidents are recorded properly. That deals with some of the issues that were raised by the Justice 1 Committee at stage 1. In debates on this subject, we often miss out consideration of how we can prevent the attacks from happening in the first place, and of the design of the areas or environments where they occur. I have seen examples of health boards examining the design of accident and emergency departments to ensure that attacks become much more difficult. Let us consider how we can prevent attacks from happening in the first place. Let us ensure that the public are informed of the importance of public services. I want the Executive  to add to the existing legislation, which will send a clear message that attacks on our public sector workers are absolutely unacceptable and will not be tolerated in a modern democracy.

I reiterate the point that I made earlier. I welcome the move in respect of the Queen Mother's hospital. However, if I and other representatives can present a clinical case for some form of acute service to be retained at Stobhill in partnership with the ambulatory care and diagnosis project and the Glasgow royal infirmary, will the minister take that case seriously and ensure that we can move forward as he has moved in respect of the Queen Mother's hospital?

I will not spend too much time talking about the Tories, but I would like to make passing reference to an adjournment debate that took place on 27 May 1993. That adjournment debate, on the subject of Stobhill hospital, was raised by a close colleague of mine, Michael Martin MP, who asked the then Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland, Allan Stewart: "Does the Minister still maintain that 1,000 beds must be lost in the Greater Glasgow catchment area?" Allan Stewart replied: "The figure of 1,000 ... was arrived at through various planning models. It has been discussed ... with many clinicians through the internal consultation process".—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 27 May 1993; Vol 225, c 1052.]

I would just like to raise the Stobhill figures. Over the past year, from 2003-2004, 20 beds have been lost at Stobhill, and that has been due to consultation exercises that took place some time ago. I would like to raise a serious issue. I am not here today to defend Malcolm Chisholm, nor am I here to challenge him in any way. I am here today to hold the Executive to account in respect of one of the issues that affects my constituency and which Johann Lamont raised earlier. We have some of the most appalling health statistics in Scotland. Heart disease in my constituency is 173 per cent above the Scottish average, and the incidence of cancer in Glasgow Springburn is 213 per cent above the Scottish average. That sets out clearly the serious challenges that we face in this Parliament. When we talk about raising our game, those are the issues that we should be challenging. That brings me to the serious issue that I raise today. We are trying to challenge those statistics, and with an acute site in Glasgow Springburn we have a serious opportunity to do just that. If we move acute services from the Stobhill campus, will we improve those unacceptable statistics? Will the patient experience improve as a result? The devil is in the detail. I have not received any serious information from the various consultants who have made the case for acute services to be moved from Stobhill hospital about how they will improve the patient experience or how they will attack those unacceptable statistics that we face in Glasgow Springburn. That is why I raise concerns about whether the patient experience will be improved if acute services are relocated to Glasgow royal infirmary and about whether Glasgow royal infirmary will be able to deal with that additional capacity. In an age of creativity, we hear about modernisation and flexible working practices in many public sector areas. When the site to which we propose to relocate acute services is 3 miles away, why can we not consider the Stobhill campus as part of the acute services strategy? Although I welcome the compromise that the minister has made in regard to the Queen Mother's hospital, with which Pauline McNeill has been involved—I also congratulate the Evening Times on its campaign—I ask for a compromise in relation to Stobhill hospital. I ask the minister to consider in his closing remarks the possibility of retaining some acute services at Stobhill hospital in partnership with the new ambulatory care and  diagnostic unit that will be developed at a cost of £83 million. Like Jamie Stone, I have some concerns about the Executive's amendment, but if I receive a commitment from the Executive that it will meet me and other campaigners, and if the minister will at least consider developing a clinically-proven strategy that will include Stobhill, that will give me some food for thought. Like Roseanna Cunningham, I have serious concerns about the way in which consultation exercises have been carried out in the past. They have not been consultation exercises; they have been information processes. We have to modernise the way in which such exercises are carried out. I ask the minister to consider my member's bill, which seeks to give local communities the right of appeal to a sheriff if they feel that a consultation exercise has not been carried out properly. We continue to face serious challenges in the form of unacceptable health statistics in Glasgow. I ask the minister to ensure that, whatever strategies are adopted, they attack those statistics, and that he considers a clinical strategy that includes the retention of acute services at Stobhill in partnership with the new ambulatory care and diagnostic unit that will be developed.

Does the minister have any plans to reform how health boards consult local communities, and to give communities the opportunity to appeal to a court of law if they feel that a public consultation exercise has been merely cosmetic, as has been the case on a number of occasions throughout the Greater Glasgow Health Board area?

I find myself agreeing with Ted Brocklebank on one point, and that is not because the new building is having an effect on me. I agree that the issue is politically charged. We should be proud of the Executive's policy of relocating jobs from central Edinburgh, and we should implement it—as a Labour member, I am proud of the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive's decision and I want it to be implemented. However, I have some sympathy with the concerns about the way in which the process has been developed, and the minister should deal with some of those points to ensure that we learn lessons from this complex process. I will be my usual parochial self and make the case for my constituency. A number of people have already expressed self-interest. I add to that by welcoming the minister's comments on the City Park development in my constituency, which he and Andy Kerr visited recently. It is on the site of the former Wills tobacco factory and is able to hold more than 2,000 members of staff in good-quality office accommodation. In a constituency that faces serious social and economic challenges, that opportunity is most welcome. We often hear about—and Opposition members often attack us for—the social profiles in our constituencies. This is a serious opportunity for us to attack those social profiles. Bruce Crawford raised his concerns about the opportunity for Glasgow to benefit from this relocation. However, the Executive's belief is that locating to Glasgow fits in with its economic and social policy. Glasgow fits very well with the Executive's policy of tackling social exclusion. In Glasgow, we should not make any apologies for seeking the opportunity of relocation of jobs in our area. At the same time, the Executive must practise what it preaches. It preaches to other prospective employers that they should recruit in areas of high unemployment, and we have seen that in the new deal programme. The Executive must take up that theory, and the City Park development fits in with that. As I said, there are lessons to be learned from the process that has been followed. I share some of the concerns that SNH staff have raised about  the way in which they were consulted. I know that several members from the Edinburgh area will raise that issue today. In Glasgow, although we welcome the relocation of jobs, we do not want to see that having a detrimental effect on other areas. The process is complex and if the Executive is to deliver its theory of relocation, and if we are to achieve the long-term aim of a much more open and transparent Scotland in which various departments are delivered to various parts of the country, difficult decisions such as the one on SNH will have to be taken, as Des McNulty said. However, that must be done in full consultation with union representatives and we must also consider investing in the process. Fergus Ewing has now left the chamber, but I take issue with his suggestion that the policy will have a significant cost to the Executive. If we are serious about delivering the policy, we have to invest in it to make it work. If we are to create a much more effective devolved Scotland, in which employment opportunities are devolved to various areas, such as my constituency, we have to invest in at least the initial stages of the process and ensure that the opportunities are there in all our various communities. I welcome the policy and I welcome the fact that the minister visited City Park in my constituency—I make no apologies for being parochial about that. We face serious social and economic challenges and, for once, we have a serious opportunity to deal with them. I ask the Executive to put its policy in the front line and to take the opportunity to make a real difference in areas such as Glasgow Springburn.

Will the member take an intervention?

The purpose of amendment 158 is to provide the police with the powers to remove and seize vehicles that are used in a manner that contravenes sections 3 or 34 of the Road Traffic Act 1988. The amendment will also apply to quad bikes, which are involved in significant antisocial behaviour in many of our communities. Amendment 158 will provide that a constable may provide information at the same time. Amendment 159 is a technical amendment that will allow secondary legislation to be introduced. I move amendment 158.

I am satisfied with the minister's response and am obviously delighted that she accepts my amendments. Mary Scanlon referred to those who make use of quad bikes on land that they own. Earlier, I made it clear that the Road Traffic Act 1988 refers to those who cause alarm, distress or annoyance, which is the main reason for the amendments. Those who drive quad bikes on their own land would not cause annoyance, alarm or distress to others.

As I explained earlier, amendment 159 is mainly a technical—

I move amendment 159.

Does the First Minister agree that the rail franchise should benefit not only passengers but Scottish companies? I bring to his attention the Alstom Railcare group in my constituency, which can provide its services to FirstGroup. Will he ensure that FirstGroup gives Scottish companies such as Alstom every consideration?

I do not always jump to the defence of the Executive, but on this occasion, I congratulate it on ensuring that today's debate is a comprehensive one that deals with a serious issue, as Robin Harper and Jeremy Purvis said, and for ensuring that it gives respect to the members of children's panels. We should reflect on Brian Monteith's and Fiona Hyslop's comments that they did not welcome the debate and wanted the debate's time to be reduced. I think that we should also reflect on the Procedures Committee's recommendation that we hold debates such as this. It was that committee's recommendation that the Executive instigate debates such as this and I, as a member of the Procedures Committee, opposed the recommendation because of the very thing that has resulted today: I said that the Executive would be accused of trying to avoid votes on certain issues. I say that for the Official Report . Members should reflect on the fact that we find ourselves holding a debate such as this because of the recommendations of the Procedures Committee. A number of important issues have been debated today, and I think that we can helpfully intervene in a number of areas to improve the children's hearings system. We have referred to the valuable work of the volunteers who give of their time to that system, and I want to put that on record. On parenting orders, which are being introduced in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill, it is quite right that we have that running theme. We want to ensure that parents are more proactive in  the process of tackling antisocial behaviour, and parenting orders will provide an opportunity to hold parents to account. I say that as the new parent of a three-month-old baby. I have my responsibilities and only two hours' sleep per night as a result of them, but the role of parent should be valued. There is no God-given right to be a parent. Being a parent should have value attached to it, but we have seen that role being devalued in our society. Ken Macintosh alluded earlier to the important role that parents play in guidance of their children. We must introduce proposals to ensure that parents value their role and to ensure that we can intervene to assist them in that process. If that means that we have to look at the difficulties that they may be experiencing with alcohol or drug addiction, we must make those interventions. I refer to Robin Harper's point about poverty being the cause of many problems. Both my parents were brought up in extreme poverty and they turned out to be excellent parents. Poverty is not always related to parenthood.

The point that I am making—I make it time and again in Parliament—is that poverty certainly makes lives difficult, but people from other backgrounds experience similar difficulties. Poverty is not an excuse for many of the challenges that we currently face in the children's panel system. We should look to the example of previous generations who, despite challenges, turned out to be the most effective parents that people could ask for. A multi-agency approach has been referred to on a number of occasions. Almost every glossy document that is presented to Parliament talks about the need for a joined-up approach to delivering services on a number of issues. I am not convinced that what is down on paper is actually delivered in practice. There is a requirement for a more intelligent approach to how we deal with joined-up working. It is unacceptable in the 21 st century that we continue in the children's hearings system with manual filing systems to track and monitor young people. There must be a more intelligent approach to managing the system—one that will make best use of the information technologies that are available. I would like to make a plea in respect of Glasgow. A number of members have referred to the pressures on Glasgow's children's hearings system. As a result of the local government finance review, I expect us to consider how we  can assist Glasgow with the extreme pressures that its social services are under at the moment. Ensuring that recommendations are delivered is another issue to which a number of members have referred. As parliamentarians, we often express concerns and we would be concerned if our recommendations were not delivered. Members of the children's hearings system are no different in that respect—when they make recommendations, they expect them to be delivered. The issue is not always about resources, but about how we manage recommendations and ensure that issues are managed and effectively monitored. An external approach to managing recommendations and delivering them is possible. It appears that our resources are focused on ensuring that particular cases are delivered to the children's hearings system, but we are not as effective in ensuring that recommendations are delivered. Therefore, there might be scope for a new approach to ensuring that we deliver and monitor recommendations so that they are delivered effectively. I will deal with a final issue, which has been referred to. There are real frustrations out there about the number of cases that are marked "No further action"—Mary Mulligan touched on that issue earlier. I often hear from police authorities, using what I call the database of excuses, that issues can be referred to the children's hearings system, but that they will be marked "No further action." I think that that is sometimes an excuse. Police officers have mentioned two examples to me. The first case involved a youth throwing a paving slab from a footbridge on the M8 motorway. That case was marked "No further action". The second case involved an attack on a police officer with a knife with a 14-inch blade, which again was marked "No further action". I am sure that the minister will agree that those cases should not have been marked "No further action" and I am sure that there are many similarly unacceptable examples. In conclusion, the Executive has set in place a comprehensive consultation exercise. I have been impressed by the fact that the exercise is a good example of good practice in respect of how we should consult. Specific answers to questions are requested on a number of issues—I think that Robert Brown mentioned that earlier. I commend the Executive on its step in the right direction and on ensuring that a much more effective children's hearings system that supports those who take part in it will be delivered.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is improving primary care services. (S2O-2315)

There is a need to invest in the facilities where we provide primary care services. Does the minister agree that, if we are to tackle the health inequalities that have been highlighted in recent documents, particularly in relation to Glasgow, the Executive should commit additional resources to dealing with the situation? I stress that the health statistics are extremely challenging in the Glasgow Springburn constituency.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in raising the limits for small claims in the courts. (S2O-02154)

I have two points to raise with the minister. First, does the minister accept that a significant increase is required in the limit on a claim that consumers can make in the small  claims court? Secondly, does he accept that those who wish to make a claim in the small claims court should be given significant advice and assistance to ensure that they are able to address the difficulties that many people face in taking such action?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure that free debt advice is available to all who require it. (S2O-1981)

Is the minister aware of a statement that was made by the chairman of the HSBC Bank, which made a pre-tax profit of £6.86 billion? He advised that it was a very good year for HSBC. It was not such a good year, however, for many of those who find themselves in debt. Is it not time for us to call on our banking giants to provide funding so that we can deliver independent and objective financial advice in our local communities?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to encourage Scottish Water to become more efficient. (S2O-1751)

Does the minister share my concern that my constituents in the Dennistoun area do not appear to have benefited from that efficiency, as they have been waiting for nearly two years for flood prevention measures to be implemented? Will he meet me to discuss the issues with a view to bringing forward capital investment as a matter of urgency?

The multimember wards to which Mark Ballard refers are not the same as those that have been proposed for Scotland. The members are elected under the first-past-the-post system.

I ask Tommy Sheridan whether he will join me in questioning the claim in Professor Curtice's report that only 8 per cent of the population make contact with their local councillor. Tommy Sheridan, Bill Butler, Bill Aitken and I have all been members of Glasgow City Council and I do not recall being contacted by as few as 480 electors out of an electorate of 6,000. In my experience, the figure has been much greater than 8 per cent. Similarly, I am sure that, if MSPs reflect on their case loads, they will conclude that the figure is much greater than 8 per cent. Regardless of whether members are from the partnership parties, they should make no  apologies for scrutinising and interrogating legislation proposals that are before them. I have been part of the scrutiny process as a member of the Local Government and Transport Committee and have been unable to support a number of conclusions that the committee has reached. First, I do not believe that voting reform is an essential element of modernising local government or that it would improve the way in which local government delivers services in our local communities. All the evidence that we received should be considered. On a number of occasions, I asked people—including the ministerial team—whether we would improve local government as a result of introducing voting reform. Professor Farrell told me that that was a difficult question. Every academic who was asked the question said that it was difficult, so why do we find ourselves proposing voting reform? We face difficult challenges in our constituencies. Last week, I raised with the First Minister the fact that young people in my constituency face challenges in respect of educational attainment. I ask myself whether we will improve educational opportunities as a result of the introduction of the single transferable vote. Not one iota of evidence has been brought to me or the committee to lead me to conclude that we will.

The point that I am making is that we should have an informed debate that is evidence led. I believe that there is no evidence to that effect. Similarly, there is no evidence in the Kerley report that, in an STV system, independent councillors will find themselves in better circumstances or on a par with councillors who represent the parties. The evidence that we received is that the party machinery would ensure that independent candidates were at a disadvantage.

While we are on that point, I should add that various academics drew analogies with the systems in various countries throughout  the world that have introduced STV. The Irish example—in particular, the example from the south of Ireland—shows that parties have an effective machinery that influences the opportunities for independent members to be elected. The Kerley report says that we must deliver opportunities for independent councillors, but the bill will not deliver such opportunities. Let us be clear: the party machines will work together to ensure that independents are adversely affected.

I am sorry, but I have already given way to one of Iain Smith's colleagues. It is extremely unfair to compare Scotland with Ireland, despite their many magnificent attributes, or to compare Scotland with New South Wales. New South Wales is 10 times the size of Scotland. The academic analogies with all the other countries do not provide us with sufficient evidence to draw effective comparisons. We have not given serious consideration to the financial implications of the bill. We have heard from the minister on several occasions that it is difficult to quantify the cost of, for example, voter education and the staff cover that will be required to implement the STV system. In the current climate, in which we hear concerns about the council tax increases throughout Scotland, that is an issue that we will have to face up to. The financial implications of the bill will have an effect on council tax throughout Scotland. Like other members, I respect the fact that others have a different point of view from mine on this matter. I acknowledge that my Liberal Democrat colleagues hold a different point of view and have held it for some time. However, it verges on corruption for some members to support the bill because they see it as providing an electoral advantage for their party.

To ask the First Minister what action can be taken to address the issues highlighted in "Health and Well-being Profiles for each Scottish Parliamentary Constituency, 2004". (S2F-742)

Is the First Minister aware that, in Glasgow Springburn, the proportion of people who leave school with no qualifications is 260 per cent above the Scottish average? I am sure that, like me, the First Minister will be concerned that people who live in Springburn face that challenge, along with the other challenges that are mentioned in the health and well-being profiles. Will he  consider leading a summit of all the stakeholders in Glasgow to ensure that we deal with the unacceptable statistics that face Glasgow and Glasgow Springburn in particular?

We all accept that delivering a police service is a very complex and difficult task. I welcome the opportunity this morning to debate how we hold our police authorities to account, and in my speech I will give particular consideration to the high crime levels in my constituency. Although I have some sympathy with today's motion—especially in relation to police accountability—I do not see the people of Red  Road, Burnie Court, Sighthill and other parts of my constituency that are affected by high crime levels being excited by the proposal to have a directly elected convener in police authorities in Scotland. The way in which police officers can best communicate with the public and best capture and clarify information on local crime statistics is important; as is the way in which that information is formatted and made available to local communities. All too often, communities receive wrong information. In the Sighthill area, before the Firsat Dag murder, the community was advised that crime levels were low. That was not the local experience. We have to consider how to take account of local perceptions of high crime levels. Unreported crimes are an issue for police officers. I am not entirely convinced that our authorities—the police authorities in particular—interact with other agencies to find the best way of sharing information. Margaret Smith touched on that point. I welcome the interest of Strathclyde police's chief constable William Rae in community planning, but we have a long way to go to ensure that a robust system is in place for the sharing of information by police authorities. That is an accountability issue. I have said in this chamber on a number of occasions that the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 makes it clear that police authorities can share information with other agencies. All too often, the Data Protection Act 1998 is used as an excuse not to share information. We have to ensure that our police authorities, in particular, use existing legislation on the sharing of information more effectively. Police authorities have to be encouraged to involve themselves proactively in problem solving in local communities. All too often, police officers have not taken a problem-solving approach to dealing with crime. However, in my constituency, I know of good examples of police officers taking such a constructive approach. I welcome that, and would encourage others throughout Scotland to take that approach. We are obsessed with police numbers, and we often hear the political slogan, "More police officers on the beat." That is the quick-fix answer to the challenges. However, we must ensure that officers are used more effectively in local communities. Officers should be deployed in areas of high crime. The number of police officers in the Ruchazie and Blackhill areas of my constituency is the same as in the leafy suburbs of Glasgow. We have to focus our police officers on areas with high crime levels, and we should perhaps find a more effective way of deploying our resources. I welcome this debate. It should be part of a wider Executive debate to find the most positive ways of making progress.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve support to those who are involved in the child adoption process. (S2O-993)

Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that a family in my constituency who wish to adopt a three-year-old nephew find that they will incur legal expenses of between £5,000 and £10,000 because the child's natural father  wishes to contest the case? Can I meet the minister in the new year to discuss ways in which we can give financial support to families who wish to give so much to those who are in difficulties?

Does the First Minister agree that we should be  ensuring not only that the bus operators run their buses on time, but that they serve their communities rather than serve their own profits?

I join others in condemning the comments that have been made by the Greater Glasgow NHS Board official. When an official says that the number of petitions that have been received does not matter and that proposals will be proceeded with regardless of the number of petitions that have been received, that threatens our democracy. I ask the minister to deal with that matter. It is important that all members of the public are given the opportunity to express their views in consultation exercises. As Pauline McNeill and Sandra White said, there are concerns about consultation exercises. I believe that they are cosmetic exercises. We see documents that say things like, "Have your say" and "Tell us what you think." However, the people who produce those documents want to know what people think only if it is the same as what they think. The Parliament faces a serious challenge in ensuring that, when people express their views about the future of their health service, consideration is given to ways in which those views can be accommodated. All views cannot be accommodated, because people sometimes make unreasonable demands—as an elected member, I appreciate that. However, we must develop proposals to ensure that a mechanism exists for occasions when health boards get things wrong, which happens often. That is why I plead again with the minister to consider my member's bill, which proposes opportunities for communities to appeal if they are concerned that an exercise has not been conducted properly.

Obviously, David Davidson can raise that matter with the minister. We must move consultation forward. We face challenges and difficult decisions in our everyday  lives. If somebody asked me to move from the Clydesdale Bank to Lloyds TSB, I would want to know what improvements in service there would be. However, with the maternity services review, no one has said where patients can expect improvements in services. Every day, the health board faces the serious challenge of telling its patients where they can expect to see improvements in services and whether those improvements will be to the fabric of the buildings in which services are delivered, or to staff conditions for those who work in the buildings, or to the waiting times for maternity services. The daily challenge that health boards face is not in asking for people's say and for what they think, but in demonstrating to members of the public where they can expect improvements to be made in services as a result of reducing three sites to two sites, for example. There has been no demonstration of how such services will be improved, because the health board in question does not know how they will be improved. All that the health board sees is a proposal to reduce the number of sites from three to two. Where members of the public can expect to see improvements in service has not been demonstrated.

I subscribe to the comments that Robert Brown and  other members have made concerning the need to ensure that agencies' activities in the cities do not overlap. I also make a plea in respect of the large number of consultancy reports that we receive in Glasgow and the conferences that are organised at the same time. When we consider a cull of the organisations, we should perhaps also consider a cull of the consultants, who are good at creative reporting on this issue, and of the conferences that are organised on the subject. Like many other urban areas, Glasgow has suffered dreadfully economically due to its dependency on heavy industries, especially during the 1920s and 1930s. Undoubtedly, the economic transition away from the traditional industries has followed a number of periods of difficulty. It was due to the utter complacency of the Conservative Government and 18 years of Tory rule that Glasgow found itself facing the many challenges that we face in the post-1997 years. However, Glasgow is fighting back. In my constituency, unemployment has been reduced by 46 per cent and five brand new secondary schools have been built—a pipe dream during the years of Tory rule.

I am afraid that I do not have time. There has been record investment in the stock-transfer process and the opportunity, for the first time in my generation, for full employment in the city of Glasgow. That has not happened since 1967, when I was born. Other members have said that we must harness the opportunities for the benefit of Glasgow's citizens. I believe that the minister must take immediate action on that. There have been several consultancy reports on the best opportunities that exist. There have also been several conferences in Glasgow and other cities on the issue. How do we ensure that those who live in Glasgow benefit from the city's economic achievements? One example of how to do that is the St Rollox Partnership initiative in my constituency, which has resulted in more than 90 per cent of the local Tesco superstore's employees being local residents. I would like the minister to consider that example, which is a partnership with the business sector. Recently, I met the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce, which advised me that it would like to consider the possibility of an employers charter that would ensure that employers have the opportunity to employ locally. On council tax, we face a number of challenges. I do not support the Scottish socialists' proposal of a service tax. However, I believe that there is a  need for a top-to-bottom review to ensure that those who decide to play and work in Glasgow also consider residing in Glasgow. I acknowledge that there has been progress in restricting council tax increases in Glasgow. For example, council tax in East Dunbartonshire has increased by 5.6 per cent, whereas Glasgow's council tax has increased by only 2.5 per cent. I welcome today's debate, but I believe that it is time to ensure opportunities for full employment in Glasgow so that those who are unemployed in Glasgow can benefit.

Will the member give way?

I do not know whether Patrick Harvie lives in Glasgow, but if he lived in Viewpark Avenue, where an elderly gentleman has had to board himself up in his own home, he would want the Daily Record to report that story and the Parliament to take action on it. We have to acknowledge that people live in such conditions. I mean no disrespect to those who compile statistics, but we do not need statistics to tell us what is happening—the evidence is in front of us. The minister was born and bred in the Dennistoun area and has seen how that community has deteriorated. Its people want action and are quite happy with our rhetoric if it amplifies their concerns.

I will be quite happy to give way to the member in a minute. Nicola Sturgeon mentioned the example of the old lady passing a bus shelter. We do not have bus shelters in Springburn because the local neds burn them down. We have lost two bus shelters in the Wallacewell Road area of Springburn because of the absolutely unacceptable behaviour of a tiny minority. I am the former youth convener of Glasgow City Council and no one is more committed than I to ensuring the delivery of youth services in my constituency; however, a tiny minority is being allowed to rule our constituencies. That cannot be allowed to continue.

I am quite happy to deal with that point later. I thank the minister for visiting my constituency. She has shown genuine concern about many of the issues that the community raised. However, she will recall that my constituents expressed concern that existing legislation was not being enforced. I share some of the Conservative party's concern that we should ensure that existing legislation—

I welcome the fact that we are moving away from what I call the database of excuses in our communities and away from the situation in which police officers who attend public meetings simply say, "I'm afraid there's very little that we can do at the moment. We try our best but the existing legislation isn't effective." Would those police officers have such a database of excuses if they lived in Viewpark Avenue, the Red Road flats or Burnie Court? They would not; instead, they would ensure that the issue was dealt with. The people who live in the leafy suburbs of Bearsden  would not put up with graffiti in their community. The Parliament has to face up to the fact that existing legislation is not being enforced. However, we must also point out that our communities welcome the proposed additional legislation. Not one person has said to me, "I don't want you to take any action to deal with unruly young people in our community." Indeed, they said that unruly adults should also be dealt with. No one has said that we should not ban the sale of spray paint to under-16s. One per cent of 600 people from Springburn said that we should not consider the possibility of tagging under-16s. We are simply amplifying the genuine concern of the communities that we represent. It is not rhetoric; we are facing up to reality. Fergus McCann once told a famous Celtic player to get a reality check. Opposition members should get a genuine reality check, examine the difficulties that we face in our communities and realise that this is not rhetoric, but a genuine attempt to deal with the issue. I ask the minister to ensure that we face the challenge of enforcing existing legislation, and that police officers and all other authorities that deal with the problem are aware of existing powers. Police officers and housing officers have asked me to explain interim ASBOs to them far too many times and that should not be happening in our communities. We must train those people to ensure that they can make a difference. I hope that the proposed legislation can do that, too.

In the interests of clarity, I want to return to the issue that Christine Grahame raised about the form of this debate. As a former member of the Procedures Committee, I recall that I raised  concerns about this kind of debate when the matter was discussed. However, the SNP member on the committee did not raise any such concerns at the time. As a result, we should accept that all parties have agreed to the form of today's debate. I mean no disrespect to the ministerial team, but I have to say that I welcome the publication at long last of a document that is not littered with politically-correct photographs and images of the team. Instead, this is a glossy action document that actually sets out the way forward. However, it might be helpful if, in addition to that document, we had another document that looked back at the Executive's previous commitments, tracked whether they have been met and gave a specific focus to the issue. As some members have pointed out, this wide-ranging debate has touched on both acute and primary services. That brings me to the subject of consultation, and how we improve primary and acute care services. Many of the health boards are obsessed with consultation documents. People in our communities want to know how those documents have been responded to. One of the documents from the Greater Glasgow NHS Board says: "Tell us what you think about your local services." That is a welcome phrase, but at the time of the acute services review in Glasgow, did the health board interrogate the views that people presented to them? In order to improve health, particularly the acute and primary care services, we must put across the message that local views have to be considered. Consultation exercises must not become information exercises, as a number of them have been; instead they should give serious consideration to people's views and result in movement on the issues raised. Frances Curran talked about health board representation earlier. Her point was well made, and I have made this point several times in the chamber: many of our constituents are good enough to serve on the boards of housing associations, community councils and health councils, but those same people do not have the opportunity to serve on our quango health boards. The sooner we consider Bill Butler's proposed member's bill the better. We must ensure that it is not always the so-called great and good who are considered good enough to serve on our health boards, but genuine local stakeholders who can offer their experience in their communities to ensure that all local views are considered. We have discussed healthy lifestyles again today, as we often have, and we have raised the issue of how we get the message about healthy  lifestyles across—to young people, in particular. When I met the minister yesterday, I made the point that many designer brands—I do not want to advertise them here—are capable of getting their message across to young people. Can we look at ways of emulating those brands' methods, so that we can find more effective ways of ensuring that young people have healthy lifestyles? Margo MacDonald made the point about the need to ensure that sports personalities—and other people to whom young people look up—play a more prominent role in getting the message across to young people. The minister has always given consideration to Glasgow, and I welcome his comments on additional funding for Glasgow. To finish on a famous quote: "A government that robs Peter to pay Paul can always depend upon the support of Paul." That is a serious issue for Glasgow.

Members will be aware that we have discussed Sighthill in the chamber on many occasions. Since the murder of Firsat Dag two years ago, the Sighthill community has been the subject of intense scrutiny. I advise the chamber, as I have done on many occasions, that the local community in Sighthill has met the challenges that it faced as a result of the dispersal programme. John Swinney does that community a sincere disservice by referring to our UK colleagues as racist. That does not assist us in considering ways in which we can deal with the very serious and complex issue that we face in our community.

They passed the Sighthill test. We welcome people from all over, and we have done so for 25 years. We welcome people from the overseas community—students and asylum seekers. Our focus has been on working with asylum seekers to ensure that they feel part—

Sandra White should give me some time. We have considered ways in which we can support asylum seekers and their children in that community. Little recognition has been given to the many community organisations and individuals who do so, such as the recently retired Church of Scotland minister, Rev Jones, who gave 32 years of his life to Sighthill. Only recently was recognition given, when Rev Jones was awarded the MBE. We should recognise his contribution to supporting  asylum seekers all over Scotland during the dispersal process.

I assure Sandra White that I will most definitely come to that point shortly. We have welcomed people through the dispersal programme, but the Parliament needs to involve itself in a mature debate on that programme. Should Sighthill have been selected because we had 500 empty properties? Is that the only reason why dispersal took place to that community? We need to consider whether the dispersal programme has worked and have a mature debate. On Robert Brown's amendment, I recognise that the education programme for asylum seeker children has worked effectively in Sighthill. The children have integrated with each other. They are an example to their peers because of the way in which they have worked with other children and have bonded so effectively with them. I will support Robert Brown's amendment because it recognises the need to ensure that children are given the opportunity to bond with other local children to ensure that they can be part of the community. I say to the minister that we need to consider how we fund the education system to ensure that additional teaching staff are made available to support asylum seekers. There is a particular issue in relation to interpretation services, which are a serious concern in many schools in Glasgow. To me, that is the kind of practical point that should be discussed in the chamber. I would also like to see us ensure that additional resources are made available for health. To conclude, it is time for us to consider ways in which we can work with our colleagues in Westminster, instead of working against them. We should not involve ourselves in the kind of provocative language that has been heard in the chamber today. We need to build on the positives that there have been in areas such as Sighthill. We should welcome the investment from the Executive, but we should also learn from past mistakes in areas such as Sighthill, where asylum seekers were dispersed because we had 500 empty properties. We must learn from those mistakes and learn from the negatives. That is the way forward.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to tackle the antisocial use of quad bikes in public areas. (S2O-317)

I advise the minister that the police are not enforcing that legislation uniformly. I ask her to write to every chief constable in Scotland to advise them of their requirement to enforce that legislation along with many other measures on antisocial behaviour that are not being enforced by our police and other authorities.

My comments will be brief. I congratulate Sandra White on securing this members' business debate.  This has been a cross-party issue among Glasgow and Edinburgh members. I want to make it clear that, although I can be very parochial where Glasgow is concerned and have made no apologies for that in the past, it is important to acknowledge that we want Glasgow and Edinburgh airports to thrive in the interests of Glaswegians and people in the rest of Scotland. The minister needs to answer two important questions. The first relates to progress on the Glasgow airport rail link. Significant progress has been made on that issue, for which the previous minister, Iain Gray, deserves a great deal of credit. I ask Nicol Stephen to provide a progress report on the Glasgow airport rail link. I would also like him to advise us when he will meet the Secretary of State for Tranport, Alistair Darling, who also is the new Secretary of State for Scotland, to discuss that issue and to clarify the statements that he has made about Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. Other members want to speak, so I will conclude. It is important that those two questions are dealt with and that a report to the Parliament is given.

I confirm for Bruce McFee's benefit that my member's bill was not raided from Scottish nationalist policy; it arose from the streets of Springburn, as a result of the injustice of a proposed secure unit and a closure. The people of Springburn were not interested in any of the SNP's policies and they confirmed that in the elections on 1 May, as did people throughout Scotland.

If Shona Robison gives me some time, I will confirm a number of points for her benefit. I welcome the document that the Scottish Executive has launched today. We have seen a large number of documents like it, but we have to ensure that their proposals are enforced and that the aspirations and energy of civil servants are brought in to ensure that we deliver what the documents offer. I am afraid to say that our unelected quango health boards have failed in the past to ensure that patient focus is the primary concern in our communities. I put it to the minister that that was the case in the acute services review in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area. I believe that the review and the process were cosmetic and did not investigate effectively many of the issues that people in the communities raised. I am mature and experienced enough to know that different points of view will not always be accommodated. However, health boards have to present evidence to show that they are ensuring that local views are informed by debate and that they are not simply informing communities of decisions that have been made.

I welcome that support, but clarity is required as to where the proposal originated. As I said, the people of Springburn invented the proposal for my member's bill. I also welcome the fact that a number of cross-party groups support the proposal. I welcome Bill Butler's proposed member's bill and I disagree with the SNP amendment that was lodged today. For the first time, I find myself agreeing with Carolyn Leckie. Boards should be 100 per cent directly elected. Before the business managers contact me on my pager to ask why I am supporting Carolyn Leckie, I must say that I will allow the three stages for Bill Butler's bill to inform the issue. Bill Butler advises me that I will be convinced not to support the 100 per cent election of board members.

I agree with that point of view. We should allow the three stages of the bill to provide effective scrutiny. We should listen to the wide range of views that will be aired during that process. I might change my mind and move from agreeing with Carolyn Leckie to agreeing with Bill Butler.

I am sorry, but I have taken a number of interventions and I still have a number of points to make. I am less concerned about the structure of health councils, although I take the point about health boards appointing health councils. I am more concerned about what health councils deliver in our hospital facilities. The Executive faces the challenge of ensuring that health councils are effective in dealing with the many issues that patients raise in our local hospitals. Rather than being concerned about the structure, we should ensure that our patients are aware of the presence of health councils in our hospitals and of their effectiveness in acting as facilitators for dealing with patients' complaints and the other issues that they raise. Although I welcome the launch of the white paper, I ask that the issues that it raises be acted on.

Has the Cabinet discussed the rise in the number of attacks on firefighters and other emergency staff who provide a valuable service in our communities? During the election campaign, the First Minister advised that he would legislate to protect our emergency staff. Can he update me on the position, as there was no reference to that issue in his statement yesterday?

Like other speakers, I pay my respects to the retiring members and wish them the very best. I look forward to my retirement—hopefully, in 29 years' time, after a career serving as the MSP for  Glasgow Springburn. Credit should be given to the Executive where it is due. Like other members, I am sometimes critical of the Executive, but I commend it for its response to the pharmacy report. It has listened to the wide range of members' views. The pharmacy issues are very important to the older people in our communities as pharmacies provide a valuable service and the Executive has taken that into consideration. I see this debate as an opportunity to promote many of the services that we have delivered. I also see it as an opportunity to consider how we improve older people's experiences in our communities. I put on record my appreciation of the army of home helps and care workers and other key staff who provide a valuable service in supporting the older people in our communities. I also give recognition to the alive and kicking project in my constituency, which provides a valuable service to the elderly. The experience of many of my elderly constituents appears to be patchy, particularly when they have inquiries about council tax, utilities, housing benefit or other issues to which members have referred. Older people face what is almost a web of secrecy about how their inquiries are dealt with. I ask the Minister for Social Justice—I make a constructive point here—whether she will consider a one-stop-shop approach to support elderly people with the inquiries with which they encounter difficulties. As a Glasgow MSP, the minister will be aware of some of the council tax inquiries that our elderly constituents have and the difficulties that they face with how such inquiries are managed. We have many examples of one-stop-shop approaches in our communities and such an approach to support the elderly with their inquiries would be a way forward. I referred to the alive and kicking project. The ethos of that project is that one is never too old. The project has set up an informal dating agency—if any retired members are interested—and many of the people involved have married later in life, such as Rose and Benny Walker, the founder members of the project. Their ethos is that one is never too old for many of the activities in which they are involved. That is the kind of ethos that we should develop in the Parliament. We should not allow our elderly people to be confined to day rooms and day facilities. They should be involved in the kinds of activities that the project has developed over the past 20 years. I put on record my appreciation, as the local MSP, for the hard work that has been done. I plead with the Executive to consider investing in and developing such services. The main thing is to ensure that we build on that  for the future. Shortly, I will be joined by children from St Stephen's Primary School in my constituency. As Colin Campbell said, those are the young people who see us all, perhaps including me, at 36 years of age, as old guys. We should lay the foundations to ensure that when those pupils are older, services are in place to ensure that they will have a good life in their later years.

Does the minister share my concern that funding is not being made available to deal with some of the serious health issues in Glasgow Springburn? For example, statistics show that lung cancer is 93 per cent above the Scottish average and that there  is also a serious problem with heart disease. Will he give a commitment that Glasgow Springburn will receive additional funding to deal with those problems?

Not only should secure units be located in the correct areas, but the treatment that is provided in them should be effective. I support the amendment because psychological intervention is important. Last week, I met Dr Ramm of the Orchard clinic, to which Mary Scanlon referred, and discussed with him his concerns. It is important that we get the facilities right and ensure that the local communities embrace them, but it is also important that the treatment is correct and proper. The case for psychological intervention has been well made. I commend the Health and Community Care Committee for allowing that to be developed. Although the psychologists have come to the debate late in the day, it is important that we consider their points. I ask the Executive to consider the amendment, which is serious, in that light.

Does Mary Scanlon agree that it is important that the local health boards consult communities prior to making proposals for a medium-secure unit? Does she agree that it is important that we do not have the negative attitude of consulting communities and then saying that they will get a medium-secure unit whether they like it or not, because the local quango board has taken that decision?

I welcome the minister's commitment to scrap the health trusts, but I seek an assurance from him that there will be a genuine cull of the unnecessary bureaucracy and senior management posts in the trusts. Will the resources that are freed up by that process be made available to the front-line staff who serve in our local trusts and provide an excellent service?

I intend to withdraw amendment 75, based on two factors. The first is that there will be a proactive approach to sentencing policy, and I welcome the guidance from the Lord Advocate on that. The second is that that policy will embrace all public sector workers, as discussed by the Lord Advocate and Karen Gillon. I have been receiving representations on that point from senior union officials at Unison and the GMB. They called for an amendment, but said that they would rather  there were measures embracing all public sector workers who might be attacked while carrying out their duties. I thank the Lord Advocate for responding to the issue in a positive manner, and I look forward to measures being implemented. I will, however, revisit the matter in the form of a member's bill if those measures do not prove effective during the period that the Lord Advocate set out.

Amendment 75 refers to assaults on emergency personnel. Parliament passed the Protection of Wild Mammals (Scotland) Bill to protect our wildlife and we will deal later with a section of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill that is also about protecting wildlife. I want to give effect to the public's opinion that Parliament should ensure that we also protect those who deliver a public service in our community from people who attack them. There is no more repulsive act than that of people attacking firefighters or paramedics who are trying to save lives. That is the theme of amendment 75. During stage 2, I lodged an amendment that was equivalent to amendment 75. The minister advised me that he had difficulties with that amendment because it did not embrace all our public service personnel. If the Executive and the Lord Advocate are not willing to accept amendment 75, I seek two assurances from them: first, that whatever legislation is introduced will deal strictly and robustly with those who attack public service personnel and that the attackers will feel the full weight of the law; and, secondly, that the legislation will be carefully monitored to ensure that it is effective. I move amendment 75.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in speeding up the processes of hearings to deal with young offenders. (S1O-6375)

Does the minister agree that the fast-track hearings should be piloted in Glasgow, given the higher volume of youth offenders there? That volume would allow us to fine tune the process so that the programme could be rolled out to other parts of Scotland. Will she consider adding Glasgow as a further pilot area for fast-track children's hearings?

I am sure that the chamber will join me in expressing sincere condolences to the family of the late Mr Heenan, who lost his life in my constituency during the firefighters' strike on Tuesday. Can the minister assure me that the issues surrounding that tragic death will be investigated to ensure that lessons are learned?

I welcome this piece of housekeeping and the technical aspects of the statutory instrument. Housekeeping is important to the Parliament, although, having said that, I must say that I am not an expert in other forms of housekeeping.  The principle that is raised by the debate is that clarity on such issues is important. We are setting an example, especially to quangos, which should consider the clarity that the statutory instrument provides.

To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Executive will take to deal with any increase in the number of racist attacks. (S1F-2321)

Will the First Minister join me in making it clear to the Parliament that asylum seekers will continue to be made welcome in Sighthill? I want to make it clear that those who carry out racist attacks are not welcome in Sighthill. I also want to make a plea to the media, to Government agencies and to all political parties that are represented in the Parliament to recognise the positive work that is being done in Sighthill with asylum seekers. We need to face up to the continuing challenges and ensure that we deal with them.

Will the minister assure us that the monitoring committee will operate independently of, and will not necessarily report to, the health board? Will he confirm my understanding that Audit Scotland will continue to perform the audit but will subcontract work to PricewaterhouseCoopers?

Perhaps we could consider attendance at several other meetings since May 1999. Perhaps we could exchange information on what meetings Fiona McLeod has attended that I have not attended, and what meetings I have attended that she has not. It is not fair to refer to one particular meeting and not the other meetings that have taken place in that period.

I congratulate Bill Aitken on securing the debate but point out that, in his long and distinguished career, he must recall the years when Michael Forsyth, Ian Lang, Lord James Douglas-Hamilton and George Kynoch were in charge of the Scottish Office. I do not recall Ian Lang giving any consideration to local feelings when the maternity unit at Stobhill hospital was closed. The coming of the Scottish Parliament has ensured that the people who make such decisions are more accountable and we are now able to scrutinise those decisions. Bill Aitken should cast his mind back to his good old days and reflect on the situation that pertained back then. Although Lord James Douglas-Hamilton gave us a fair hearing, little could be said of his colleagues in that regard. Does the minister agree that, according to the legislation that was passed in 1973, a transport study should be completed in full prior to any decision being taken on hospital closures and resiting? I would like confirmation that he received a full transport study during the relevant period and ask him to delve further into that issue to ensure that the process met with the requirements of legislation dealing with the reconfiguration of services and the consideration of business cases. I would like to deal with the accountability of the boards. It appears that local people are good enough to serve on housing associations, tenants associations and community councils, but are not good enough to be part of the quango health boards. It is about time that we considered the democratisation of our health boards to ensure that those people reflect community views. If people can be involved in organisations such as the Glasgow Housing Association, which is dealing with a £1 billion investment, surely they can be involved in parochial decisions relating to the health boards. The challenge that faces this Parliament is to make the boards accountable and ensure that people on them have an electoral mandate instead of being made up of the so-called great and the good. I ask the minister to tell us what plans there are to modernise the health boards in that respect. Secondly, I will deal with the process that the Parliament has set in place to ensure that it  monitors the decision and I will deal with the Auditor General's involvement. Will the minister assure me that if, during the five-year period for which we have committed ourselves to preserving the services, the Auditor General or the monitoring boards discover that it will not be possible to remove and reconfigure services in other hospital facilities, the Executive of the day will reconsider the decision that the Parliament took on 12 September? That is a very serious issue because in the past—let us face the facts—authorities have taken a number of decisions that have later been found to be flawed. The involvement of the Auditor General and the monitoring process that has been set in place will ensure that we have the opportunity to discover whether the decision is flawed. I am proud of the fact that I am a local resident—I stay in my constituency—and of the fact that I was born in Stobhill hospital. Over the five-year period, it will be possible to interrogate the decision that was taken on September 12 and to reconsider a number of issues, perhaps at a later date.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to tackle stalking and harassment. (S1O-5995)

I remind the minister of the case in my constituency of Marilyn McKenna, who was a victim of stalking. During the period of her stalking, there was no coherent approach to supporting Marilyn by the police, housing authorities and social services. Can the minister assure me that  the new framework will ensure that those authorities work together to support victims of stalking and harassment?

To ask the First Minister what success the introduction of drugs courts has had in reducing crime and drug addiction. (S1F-2281)

Does the First Minister agree that the challenge that we face is not just ensuring that the drugs courts work, but ensuring that local communities see a decline in the activities of drug dealers? Will he accompany me to the Blackthorn Street area of my constituency to meet local people who are affected by the activities of drug dealers?

I congratulate Johann Lamont on raising issues that face not only her constituents, but people throughout Scotland. We must ensure that the security industry does not have the problem of the poacher-turned-gamekeeper; we must have the poacher and the gamekeeper. Certain security companies create crime so that they can run protection rackets and we must regulate to deal with that problem. The Scottish Parliament and the Westminster Government face the challenge of dealing with the associates of those security companies, many of which are legitimate, but are associated with the criminal underworld. I do not know the answer to that problem; that is a question for the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee. Kenny Gibson talked about the police postcode lottery and ensuring that resources are found in our local communities to deal with crime and to fund the work of the legitimate security industry—our police officers. We must deal with the resourcing of police officers in Glasgow. Kenny Gibson will remember my call for a top-to-bottom review of policing in May 2000. I suggested that we should consider relocating police officers from the leafy suburbs to areas of high crime in Glasgow. We must take tough decisions about police resources and ensure that they have an impact in constituencies such as Pollok and Glasgow Springburn. The message to security companies is, keep out of our communities unless you are legitimate.

Will Kenny Gibson clarify where in the Official Report , or in any public statement, I said that I did not support drugs courts.

I subscribe to the views of many members in the chamber concerning the hoax calls that have been made to the fire service. I hope that the Lord Advocate and the police use every possible intelligence source to detect and follow through on those serious crimes. I agree in some ways with what Donald Gorrie said about the evaluations and pilot schemes that we hear about regularly in evidence to the Justice 1 Committee and the Justice 2 Committee. We must move away from the constant flow of glossy documents that we receive and consider instead the action that we can take to tackle many of the issues to which members have referred today. I once said to a constituent that if I set up a car boot sale in the Blochairn area to sell the glossy evaluation documents that I receive, I would be a wealthy individual. We must deal with the problem because it concerns the delivery of action in our local communities. Michael Matheson seeks credit for the drugs courts. I do not care who introduced the idea of the drugs courts; all I care about is that they work in communities such as Glasgow and throughout Scotland. I have often said in Parliament that we must grow up and that we must share and deliver ideas, rather than care where they came from. It is mentioned regularly by and in respect of the police authorities that crime is being reduced, but Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said that we must  at the same time tackle the underlying crime trends; for example on graffiti, abandoned vehicles and antisocial behaviour. We cannot be complacent in dealing with those types of crime and the effective way to tackle those problems is through sharing information. Organisations must work together to tackle crime. I was impressed when I visited the Dalmellington area of East Ayrshire at the invitation of Provost Boyd. The police and health authorities and the local authority there are based in one facility. That ensures not only that they talk about partnership, but that they live in partnership by being co-located in one multi-facility. That is an effective way of ensuring that they work together to tackle crime. We often talk about partnership, but we do not necessarily deliver it in our communities. We must ensure that we deliver partnership. I want to talk about the gimmick that 1,000 police officers will deliver on tackling crime. I believe that we must make best use of those police officers to ensure that they do not spend day upon day in our courts. The time that police officers spend in the High Court dealing with a large volume of cases is one of the issues that the Lord Advocate must deal with today. He must consider more effective ways of dealing with reports so that our police officers do not spend so much time in court when they could be in our communities. I welcome the Lord Advocate's commitment to continue to examine ways in which to reform the criminal justice system. However, it is time to move away from glossy documents; we must ensure that they are action documents and that we deliver in our local communities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps will be taken to improve the process of selecting sites for new health care facilities. (S1O-5736)

Does the minister agree that it is absolutely crucial that facilities such as new medium-secure units are selected in the most effective and best sites possible? Does he share my concerns that a 1998 option-appraisal document discounted two sites in Glasgow for public and political reasons? Does he agree that that is unacceptable? Does he also share my concern that Stobhill was selected because the capital receipts that would have come from its sale would have been minimal compared to other sites at the time?

I welcome the minister's statement and particularly the record investment in the Scottish Prison Service. I will touch on some of what Christine Grahame said. She was correct—the Justice 1 Committee worked as an effective team and many hours were put into the report. As I said in a previous debate, I had an open mind on the way forward for Peterhead, but Christine Grahame failed to recognise the fact that the consultation document contained a recommendation that Peterhead prison should close. The minister listened to every point that was raised effectively by the local member of the Scottish Parliament, by the local community and—which is important—by the Parliament. The Parliament must grow up. When the Executive reconsiders its position, we should accept that and we should constructively consider the way forward. The people of Scotland do not want us to sit in the Parliament and become involved in the political point-scoring exercise that Christine Grahame's speech was about. We must move forward and consider that the important issue that faces the people of Scotland is ensuring that we deliver an effective service. From experience of the issues that the Peterhead community raised effectively, I learned that Peterhead delivers a service and that the local people accept that. We must move on.

I know of no prison that we could say will remain for good. A commitment has been given on Peterhead prison, which I welcome. The clear message to the unelected quangos out there is that the Parliament has shown them how they should consult. They should learn from our experience. People are quick to knock the Parliament, but we have sent a clear message that we are willing to listen to the people of Scotland. We have put in place the framework for doing that. The people of Peterhead will acknowledge that, while they continue to examine ways of improving their prison. While the arguments were being made about Peterhead, Dr McManus raised in his evidence several issues that had to be dealt with, such as throughcare and the difficulties with Peterhead prison's location. Later, I will touch on the leadership that is required in the Scottish Prison Service to ensure that its services are delivered locally. The SPS should listen to local staff's views on Peterhead prison and on the best way to deliver throughcare. I did not agree with everything that Peter McKinlay said in evidence, but we could learn much from his experiences in his previous life as the chief executive of Scottish Homes. We must audit the effectiveness of the service that is provided at Peterhead prison. Stewart Stevenson—rightly—gave his view several times on the effectiveness of the STOP 2000 programme. That programme has much mileage and must run for several years to allow us to clarify whether it is a success. We should acknowledge that the STOP 2000 programme is the foundation of the service and learn from that. The services that are provided at Barlinnie should also be recognised as successes. In my last speech in a chamber debate on the subject, I raised the point that the estates review is not only about bricks and mortar. I appreciate the difficulties and challenges that the Parliament faces and the challenges that the Scottish Executive faces, but the estates review was conducted in terms of the bricks and mortar without consideration being given to the needs of the Prison Service. We must consider those needs.  During the committee's evidence-taking sessions, we were impressed by the commitment of the Scottish Prison Service staff and support staff. We need to recognise that the Prison Service is not only the prison officers and that staff in every sector of the system deliver services within the Prison Service. Michael Matheson touched on the point that morale in the Scottish Prison Service is low and we must address that because it is unacceptable for morale to be low. The Scottish Prison Service management needs to show leadership on that issue. The Minister for Justice faces a serious challenge in ensuring that the low morale that the committee detected during several evidence-taking sessions is dealt with. In my previous speech on the subject I touched on public-private partnerships versus the private build option and said that I was not opposed to that option. I remain of that opinion. I see no difficulty on ethical grounds in building other private prisons similar to Kilmarnock prison. That said, however, my preference is for the public-private option. I believe that there is a grey area in the Executive's response in respect of its undertaking to interrogate the public-private option. Another grey area is the large number of academics who provided information and evidence to the committee, but failed to suggest alternatives. They were quick to criticise the fact that the public-private option was not delivered by the Scottish Prison Service, but they were not as quick to propose alternatives. I also criticise Grant Thornton for its opinion that the public-private option could be delivered, but not as a guaranteed option. I welcome the Executive's commitment to the possibility of the trust option and point out that that is another example of the way in which the Executive has demonstrated that it is willing to listen to the points of view that have been raised by the wide range of political parties in the Scottish Parliament. I also welcome the Executive's record investment in the Prison Service. The Parliament should take credit for considering the ways in which to improve the Prison Service. People tend to say that there are no easy answers and I am sure that the minister will say that when he makes his wind-up speech, but the committee has in its report made suggestions for improvement of the Scottish Prison Service and I believe genuinely that they will be acted on by the Executive.

I welcome the tone of the minister's motion. He has accepted the many challenges that he faces, in coronary heart care in particular. He recognises the serious issues that we face in Glasgow. He is facing up to the challenges and dealing with them with the help of the action plan. I also welcome the fact that he commends the front-line staff involved in the process. At Stobhill, front-line staff provide a first-class service hospital under the leadership of Dr Frank Dunn, a consultant at Stobhill for more than 30 years. Dr Dunn and his team have made several innovations, one of which particularly enthused me because it is an excellent initiative. I refer to the two wards, each with 20 beds, where patients are prepared for release from hospital following intensive heart treatment. It is important that patients receive that kind of treatment during the period before release and that they are advised on ways in which they can improve their lifestyle and so ensure more effective treatment. I seek a commitment from the minister that he will ensure  that similar innovations in hospitals such as Stobhill continue to be developed. That brings me on to the acute services review decision in Glasgow. I have the luxury of representing two hospitals in my constituency—Glasgow royal infirmary and Stobhill. I genuinely foresee severe difficulties in the reprovision of services from Stobhill hospital to the royal infirmary, particularly with regard to cardiac treatment. Will the minister give me a commitment that, if there is reprovision of that service to the royal infirmary, the level of service will increase? My concern about the acute services review is that the health board has made no contractual commitments on where it will make specific improvements.

I do not think that it is appropriate to discuss the medium-secure unit now, although I would be more than happy to discuss it with Mary Scanlon later. What is at issue in this afternoon's debate is cardiac services in Glasgow and particularly at Stobhill. I ask the minister to tell me exactly what improvements people can expect on the excellent service that is provided at Stobhill hospital if the reprovision proposal is implemented. If the Auditor General for Scotland discovers that reprovision would not represent value for money or lead to an improvement in services, will the minister still go ahead with the proposal? The Parliament has produced many glossy documents, and the printers must have made a fortune out of them, but those documents must be processed into real action for front-line services. Let us ensure that the glossy documents make a difference to local services.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is  making with the expansion of new community schools. (S1O-5714)

Will the minister deal with the large number of complaints that I have received from parents in connection with the public-private partnership in Glasgow and the fact that that partnership has not been rolled out to the primary school sector? Will he ensure that we deliver community schools in Glasgow and assure me that the successful public-private partnership in Glasgow will be rolled out to other sectors in Glasgow, including primary schools and community schools?

I want to refer to what Kay Ullrich said, particularly the important point that she made about Westminster. We must consider whether we are concerning ourselves purely with weaknesses at Westminster. As someone who has recently joined the Standards Committee, I have come to the issue late. The committee has developed a members' interests order that is in the best interests of the Scottish Parliament and has taken account of many weaknesses at Westminster, but there are a number of positive lessons that we can learn from Westminster. In considering the committee's report, we must ensure that we learn from the experiences of the past three years and develop an effective members' interests order that works in the best interests of the Scottish Parliament. Such an order must be made in Scotland for the Scottish Parliament and must learn from the weaknesses as well as the positive attributes of other Parliaments. The Parliament has received many knocks. As Kay Ullrich said, its integrity has been questioned many times. However, we should give credit to the Standards Committee for ensuring that this debate has been brought before us today. It should be reported that we are progressing a members' interests order that will ensure that every possible interest is recorded. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to non-pecuniary interests. I question what he said about freemasonry. I have little knowledge of freemasonry and therefore am not in a position to clarify whether he should declare his interest in such an organisation. The Scottish Parliament should ensure that MSPs declare such interests.

That is an important point. In  submitting ourselves to public scrutiny, it is crucial that every organisation of which we are members is registered, whatever the organisation is. That is particularly so if the organisation is a secret organisation and its membership is not made public. If the Parliament is serious about openness and transparency, it must ensure that membership of such organisations is registered. I welcome the committee's development of proposals in that respect—we should give it great credit. The committee has presented proposals to ensure that all possible future interests are declared, which is important. Members will also be required to declare any ceased interests. I do not believe that it is in the public interest that spouses' gifts should be declared nor is it in the interests of MSPs for gifts that are more than £250 to be declared. A number of partners would scrutinise the register of members' interests to find out whether they had spent more than £250 at Christmas. Many MSPs will breathe a sigh of relief this Christmas—if the proposals are implemented prior to Christmas—that such gifts will not be recorded. There is little to argue about in respect of the motion. To the best of the committee's ability and on a cross-party basis, we have produced proposals that will ensure that every member's interests are recorded in the interests of openness and transparency.

rose—

Can the Deputy First Minister propose any ways in which to deal with the issue of parental accountability during the children's hearings process? There is no legislation to identify ways in which we can ensure that parents are more accountable during the process.

The SNP had three hours available for debate this day but decided to split the time between different debates. Was three hours available for this debate? I want a yes or no answer.

I welcome the minister's commitment that services will be retained for five years, but we have heard many times that services will be retained at particular facilities. Will the minister assure me that no services will be removed from Stobhill hospital during the five-year period and that the Auditor General for Scotland will conduct an independent review during and after the period?

I, too, congratulate Karen Gillon on securing this members' business debate. She is right to say that the problem touches every community in Scotland. However, although the recent attacks in Blackhill in my constituency were well publicised, such attacks are under-reported. In areas such as Ruchazie, Springburn and Barmulloch throughout my constituency, there have been a countless number of attacks on emergency crews. Margaret Smith made a number of comments that I want to echo. She pointed out that we are not just talking about emergency crews. As Bill Aitken said, housing staff are attacked daily as they try to find ways of improving local communities. We have to ensure that staff feel secure from attack and that we introduce legislation to deal with the matter. I support Margaret Smith's point that, given that an assault on a police officer is subject to the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, there is no reason why that legislation cannot be extended to cover anyone who provides a public service. The Scottish Parliament was created to consider Scottish solutions to such matters and the Criminal Justice  (Scotland) Bill might provide us with the opportunity to find out whether we can introduce legislation to deal with the problem. We should also examine whether the tenancy agreements that are in place in many communities such as Blackhill could be used to enforce action against those who perpetrate attacks. Anyone who wants to live in and be part of a community should contribute to that community. By their actions, some of the young people involved in the attacks are simply saying that they do not want to be part of a community. Introducing proposals to take action under the terms of tenancy agreements will send out a clear message that such attacks will not be tolerated. We must introduce measures to allow housing associations to take action in that respect. Members have referred to the crucial issue of education. It is clear that attacks on emergency crews, council services staff and people who provide valuable public services do not impact positively on local communities. Shock tactics have often been used in educating young people and we must find innovative ways of informing and educating young people to ensure that they are aware of the consequences of their actions. I hope that the minister will tell us about any possible proposals for legislation to deal with attacks on members of staff who deliver public services. I wonder whether he will also indicate his support for housing associations that might consider taking action against those have clearly demonstrated that they do not want to be part of our community. We need to consider every course of action that we can take.

I, too, congratulate Trish Godman on securing an excellent members' business debate. The subject is one that affects my constituency in Glasgow, which is one of the most deprived constituencies in Scotland. I also want to congratulate the Daily Record . It is important that tabloid newspapers bring this issue to the forefront and raise the debate on ways in which we can tackle the problem of loan sharks. Elaine Smith touched on an important issue, which is to recognise the people in the credit union movement who provide credit union services on a voluntary basis. On a number of occasions, I have called them unpaid local heroes. We need to recognise that those people give up their time day in, day out to provide a valuable credit service in our local communities. It is clear that loan sharks present a living terror in our communities. Many graphic stories about them have been told by Trish Godman and in Daily Record articles. Loan sharks take advantage of those in our communities who are financially weak. We must take a number of measures to tackle the issue. One area that I would like the minister to consider is the fragmented approach to providing credit union services in our communities. The community of Sighthill in my constituency does not have a credit union facility. One would think that, being one of the most deprived communities in Scotland, Sighthill would have a credit union as a basic standard. Communities such as Red Road and Royston do not have that basic standard of financial opportunity. I suggest that the Scottish Executive should consider a framework that will ensure that communities such as Royston, Sighthill and Red Road have that guarantee of a credit union service. Such a framework would ensure that the volunteers who take the time to be involved in credit unions are supported during that process. Glasgow Housing Association also presents an opportunity for us, through local housing organisations, to develop ideas on where to locate financial services. Housing services can identify areas where loan sharks are showing a presence. We should use local housing organisations to highlight those opportunities. Importantly, we must tackle the banking corporations. Donald Gorrie touched on that. Banks do not provide services in my constituency.  In Sighthill, Royston, Springburn and other areas, there are no banks that are willing to provide a service to people who are in financial difficulties. There is not even a cash machine in areas such as Sighthill, Royston and Red Road. How can we possibly encourage people back into the jobs market when the very basics, such as being able to access a cash machine, are not available to them in their communities? The challenge to the major banks is to ensure that they tailor services not just to suit students, the elderly or other sectors of the population, but to serve the needs of deprived people in our communities. Loan sharks are a cancer in our communities and we must ensure that they are removed.

I thank Tavish Scott for his supportive remarks about Glasgow. I hope that he will join us in Glasgow when the rail link is in place in the near future. That will make his journey more effective and much shorter. It is not often that cross-party support is given to issues that relate to Glasgow, but we have achieved that for this issue. I congratulate Robert Brown on his motion, because it is important to focus on the matter. I share some of the frustrations that members have amplified. Tommy Sheridan, Sandra White and others raised concerns about the time scale. All Labour members share those frustrations, because we want to improve our constituencies and Glasgow's economy. Let us share those frustrations and ensure that the minister responds to them. Most issues have been covered, but I will touch on two matters. The rail link would be effective at improving and developing tourism in the Glasgow  economy. Tourism is an important part of Glasgow city's economy and it attacks the chronic unemployment in Glasgow. In my constituency of Glasgow Springburn, the number of people who are unemployed is 140 per cent above the Scottish average. The continued development of tourism in Glasgow city is important in tackling that statistic. The airport rail link would have a positive impact in dealing with that. As several members said, people have no difficulties with the development of the Edinburgh airport link, but that should not be to the detriment of, or ahead of, the Glasgow airport link. I know of no MSP who represents Glasgow who has said that the Edinburgh rail link should not be developed, but as several members have said, that should not be to the detriment of Glasgow. The airport link would have an effect on the land value issues in Glasgow. Glasgow faces difficulties in tackling and improving land values and we must examine ways of dealing with that. Airport links have proven to be an effective method of dealing with land values. Edinburgh does not face that issue. I will finish by making several clear points that I would like the minister to deal with. I would like the minister to clarify that no priority is being given to the Edinburgh railway link. We must make that point. The possibility of exploring further Edinburgh's link, rather than Glasgow's, has been well publicised. I would like to be clear about the process that will be followed for assessing the rail links in Glasgow and Edinburgh. Does the minister accept that a clear economic argument exists for Glasgow's rail link, which is based on its ability to tackle deprivation?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making on improving dental health in the Greater Glasgow NHS Board area. (S1O-5347)

Is the minister aware of the fact that 84 per cent of five-year-olds in the Glasgow Springburn constituency have a record of dental disease? Will the minister consider a pilot in my constituency or perhaps in the Glasgow area to ensure that young people are registered with a dentist? Many of the dentists I have met, including Kieron Fallon from my constituency, have made the point that ensuring that young people are registered with dentists is an effective way of dealing with dental disease.

When Richard Simpson visited the Dennistoun area of my constituency, he listened to the local people with regard to the matter that we are discussing. He advised me that he would write to me with proposed action for dealing with many of the points that were raised.

First, I want to comment on the so-called revolt against the Minister for Justice, Jim Wallace. My problem is not with Jim Wallace, but with the devastation that youth crime causes to every  community in Scotland. We must consider proposed solutions to that problem. I want to record in the Official Report that I have difficulties with some proposals in respect of the extension of the children's panel to 16-year-olds and 17-year-olds.

We should deal with the issue at hand and take politics out of the situation. We should bring forward solutions. I have shared with the Minister for Justice and the First Minister ideas from throughout the UK about how the problem can be tackled. The people of Glasgow Springburn and Scotland demand that possible solutions be suggested, rather than that we share stories of what is happening throughout Scotland. Many of us are well aware of the issues. In England, there are child safety/parenting orders. Parents are required to attend parenting courses with their children. That is a fundamental issue and we must deal with it. We must consider ways in which to support parents who have difficulties with the social skills that are required to be parents. I am not a parent, but if I ever become one, I would be happy to attend a parenting course if I thought that it would be helpful. We must all consider supporting parents. The acceptable behaviour concept—ABC—programme that was run in Islington should be considered. In that programme, the council and a police officer visit a home at an early stage of youth offending to meet the youth and his or her parents. A contract is set up to ensure that the youth's behaviour is corrected. If the contract is broken, the family's home could be taken from it. The project has been successful in Islington and we should consider it. A fundamental problem that we face concerns information sharing. I have met Strathclyde police a number of times and have been told that information cannot be shared about juveniles who are causing tens of thousands of pounds worth of damage throughout the Glasgow City Council area. We should share information about persistent offenders in Scotland—that is considered to be good practice in England—and we should examine the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 to ensure that we can address that serious issue. We should ensure that agencies work together. They talk a good game and many are interested in working together, but they do not form partnerships to ensure that effective and helpful intelligence is shared.  Agencies should also consider sharing premises. Why are social work offices disjointed from local police offices? Why are local housing associations disjointed from them? We should consider the concept of a police office, a social work office and a housing office sharing facilities in our communities. None of the agencies is considering that concept and the Executive should take a lead on the issue. Good ideas about good practice in our communities should be shared and we should ensure that we take the politics out of the matter and deliver for our local communities.

I welcome Shona Robison's motion and her commitment that this issue will not turn into a constitutional debate. That is important, because the issue affects every constituency throughout Scotland. I am one of the party-poopers. I support a complete ban on the sale of fireworks, because I believe that it is the only way in which we will be able to deal effectively with the issue. I appreciate many of the points that Shona Robison and others have made about the need to control vendors and the sale of fireworks on the black market. However, if members were to visit the Barras market in the Gallowgate in Glasgow at any time  of the year they will find that a black market for fireworks already exists. We will deal effectively with the issue only if we put more resources into organised fireworks displays, which many people demand, but which we have failed to deliver effectively in the past. The feeling that I have picked up from many of my constituents is that if we were to invest in fireworks displays on 5 November—Tricia Marwick's birthday—they would not feel the need to provide a fireworks display in their back garden. Although we have many happy memories of fireworks evening, things have moved on over the years. The ingredients of fireworks are extremely explosive and that is what many complaints are about. We need greater control. I would like to hear from the minister what information we have received from Westminster about how we will control the ingredients of the fireworks. We have to address the way in which shopkeepers promote fireworks in the elongated period in the run-up to Guy Fawkes night. We can buy fireworks for a small sum of money in comparison with what we would have paid 10 or 15 years ago. We are not necessarily talking about local shopkeepers, but major public limited companies that sell fireworks for extreme profit. We should consider the way in which they control the sale of those items. I have kept my comments brief. As one of the party-poopers, I have to say that we will never be able to control the situation unless we consider a complete ban on the sale of fireworks. We should ensure that there is maximum investment in providing local displays in a controlled environment. We should ensure that the companies that sell fireworks, such as Asda and other major outlets, invest in local displays some of the profits that they make from the sale of fireworks. Perhaps they could invest in fireworks displays if we go down the road of a complete ban.

To ask the Scottish Executive what further measures are being taken to improve health and tackle cancer and heart disease. (S1O-5297)

Does the minister share my view that it is unacceptable that my constituents in Glasgow Springburn suffer from lung cancer at a rate that is 93 per cent above the Scottish average? What specific action has been taken in Glasgow Springburn to deal with that issue?

I welcome the healthy interest that the Liberal Democrat and Labour members have taken in the debate, an interest that is shown by the large number of Labour and Liberal Democrat members in attendance. It is crucial that we focus on alternatives to custody. They should not be about the something-for-nothing approach but about the quid pro quo approach, which will give us something for something in our communities. As Fergus McCann once said to a famous Dutch footballer at Celtic Football Club, let us take a reality check. Let us look at our communities—for example, Dennistoun in my constituency, which Richard Simpson was kind enough to visit last week. In Dennistoun two elderly gentleman live in such fear that they board up their windows. That is the reality in our communities. Shopkeepers in Blackhill decide not to roll up their shutters, because the windows will be smashed almost immediately. People dare not walk outside the entrance to their close for fear of youths loitering there. I could bring many other matters to the Parliament's attention. I have reflected on the many views in the community that I have heard and that Richard Simpson heard last Thursday evening. The majority of people are in favour of a system that ensures that offenders correct their behaviour. I disagree with the point that Phil Gallie made. Most people in our communities want the end result to be that the offenders' behaviour is corrected.

On the visit to Barlinnie prison that members of the Justice 1 Committee made, we met an offender who had spent three years in prison without having had an interview to decide his leaving date. There had been no preparation for his release into the community. I do not believe that prison is the best way of dealing with offenders. The system fails when the community cannot see the offender facing up to and showing genuine remorse for their crime. Scott Barrie made the good point that disposals are available to children's reporters. My experience in my constituency—and this view is shared by many others—is that there is no evidence that those disposals are being used effectively. We must ensure that the disposals that Scott Barrie mentioned are improved and developed to ensure that people face up to their crimes in the community. I also want to touch on a point raised by Roseanna Cunningham. There are far too many pilots for the rehabilitation of offenders. The Executive must ensure that a Government programme is rolled out throughout Scotland so that rehabilitation programmes are in place. Far too many pilots have been launched, but not tracked effectively to ensure that we are correcting the behaviour of those who offend. The effectiveness of all such programmes can be evaluated by when the two elderly gentlemen in my constituency are able to take down the boards from their windows. If they are unable to live in their community without the fear of crime, our rehabilitation programmes have not been effective.

When the minister last met representatives of Glasgow Housing Association, did she discuss tackling anti-social behaviour, which is a serious issue in our constituencies? Will she ensure that Glasgow Housing Association puts in place an effective action plan to deal with that serious issue?

This is the fifth new Labour speech. As the member for the constituency that includes Barlinnie prison, I welcome the estates review. However, I am concerned that the review has focused so much on bricks and mortar. For that reason, it can be seen as a missed opportunity. The prison estates review was very different from the other Scottish Executive reviews that have taken place, such as the health board acute services review. With respect to that review, I am accused of being a dinosaur because I talk about bricks and mortar and do not relate that to the management of services. What makes the Scottish Prison Service different from acute services in health? Surely a review of estates management is needed, as well as an estates review. A review of the Scottish Prison Service might also be useful. We need to identify the most effective way of rehabilitating prisoners. I am sure that the Prison Officers Association Scotland will not be pleased to hear this, but I want to see mass redundancies throughout the Scottish Prison Service. I want to rehabilitate prisoners so that they do not regularly revisit Barlinnie and the many other prisons throughout Scotland. That is an important issue that has not been addressed in the estates review, but which should be addressed as part of an overall review. There should be a genuine consultation period. We should not take a fixed view on how we should approach the issue—I would not rule anything in or out. That is another important part of the process. I have criticised many authorities for not  getting involved in a genuine consultation process. This may not be a populist view, but I believe that the Justice 1 Committee, along with the Scottish Executive, has a duty to explore every possibility in the prison system, to ensure that we eradicate many of the difficulties that we currently face throughout the prison system. I am not convinced by the private option for operating prisons. Like Margaret Jamieson, I want to see more evidence that says that we cannot use the option of private build and public operation of prisons. The report states that there are no examples in the United Kingdom or internationally of such a system. However, the Parliament was developed to provide Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. We in Scotland have a great history of being pioneers of new systems. Why should not we consider developing a system in Scotland for private build and public operation of prisons, and making that system renowned throughout the world? The prison estates review was a missed opportunity for considering all the options and making use of the skills that exist in Scotland. We should allow the Justice 1 Committee and the Scottish Executive to consult thoroughly throughout the process. We should not rule anything in or out. We should all reflect on the many points of view that are expressed during the consultation period.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the housing improvement task force's report. I recognise its importance for all our constituencies, particularly with regard to first-time buyers who find themselves trapped into staying in their properties because of the buildings' condition. It has been a difficult period for many first-time buyers. I will focus on two main issues. The first is the information that is provided by solicitors when the owner-occupier or prospective owner-occupier shows interest in a property. It is clear that often—I am sure that many of us are aware of this from personal experience—solicitors do not advise the prospective owner of their communal responsibilities prior to purchase. Many owner-occupiers are not aware of those communal responsibilities until, for example, they receive a housing action notice or even an invoice for their communal share of any work that is required. We should consider entering into discussions with the Law Society of Scotland with a view to implementing a clear protocol to ensure that solicitors pass information to their clients prior to purchase. That has been touched on in the task force's report, but I think that the Deputy Minister for Social Justice ought to address it in her response to the debate. The second important issue, which currently faces Glasgow in the context of the stock transfer, is consultation of owner-occupiers. Far too often, owner-occupiers do not feel part of the process and the only time that they are involved in it is when they receive that dreaded invoice for the work to be carried out on their properties.

That is an issue for the minister to respond to, but I support that idea in principle as a possibility to be developed. Consultation is an important part of the process and of property management. If an owner is suddenly advised that they have received a bill for, say, £2,500, they clearly have not been involved. As owner-occupiers, many, if not all, of us must reflect on what it would mean for us to receive an invoice for £2,500 without having been consulted on whether the relevant work on our property should be carried out—as was the case with one of my constituents. That happens too often in the case of council-factored properties, where the council tends to hold a majority of properties in the building concerned and to carry out the works regardless of the views of owner-occupiers. We have to ensure that owner-occupiers and absentee landlords are made well aware of their legal requirement to carry out improvements to their properties. That has been referred to in the report, which we should refer to absentee landlords, who in many cases show very little interest in the activities of their tenants and the needs of their property. The minister should give serious consideration to those two issues. Once again, I welcome the report and commend the task force for what has been a very comprehensive piece of work.

Will the minister condemn the visit to Easterhouse in Glasgow by Iain Duncan Smith, who sought to undermine the efforts of local elected members to regenerate Glasgow? Given—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You have not given me the opportunity to complete the question.

I have already.

I remind members of an incident that took place near Ruchazie on Monday: three men were shot in close proximity to a primary school and a sheltered housing complex. That is why we should be discussing and debating this issue today, instead of being caught up in arguments about constitutional arrangements and Sewel motions. The fact that such incidents are not uncommon in areas such as Ruchazie and have been part of such communities for decades shows us why we need to get down to the real debate—the need to review the police force and the issue raised by the Sewel motion. When the Parliament met in Glasgow in May 2000, I called for a top-to-bottom review of policing in Scotland. I raised that matter in response to the unacceptable level of crime in Glasgow and other parts of the west of Scotland. I felt that our communities were being forced to accept that crime was and always would be part of their local communities. I stand by my call for a top-to-bottom review of policing, and welcome the principles that are set out in the motion.

This is not the first time that Kenny Gibson has raised that point and it will not be the last. The issue is to do with making best use of the resources that are available to police officers. There are 638 police officers in E division in my constituency, yet we have incidents such as the one that occurred in Ruchazie.

I am sorry, but I make no excuse for raising issues that relate to my constituents and the serious issues that face our communities day in, day out. The issue is the review of the police force—

The Sewel motion is clear that the issue is the reform of the police force and how that affects devolved issues in Scotland. It is perfectly legitimate for me to raise issues from my constituency.

SNP members do not want to hear about the issues that face people in Ruchazie and other parts of the west of Scotland. Perhaps we can address the issue in a members' business debate. It is difficult for SNP members to hear that. In conclusion, it is clear that communities such as Ruchazie and Sighthill have developed a subconscious tolerance of the level of crime in their communities. We have to reverse that trend. The Sewel motion that is before us will allow us to move in that direction.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it is making in addressing waiting and discharge times in the national health service. (S1O-4443)

I thank the minister for his reply. Does the minister share my concern that, although senior managers in Glasgow have proposed an acute services review, which they advise will improve waiting times, that review does not include a review of the number of senior management staff within the NHS in Glasgow? Does the minister agree that the facilities of the senior management staff need to be improved and that we need to increase the number of front-line staff rather than invest in senior managers?

I welcome the bill and the culture of openness that it will provide. I am disappointed that the Conservatives are not able to support the bill, in particular on the day when IDS—otherwise know as Iain Duncan Smith, the Conservative leader—advises that he will improve public services. Improving public services is about providing information to the public and ensuring that they have access to important public information. Murdo Fraser asked Jim Wallace how many people in his constituency raised the issue of freedom of information. I will give an example from my constituency. I have mentioned on a number of occasions in the chamber that it has been proposed to site a secure unit at Stobhill hospital. As a local MSP, I requested information. When I did so, I was advised that Greater Glasgow Health Board would provide the information, but that there was no legal requirement for it to do so. That concerns me. The message to quangos is that the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Bill will ensure that never again will a local member of the Scottish Parliament or a local community be told that information will be provided only if there is a legal requirement to do so. The bill will ensure that such information is provided.

I appreciate Lord James's input. He has worked closely with us on the bill. It is unfortunate that he was unable to outline his immediate concerns during stage 1. The point is simple: our local community requested information from Greater Glasgow Health Board concerning the option appraisal exercise that selected Stobhill. That information should be made available to a local member of the Scottish Parliament and to the local community. I do not want to get into a debate about Stobhill; I just want to provide background information. Roseanna Cunningham touched on the requirement to request information in writing. Many individuals encounter bureaucracy that tells them to request their information in writing. Many members of the community have severe difficulties with that, in particular those who do not have English as their first language or who have difficulty reading and writing. Local authorities and  all other authorities that are covered by the bill should be legally obliged to assist those who request information and perhaps to provide designated areas where people can be assisted to fill in the required forms. I hope that the codes of practice, which will be formulated during stages 2 and 3, will ensure that local authorities do that. I welcome the fact that individuals will no longer be required to provide their reasons for requesting information. People should not be asked their reasons for requesting information. It is their right to access particular information. We do not need to ask their reasons for doing so. Another issue that the committee raised during stage 1 was that of first ministerial certificates. The NUJ raised a particular concern about the First Minister having the opportunity, in exceptional circumstances, to issue a first ministerial certificate. The bill is clear that if a first ministerial certificate is applied for, that certificate should be brought before the Parliament "as soon as practicable". The period of time referred to by the phrase "as soon as practicable" was raised with the Deputy First Minister. In his introduction today, he did not explain what the period would be. During stage 1 consideration of the bill, we asked the Deputy First Minister to define the period, because the phrase "as soon as practicable" can be used loosely. I would like the Deputy Minister for Justice to address that and to define what the period will be. On many occasions, the Parliament has been given a difficult time about its effectiveness in local communities. We have shown that we have successfully interrogated all of the witnesses who came to the committee at stage 1. We considered every aspect of the bill and that is shown by the responses that we received from the various organisations, such as Friends of the Earth and the Campaign for Freedom of Information Scotland. I believe that the bill will ensure absolute openness and fairness in Scotland. Such a culture should create an atmosphere where who someone is or who they know does not matter; it is their right to know.

Will the Solicitor General, with the agreement of Firsat Dag's family, agree to meet the family and me to set out a full account of why those particular charges were not prosecuted further? Does the Solicitor General agree that the life sentence that was served on Scott Burrell should send a clear message that we will not accept such incidents in our society and that they will be met with a life sentence?

Did the Scottish Cabinet discuss the presentation of school league tables? Many school league tables do not take into consideration deprivation factors or whether schools have achieved significant improvements over previous academic years. Will the First Minister accept my invitation to visit one of the schools in my constituency that fared badly in the school league tables to see that there is more to schools than such tables?

Kenny Gibson, a member for whom I have respect despite his affiliation to the SNP, said that Glasgow City Council viewed the asylum seeker programme as a commodity. I have asked this before and I will ask it again: if that were the case, why were the other local authorities not forming an orderly queue at the door of the Scottish Executive's offices?

I will let Kenny Gibson answer that point in a moment. I suggest that he should get his facts right, however. It is true to say that Glasgow City Council needs every penny that it can get, but we should be clear about the fact that there is no profit to be had from the asylum seeker programme. If Mr Gibson met Jimmy Andrews, the chief executive of Glasgow City Council, that is what he would be told. I am happy to share with Mr Gibson correspondence that I have on that issue.

There is no evidence to back up that claim, but there is comprehensive evidence that that was not the case. I will share with Mr Gibson my correspondence on the issue and perhaps raise the matter again in the chamber. Mr Gibson has made a serious allegation about Glasgow City Council's participation in the scheme. I believe that councillors who were involved, such as Archie Graham, respected the ethos of the programme. I move on to comment on the Home Office statement. The first point, which is important, is that we asked for a top-to-bottom review of the asylum seekers programme and that is what was delivered. No part of the previous programme was not reviewed from top to bottom. We must address many aspects of that. We asked for the voucher scheme to be scrapped and, despite Fiona Hyslop's difference of  opinion about when that will happen, it will be scrapped. That is the important point that was raised during our consultation with many groups throughout the UK. We also called for the skills and qualifications of asylum seekers to be taken into consideration and fully utilised. That has been delivered. The Home Office will make a further statement about that in November. The highly skilled migrant entry scheme will give consideration to the skills that are available to us. In Sighthill, architects, highly skilled medical professionals and teachers are able to provide skills to the local community. They should be given the opportunity to do that. The Home Office has ensured that that will be considered.

I do not think that there is any evidence to suggest that we could scrap the voucher scheme overnight. We should further explore the possibilities of doing that, but I cannot see any evidence that would allow us to scrap the scheme overnight, despite the fact that many of us want that to happen. On the dispersal scheme, I agree with some of what Kenny Gibson said about the large number of houses that are available in Glasgow. The dispersal scheme has been scrapped because of many of the problems that we experienced in Sighthill. Dispersing 500 families to Sighthill because there are 500 empty homes in that area is not a comprehensive or strategic way of dispersing families. I welcome the Home Office statement and its commitment to no longer consider the programme as being an effective way of dispersing families.

I must move on as I do not have much time.

I welcome the review. A number of members have raised concerns about smart ID cards, but I believe that they give us an opportunity to support asylum seekers. Many asylum seekers for whom we have no details of nationality, age or medical history arrive in areas such as Sighthill. Properly developed smart ID cards would give us an opportunity to store that kind of information in the card's chip. Members should welcome that development.  I would like to discuss a number of other issues, but I appreciate that we are short of time.

I want to update members on the latest position on integration in Sighthill. I thank the media and SNP members—despite Kenny Gibson's comments—for their support and assistance during a difficult period in Sighthill. I welcome the visit by Prince William and Prince Charles. Since that visit, media coverage has given us an opportunity to improve matters in Sighthill. We continue to work on many projects in the Sighthill community, particularly on supporting asylum seekers in the local community. I ask the minister to provide for professionals to assist local groups in drawing up applications. I have said before in the chamber that a number of groups are severely affected by not having professional assistance with completing, for instance, applications for lottery grants and other funding packages. Will the minister say how the Executive will provide groups with the professional assistance that they require? The issue is complex and requires not only funding, but commitment from a number of authorities. I hope that areas such as Sighthill can look forward to that as a result of the recent review by the Home Office and the minister's comments.

What measures have been taken to extend the central heating programme to those who are disabled? I am sure that the minister will appreciate that many disabled people are housebound and in need of an efficient central heating programme for the winter months.

Although this is a short debate, it is an important  one, whose subject touches the lives of many people in our constituencies. People in Springburn have been greatly concerned to see the local criminal fraternity flaunting their wealth to give the impression that crime pays and have raised the matter on many occasions. It is important that swift legal action is taken. As Michael Matheson said, human rights must be taken into consideration. However, our constituents also have human rights, and we must consider the fact that they have had to live in the shadow of criminals who have flaunted the proceeds of their criminal activities. We should ensure that our constituents' human rights are also taken into consideration. We are aware that the legislation is in line with international policy. I ask the minister to consider the model of the assets forfeiture fund that was introduced by the Department of Justice in America. The intention is to punish and deter criminal activity by depriving criminals of property that is acquired through illegal activities. Will the minister consider ensuring that the criminals themselves— I am not feeling that great, Presiding Officer. I would like to suspend my contribution for the moment.

Would it be possible to move for an extension of business by 10 minutes to allow the remaining members to speak?

I welcome the opportunity to set the record straight about the real Sighthill and the issues that face the area. A great deal has been written and said about Sighthill and the people who live there. Let me make it clear to the chamber that the people of Sighthill are decent people. [ Applause. ] For the record, we welcome asylum seekers to Sighthill and we always will. The First Minister and the Minister for Social Justice, Jackie Baillie, who has new responsibility for asylum seekers, both visited Sighthill, as did the Minister for Justice and a number of other political leaders. Yesterday, the First Minister visited St Stephen's Primary School, where he displayed his professional football skills to the pupils, and saw for himself the integration that is taking place in that primary school, and in primary schools in other areas that are part of the dispersal programme. The media do not recognise how well our children are integrating. Many of them are learning a number of languages and are putting many of us to shame with their language skills. The First Minister also had the opportunity to meet the real community of Sighthill. The Sighthill out-of-school care project is looking to develop an extension to improve its child care facilities. It is also looking to develop a drop-in centre for all sectors of the community, including asylum seekers. The friendship group, which has been  going for some time under the chairmanship of Charlie Riddell and Fatim Ahmed, enables asylum seekers and the local community to work together to develop support for asylum seekers. The Springwell tenant management co-operative is managed by volunteers such as Angela Beattie, Margaret Beattie, Bill Greer and John Sweeney. All those people have worked tirelessly, as have the people of St Rollox church, which has almost been turned into a drop-in centre to support asylum seekers. Sighthill is not a community full of bigots or people who are ignorant towards asylum seekers; it is a community of people who welcome asylum seekers and have welcomed people from all parts of the world for more than 20 years under an overseas student programme. It is time for all of us—political leaders and people from all parts of society—to create a vision with the Sighthill community and take quick and decisive action. We must learn from past mistakes. Far too often, politicians and their leaders are not willing to accept that they have made mistakes and that they must learn from them. I admit that mistakes have been made—by me and by many of us in Sighthill—but we will learn from them. That is an important part of the process. We must consider a number of measures to ensure that action is taken in Sighthill. I ask the Minister for Social Justice, Jackie Baillie, to consider publishing an action plan that can be adopted by the Scottish Executive, the Westminster Parliament and Glasgow City Council. I ask that a number of matters be considered in producing that action plan. I will not be able to address all the issues, but I will touch on a couple. First, it is clear that there was a lack of consultation with the community prior to 393 families arriving in Sighthill. We must reflect on that. We should set in place a protocol to ensure that local communities feel part of the process, a point that has been made by the local councillor. We are not asking for the local community to take a yes or no decision. We are asking for steps to be taken so that the local community feels part of the process. Unfortunately, the lesson that we must learn from the Sighthill experience is that the local community did not feel part of the process because it was not consulted on or informed about the programme. I ask the Minister for Social Justice to consider putting in place protocols and bureaucracies, which we are good at putting in place when it suits us. I touch on the issue of community facilities. A great deal has been said about the lack of community facilities within Sighthill; that point has been made on a number of occasions. However, there is a Sighthill youth centre, a community  education centre and three excellent primary schools—St Kevin's Primary School, Sighthill Primary School and St Stephen's Primary School. The genuine point to be made is that we must assist groups with their aspirations to develop local facilities. The point that was made to the First Minister and the minister with responsibility for asylum seekers is that groups must be assisted during that process. Far too often the leafy suburbs with tennis clubs and golf clubs are successful in their applications for lottery funding because architects and surveyors assist them with that process. We should be clear that the people of Sighthill contribute to the lottery and they should expect to benefit from it. I ask the minister to consider ways in which we can assist community groups in making applications for funding—a complicated process involving business and architectural plans and many other issues. I ask for specific funding to be put in place to deal with that. I touch on the issue of public safety. As a number of asylum seekers and local residents have amplified, everyone wants to feel safe in Sighthill, regardless of their race. I commend Strathclyde police—I give them a difficult time in the Parliament, but I am sure that they will enjoy this statement—for introducing additional resources in the Sighthill area. It is on the record that I have called for additional resources in my constituency because of the public safety issue. I ask for that police presence to be sustained. The Minister for Justice is here and I ask him to make a representation to Strathclyde police that, for the foreseeable future, they will ensure that additional resources are deployed in the Sighthill area. That important issue has been raised a number of times by asylum seekers. Much criticism has been levelled at Glasgow City Council. However, we must recognise a number of points. First, the dispersal scheme is complex. Secondly, if this was such a lucrative contract for the local council, why have other local authorities not formed an orderly queue outside the Scottish Executive to take part in the dispersal programme? It is important that we recognise that point. Glasgow City Council has taken part in the programme to engage with the programme's ethos, not just because there is a lucrative aspect to the contract. That is an important point to make. Glasgow City Council should be given credit and assistance for the work that it is has done so far, but it should also, as I said, learn from mistakes that have been made. We have assurances that those points will be taken on board. Presiding Officer, I want as many members as possible to have a say in the debate, so I will  conclude. I would like to mention a number of issues, but we do not have time. I have been impressed by the determination of the Sighthill community. I know that the various ministers and political leaders who have visited the community have been particularly impressed by its determination. In that context, I must mention an incredible young man from Sighthill, Steven McMahon, who was successful in obtaining a scholarship to the Alvin Ailey American Dance Center School in New York. That was achieved despite the difficult circumstances of Steven's mother. The local community and various funding sources rallied round to ensure that Steven was able to take up his scholarship. Following the plane disaster in New York last week, I was delighted to learn from Colin McKay, my friend and journalist colleague—I do not know whether those terms go together—that Steven is safe and well. That was also reported on the ITN news. I ask everyone concerned to give us time to improve the standard of life in Sighthill, to put the negative past behind us and to promote the real Sighthill. That, with commitment from all agencies and with the necessary resources, will allow us to build a new and healthy future for all.

When the First Minister visits Sighthill, will he meet the groups that have been supporting asylum seekers for some time? Those groups have not received the positive media attention that they deserve. Media attention has touched on the negative aspects of the minority in Sighthill. The majority in Sighthill are good people, many of whom have lived there for 30 years—people such as my grandmother, who was one of the first  tenants of Sighthill and who was a tenant until she died. Those are good people who support asylum seekers and have supported overseas students, who have been living in Sighthill for more than 15 years. When the First Minister visits, will he ensure that he seeks the views of the local organisations such as St Rollox church, Sighthill out-of-school care and Fountainwell tenants association?

I welcome the reduction in the number of health bodies, which will also be welcomed in a number of local communities. My question for the minister is the reverse of Annabel Goldie's question. Those who serve on quangos are the so-called elite of society. What steps will the minister take to ensure that people who are representative of local communities will be appointed to quangos—for example, people who have served on housing associations, such as the late John Butterley, who served on a housing association for 25 years but was not considered for any of a number of local quangos to which he could have made a valuable contribution? What steps will the Executive take to ensure that community council members, tenants association representatives and health council representatives, who have been excluded from quangos in the past, are given a genuine opportunity to apply to sit on quangos?

I oppose amendment 75, which leaves us with many difficulties as to where anti-social tenants would be placed. I have raised with ministers the need to monitor anti-social tenants. There are great difficulties in moving them from one part of a local authority area to another and perhaps we should consider that after reflecting on the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Will Margaret Curran provide an update on the amendment that I lodged at stage 2 about interim anti-social behaviour orders? I believe that such orders would provide an effective way of dealing with many of the anti-social behaviour problems that Bill Aitken has raised. Anti-social behaviour is carried out by a small minority of the community. Those people cannot be given the opportunity to rule the community by behaving in the disruptive manner that we have seen in Sighthill in my constituency. There are good, decent people who live in Sighthill, who  have been stigmatised by the behaviour of a small minority. When we make legislation to deal with anti-social behaviour, it is our job as elected representatives to ensure that we support the officials out there who are doing a good job for us in many respects.

Will the minister join me, local head teachers and pupils in welcoming the public-private partnerships, through which £1.2 billion will be invested in Glasgow's secondary schools? Instead of having to listen to political soundbites from Opposition members, would he appreciate the opportunity to visit those schools, whose head teachers and pupils welcome that investment?

I, too, congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing this debate, which recognises the role and importance of local newspapers. I will focus on a specific issue in my constituency, on which the Springburn Herald and the Glasgow Evening Times have been active: the proposed secure unit at Stobhill hospital. Members will be aware that I have brought that matter to the Parliament on a number of occasions. If it were not for the reporting of the local newspapers and the action of the Parliament, that secure unit would have been built at Stobhill by now. That gives a clear focus on how local newspapers can inform public debate. The Springburn Herald has also been active through its postcard campaign and a public petition to the Parliament on the acute services review in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area. The Evening Times has informed the debate on the acute services review and has ensured that people in Glasgow are aware of many of the issues that face them as a result of it. Those are  two examples of the activity of local newspapers. Unfortunately—but quite rightly—the children from St Ninian's Primary School have left us to catch their train. The tabloids do not report some of the very positive parts of the Parliament, such as the visit by that school today. Many other primary schools, including one in my constituency, have visited their MSPs. That would not happen to the same extent at Westminster. Such visits are not reported in any of the tabloids, but they are reported in our local newspapers. That is an example of the positive role that local newspapers can play, for which they should be given great credit. Duncan McNeil touched on the sports coverage of local newspapers. My local junior football teams, Petershill and St Rochs, have had a very successful season. Local newspapers are effective at reporting on such teams, but the tabloids are not very good at reporting on junior football. I conclude by again congratulating Duncan McNeil on bringing his motion to the chamber. I am sure that all of us look forward to continuing to support our local newspapers.

I begin by reminding Brian Monteith and Michael Russell that today's debate is not David Black's book launch. We are discussing the future of the Scottish Parliament building. I wonder whether Michael Russell has declared his complimentary copy of David Black's book, which he is promoting today, in the register of members' interests. I want to promote the report of the Auditor General for Scotland, which is an independent report and is not based on promotional or personal interests. It sets out a number of reasons for the way in which the Parliament's costs increased. Page 22 of the report states that one of the reasons for the increase in expenditure was the client's requirement for additional office space. The corporate body raised the issue of all the political parties requesting more space in the building.

It would be helpful if we could clarify that. Perhaps the corporate body could bring its minutes before the Parliament to clarify that point.

I am afraid that I do not have time to hear an intervention. I would like to continue. The Parliament is about serving the needs of the Scottish people and I will focus on access for the disabled. Ashcraig Secondary School for children with special needs and severe disabilities is in my constituency. I am appalled by the difficulties that the children experience in trying to access the Parliament. If it were not for the security staff, the children would not have the opportunity to be introduced to their local member of the Scottish Parliament and they would not be able to access the chamber. I want a new Scottish Parliament  that will be accessible to those children, who take time out of their curriculum to access the Parliament. I am assured by the chief executive, Paul Grice, that the new Parliament will serve the needs of the visually impaired, the hearing impaired and all sections of the community. It is important that we deal with that point. We must put into perspective the fact that new buildings and capital projects such as this one will always be complicated. John Young and Bill Butler will remember the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall, which cost us £30 million and went well over its original budget. Following the concert hall's completion, a Tory conference was held there, despite John Young's opposition to its construction, and many other events have been held there. I do not hear people raising concerns now about the increased costs of the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall. It is part of our heritage in Glasgow and Glaswegians are proud of it.

This is the new Scottish Parliament: it is a Parliament that will be recognised worldwide. It is not an insurance building; it is our heritage. Future generations will look towards the Parliament as their future. We must be ambitious; we do not want the Poundstretcher Parliament that David McLetchie has suggested. We do not want a cheap and nasty version that will be the laughing stock of the world. Some members have allowed their personal aspirations regarding where the Parliament should be located to get in the way. Personally, I would like us to consider Springburn Public Halls, in my constituency, but I appreciate that the whole of Scotland must take the decision. We should get away from parochial issues. We should reflect on many aspects. We should see that the Holyrood project is creating a good building. I hope that we will portray our ambition for Scotland in the new Scottish Parliament building.

I welcome the Executive's motion. I also welcome the part of Roseanna Cunningham's amendment—S1M-1890.1—that asks for a more coherent programme that would tackle the major problems that are currently experienced throughout Scotland. That is what Roseanna is calling for from the Executive, so why have not we seen the SNP's programme for a more coherent criminal justice system? Why—instead of picking holes in every Executive motion—does not the SNP publish its coherent programme and let the real debate begin? We want to see the SNP's programme, so why is it not published on the SNP website? Where is it? I am concerned that the debate has focused primarily on police numbers. Fighting crime is not only about police numbers. We must raise several issues. First, I will talk about the way in which police officers are allocated throughout our constituencies. Areas of high crime—such as Blackhill, Sighthill and Roystonhill—in my constituency receive the same placement of police officers as areas such as Bearsden. I mean no disrespect to anyone in Bearsden, or to the member for Bearsden, but that area does not have the high crime that is experienced in my constituency. We must consider the way in which police officers are placed in areas of high crime. I will deal with another recently well-publicised issue that faces my constituency—racist attacks. The chief constable must take the issue seriously in relation to the way in which he places his police officers. I put on record that the attacks have been carried out by a minority and that 99.9 per cent of the people in my constituency are good, hard-working people. They are not criminals or drug dealers. They are decent people. They do not deserve to be included in the soundbites, which we hear in many parts of the media, that say that Sighthill is a drug-ridden community. I am very proud to represent Sighthill and will continue to be so. Sighthill needs the support of the local elected members, the local community and the authorities, such as the police and the housing authorities.  In order to deal with racist attacks, which are an unacceptable aspect of our society, we need additional resources. I ask the minister to address how we might raise additional resources to deal with racist attacks, which have become an issue in my constituency. The Executive has also introduced a number of innovative programmes, particularly with regard to CCTV. Glasgow City Council should be commended for its initiative in exploring best value as far as the CCTV programme is concerned. That council is considering ways of reorganising the programme, including its base in the Blochairn depot, which is in my constituency. Because of football grounds such as Celtic Park, Ibrox and Firhill, there are particular demands in Glasgow that require additional policing resources, and we must remember that community police officers are deployed to such areas. The chief constable must seriously consider how he deploys such resources to ensure that the community police officers do not continue to be the losers. I welcome the Executive's statement and I certainly look forward to a reduction in crime figures.

Will the minister assure me that he will take no lectures from Kenny Gibson or any of his colleagues on improving public services? Can the minister clarify which party was in power on Perth and Kinross Council when, rather than build new schools with a private finance initiative programme, it built a new office complex along with a car park for local councillors?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are in place to ensure that full business cases for capital projects submitted by health boards demonstrate value for money. (S1O-3233)

Does the minister share my concern that the Greater Glasgow Primary Care NHS Trust's wish to proceed with the full business case for the proposed secure unit at Stobhill hospital, despite the fact that that site is zoned for residential use—which is confirmed by correspondence that I have received—is a scandalous waste of public funds?

In the time available I will be able to touch on only a couple of points, so I shall start on a positive note. I welcome the new figures for the increased number of police officers on the beat, and the Scottish Executive's achievement in forming the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency, which has led to significant benefits in my community. The CCTV system has also been a significant success in Glasgow and particularly in my own community. We should accept the positive aspects of what has been announced today. On a more negative note, tackling crime is not just about the allocation of additional resources. It is about the way in which those resources are managed, and I am not fully convinced that Strathclyde police make best use of the resources that are available to them. With the greatest respect to the point that Kenny Gibson made, the problems in Strathclyde will be solved not simply by having additional police officers, but by tackling the issues that our constituents raise with us. Let me touch on the way in which police offices communicate with the public. It is unacceptable that people can wait up to 10 minutes for calls to their local police office to be answered while they are kept in queueing systems. People are lectured to at local public meetings that they must report crime but, when they take the next step of reporting crime by the use of telecommunications systems, they are not able to do so or are discouraged from doing so by the fact that they are kept in telephone queueing systems. I have raised that issue with Strathclyde police for the past five years. I have not seen them take any significant steps towards improving their telephone system. I ask the minister to take that point on board, to ensure that we bring the telephone systems in police authorities into the 21 st century, because I do not believe that that is being done. Jim Wallace mentioned improving the information technology that is available to the police; that is welcome. The police do not currently have e-mail addresses, which are at the disposal of every major organisation throughout Scotland. We should work to improve the situation that has arisen as e-mail, which is a simple method of communication, is not available to the police. I reiterate the point that there should be a top-to-bottom review of the policing allocation. It is unacceptable that in areas such as Blackhill in my constituency, there is one community police officer, when the leafy suburbs throughout the Strathclyde area have two local community police officers on the beat. We should be allocating police officers to the areas where crime is  committed and where crime is unacceptably high. We must examine the way in which police authorities allocate local police officers. We must also examine the shift patterns of community police officers. Criminals do not work shift patterns; they do not decide that they are on the back shift or the early shift. We must ensure that community policing is flexible; currently it is not, as a community police officer works specific shift patterns, which do not fit in with the pattern of when crimes are being committed locally. Pauline McNeill raised a point about liaison with local agencies. There is no evidence that agencies are working together with the police authorities. I have had to lead the way in ensuring that there is a coherent approach to working with other agencies. We must move forward. I welcome the commitment that has been given that there will be more police officers on the beat. I look forward to a continued positive approach to the matter.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures can be taken to ensure that developers of new housing include local amenities in planning applications. (S1O-3086)

I thank the minister for his reply. Does he share my concern that developers are able to volume-build in areas such as Robroyston and to submit planning applications that give no consideration to local amenities such as schools and nurseries? I ask the minister whether I can meet him to discuss my general concerns on the matter. My declaration of interest is that I stay in Robroyston.

I welcome the Housing (Scotland) Bill and the opportunity the stage 1 debate on it gives members to debate the issues facing tenants, owners and housing organisations across Scotland. I will begin by commenting on the remarks made by Bill Aitken, who I see cares so much about tenancy that he has now left the chamber. Bill Aitken accuses us of passing the buck on measures to tackle anti-social neighbours. We had 18 years of Michael Forsyth's buck-passing. During that period, I did not see any proposals come from the Tories to deal with the serious issue of anti-social neighbours. We should remember that we would not be in the chamber today, looking at the Social Justice Committee's comprehensive report, if the Tories were still in power. There would be no Scottish Parliament, so he should not lecture us on what we should be doing on this issue.  The measures on anti-social neighbours are a serious part of the bill. The correspondence that we receive daily demonstrates that. We must take measures to deal with anti-social neighbours.

I was a member of Glasgow City Council. On very few occasions were we graced with the great pleasure of meeting the minister from hell. The minister from hell did not come to Glasgow. Members of Glasgow City Council had to make their way to Westminster. I am well aware of the situation with respect to Michael Forsyth.

I know that John Young is keen to intervene, but I have already given way. It is fair that I continue. [Interruption.]

The criminal justice system must deal with the difficulties that we face with anti-social neighbours. Some of the current difficulties come from the criminal justice system itself. I have often had difficulties because of the time it takes Strathclyde police to collate information following complaints about anti-social behaviour at a particular address. We also continually come up against the problem of the Data Protection Act 1984. I appreciate that that is reserved to Westminster, but when we are dealing with complaints about anti-social behaviour we are repeatedly advised by Strathclyde police that they cannot deal with particular complaints because of data protection law. We must ensure that the bill deals with that point. We must also legislate to ensure that authorities work together. When I met senior housing officials and senior police officials, I was appalled to be told that they do not call case conferences when they deal with serious complaints of anti-social behaviour. Surely there must be opportunities for authorities to work together, using the mechanism of case conferences. In this bill, we have to ensure that organisations can work together to tackle anti-social behaviour. The most effective way of doing that would surely be to bring together the relevant authorities that deal with complaints. Far too often I have spoken to police officers who have advised me that it is for local authorities to deal with complaints of anti-social behaviour. When someone lets a firework out of their living-room window, it is not only a local authority issue  but a police issue. It is about time that all the authorities took ownership of the difficulties that we face in coming up with measures to deal with anti-social behaviour. In the bill, we must put together a framework for that. We should regulate property management factors. For far too long, that industry has not been regulated. We must make progress on that. I have one final point on anti-social neighbours, which is one of my favourite subjects. We should put together a national register of anti-social neighbours to ensure that they are not able to move from one local authority to another. I commend the report of the Social Justice Committee and look forward to stage 2 of the bill.

To ask the First Minister what plans the Scottish Executive has to make communities safer. (S1F-855)

Will the First Minister join me in congratulating community organisations, councillors and, of course, the local member of Parliament—Michael Martin MP—on their support  for the process of developing closed-circuit television proposals, which will have an effect on fighting crime in parts of my constituency such as Springburn, Barmulloch, Royston and Blackhill? Does the First Minister agree that a top-to-bottom review of policing could be considered, to deal with issues such as poor police response times and the allocation of community police officers?

The strategy document and the action plan clearly make the case that the Parliament cares about victims. Phil Gallie has been somewhat unfair. I  subscribe to what my colleagues have said about his description of the Executive as being lethargic in its approach. If he examined the strategy document, he would see that it sets out over 14 bullet points the initiatives that it has taken to deliver for victims. However, a great deal of work requires to be done to ensure that the full package is brought together. It is clearly unfair to accuse the Scottish Executive of lethargy when one examines those points—quite apart from the package itself. In his closing speech, Phil Gallie should be more specific about the areas in which he believes there has been a lethargic approach. We must consider training court staff to be able to deal with victims. In my experience of dealing with constituents who have been through the system, it is clear that they believe that there is nothing in place to ensure that officials are trained to deal with a difficult period for victims. In his closing speech, perhaps the minister could deal with the proposal of setting up a certificated training programme to ensure that those who work in the criminal justice system are qualified to deal with those issues. There has recently been a great debate on whether victims should have the opportunity to provide evidence. I refer members to the case of my constituent, Elizabeth McGrath. Sadly, her partner, Michael McManus, was murdered on his way to Baird Street police office, where he worked as a caretaker. Michael was portrayed in the media as a workplace bully, which greatly concerned Elizabeth, as he was a hardworking individual. Many words have been spoken by police officers and by the people who worked with Michael about how hardworking he was. If Elizabeth had been given an opportunity to give evidence that had not been raised by the prosecution during the court trial, she would have been able to ensure that Michael was portrayed as that hardworking individual going about his daily business. That example makes the case for giving victims the opportunity to give evidence during court proceedings. We must consider in further detail how to make progress on that proposal.

If Phil Gallie read the document, he would see that it makes clear the Scottish Executive's wish to take action on those issues. We cannot be accused of being lethargic for not going straight into the process without ensuring that the system that we introduce will be effective for victims—although we could be accused of being methodical. The system never worked for victims in the past. Roseanna Cunningham made the relevant point that that has been the case for centuries. Victims are not provided with sufficient information during court trials. I am pushed for time, but I will mention the information that is provided to victims.

It is of particular concern to victims that they do not have access to court transcripts unless, as happened in a case about which I have been told, they pay £792 per day of evidence. The minister should ensure that victims have access to court transcripts, perhaps through the website that is being set up.

I welcome the debate on stalking and harassment. I share many of Roseanna Cunningham's views, particularly on the legal remedies that are in place but are not being enforced by many of the agencies, and on the culture that unfortunately exists in the legal system. We have to move forward on that.  Kay Ullrich has raised the tragic case of my former constituent, Marilyn McKenna, and described the circumstances. I welcome what she said. I too will speak about Marilyn's case. I have a statement in front of me that gives in graphic, tragic detail the incidents that Marilyn and her three young children had to endure because of Stuart Drury's obsessive behaviour. One of the concerns raised by Marilyn's family is the lack of support provided by agencies to victims of stalking. While the agencies show some care, they are not providing a joined-up approach to supporting victims of stalking. I would not rule out the possibility of legislation to ensure that agencies do provide a joined-up approach. Marilyn was dealing with bureaucracy over being rehoused outwith the area in which Stuart Drury was operating and she had great difficulty being rehoused as a result of problems in police reports going to the housing department and because it was referred to as a domestic incident. We have to get away from that terminology and definition. Marilyn's case was being treated as a "domestic" when it was her former partner who was harassing her. We must put together a supporting framework for victims. I would not rule out setting up a harassment and stalking unit where case workers can support victims during the very difficult period that they have to endure. One of the problems that Marilyn's family told me of was that she had very few people to turn to. We must consider a unit being set up to ensure that someone like Marilyn, and their family, could speak to someone who could help at such a difficult time. We have raised the issue of a stalking law. I agree with Pauline McNeill on the need for further research on that. In the memory of victims such as Marilyn, we should not allow the issue to be lost. Very sadly, as a result of the tragedy, there are three young children who no longer have the very caring mother Marilyn was, and a family who no longer have a caring sister and daughter. We must ensure that such an incident is not repeated. It would be a great credit to the Parliament if we could put a framework in place to ensure that such tragic events are not repeated.

Will  the minister share my surprise at the Tories' tactics in supporting local authorities, when Conservative Administrations could only promise the return of the stone of destiny; propose council tax rises of 20 per cent in Glasgow; destroy local communities—

I welcome the minister's detachment from the Michael Forsyth era, during which Scottish Westminster MPs had persistently to transport their begging bowls to Westminster. We have moved on from then. What measures are being taken to tackle the problem in Glasgow, where an ever-decreasing council tax base is expected to support an economic infrastructure such as that which supports so many other local authorities?

I must declare an interest in this issue, in that I was attending primary school when Baroness Thatcher decided to remove free school milk. I welcome the staff and pupils from my former school, St Catherine's Primary School, who are here with us in the public gallery. Will the minister join me in commending the Prime Minister for his attack yesterday on the milk snatcher, Baroness Thatcher, and use this 10 th anniversary of her departure from Downing Street to declare the Executive's opposition to the Thatcherite policies that destroyed so many communities in Scotland?

I am delighted that the SNP has chosen this subject for debate today, because it gives us the opportunity to extract SNP policy. Fiona Hyslop spent nine and a half minutes criticising the Scottish Executive's policy, and one and a half minutes introducing the SNP's policy. Perhaps in her colleague's closing remarks we will hear more about what the SNP proposes for the future of tenants in Glasgow in respect of the GHA model. I will deal with the scaremongering that is going round Glasgow at the moment, particularly about  privatisation, which Dorothy-Grace Elder mentioned earlier. My interpretation of privatisation is that it is what happened to British Telecom, Scottish Gas, Scottish Power and BP in the 1980s and 1990s, when the Tories introduced fat cats to the boardroom.

I take exception to that on behalf of housing associations. I have been a member of management committees of housing associations and I take offence at Dorothy-Grace Elder comparing housing associations to privatised bodies with fat cats sitting in their boardrooms.

I am sorry, Dorothy. Give me a chance to speak. I take offence in the name of people such as John Butterly, who has given 25 years to Reidvale Housing Association, and the unpaid local heroes throughout Scotland who have given their time and made things happen in their local communities. I say to Brian Adam that that work happened not just because of subsidies, but because of the commitment of those people to their local communities.

I will bring Fiona Hyslop in later. She must give me some time. At every tenants association meeting that we attend, we see a wish list. The Armadale Tenants and Residents Association wants new central heating systems. The residents of Red Road, Sighthill, Charles Street and Balgrayhill multistorey flats all want double-glazed windows, fabric improvements and environmental improvements. People in the Ruchazie, Haghill and Carntyne areas all want environmental and fabric improvements. I am talking about groups in my constituency, but such requests are repeated throughout Glasgow. People want us to deliver those improvements with a package of investment throughout communities.

I want to move forward on behalf of my constituents. I want to talk about not what  has happened in the past two or three years, but what will happen in the next few years. I am proud of Labour's record, but I have a vision for the future of Glasgow housing association's tenants. We must move forward.

I would like to bring Fiona in, but I must carry on, because I am struggling for time. We should have an informed debate. Tenants need support to formulate their plans. We do not want any more isolated housing investment programmes. We want to improve local schools, shopping facilities, nurseries and local amenities. I will finish with the words that I heard from Rankine Kennedy, who attended a meeting with me and my colleague Councillor Allan Stewart. He said simply that he wanted his children, his grandchildren, their children, his neighbours and all tenants in Glasgow to live with a decent roof over their heads and to feel safe. He wondered whether that was too much to ask in the 21 st century.

Given the appalling dental decay figures in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area, I welcome today's debate. In my constituency, 84 per cent of five-year-old children suffer from dental decay. That is the only time that I will use statistics or refer to the glossy documents, some of whose covers have nice photographs. I was unable to obtain the popular document with a picture of a toothbrush on the cover, because the information centre had run out of copies. Delivering front-line services is an important part of the Executive's strategy. I will focus on a couple of areas in which we can make a difference. First, we can identify the young people who are suffering from dental diseases—the five-year-olds to whom the statistics refer—and the best ways of tackling the problems. I propose that we set up and pilot a database that would identify those youngsters. It is not good enough to say that north Glasgow is a deprived area; many parts of north Glasgow have been involved in regeneration strategies over the years and are not deprived. However, in other parts, such as Ruchazie and Blackhill in my constituency, there is a great deal of deprivation, and young people have particular difficulties in accessing dental services. I ask the minister to respond to my proposal that we develop and pilot a database that would allow us to identify and track those youngsters throughout their lives, so that we can focus the limited resources—which we and any Government will always have—on assisting them in tackling dental decay. A database would also give us the opportunity to work with parents and local schools on attacking dental decay. However, I repeat that to do that we must identify where those young people are and find ways of assisting them. We can use that information to our advantage in allocating resources throughout the Greater Glasgow Health Board area. Local health boards have shown a lack of innovation, for example in health centres, which provide an excellent opportunity to access parents when they meet their general practitioners. I am appalled at how that opportunity has always been  missed. I suggest that the minister takes the opportunity to propose a pilot in the Greater Glasgow Health Board area, involving a multi-booking system under which parents could book a dental appointment at the local health centre at the same time as booking a visit to their general practitioner. Over the years, trends have shown that parents spend more time in health centres than they do in dental practices. We must enable parents to book dental appointments through that process. That opportunity has been missed over the years. In Glasgow, some health centre notice boards are two years out of date. We must move forward on that. We must put greater emphasis on providing outreach staff, who can spend time in local schools and health centres. It is not good enough to provide documents that will not make sense to local parents; we must get staff in place, working with local organisations, health centres, schools and medical practices. It is not good enough that 84 per cent of the children born in my constituency are more prone to experiencing dental decay than children in other parts of Scotland. It is up to the Parliament to present an action plan to deal with that. I welcome the action plan that has been introduced by the Scottish Executive today, but I ask the minister to take my points into consideration. I hope we will fine-tune the process.

I welcome the Minister for Justice's statement in respect of additional police numbers. However, I am concerned about the method of allocating police officers in areas such as my constituency, where there has been a significant increase in violent crime. Will he consider ring-fencing an allocation for police numbers in areas where crime is at its highest, such as Blackhill in my constituency? What funding will be allocated to victims of crime, particularly those who are going through the court system? I am concerned by the poor liaison with victims of crime during trials. I am also concerned by the level of support that is available and the arrangements that are in place for them.

Will Fiona Hyslop give way?

Will the member give way?

This Parliament is clearly about providing alternatives—

Will the SNP provide to every member of this Parliament its plans for an alternative to the proposed Glasgow housing association?

As a Labour MSP for Glasgow, which, health statistics show, is suffering, I welcome the debate as an opportunity to speak on the important issue of the modernisation of the national health service. It is quite right for members of Opposition parties to question the Government, which, with ministers, should be accountable. Opposition members want answers to many of the questions that have been raised today, but it is about time that we heard some answers from those members about what they would do if they were in Iain Gray's position. What would they do to advance the NHS agenda? We need a clear answer to that. Perhaps the world debating champion, Duncan Hamilton, wishes to intervene with an answer to that question—I would be happy to give way to him if he wished to provide that answer.

Duncan Hamilton should discuss that with his colleague, Andrew Wilson, whose four-minute speech was based on the gossip columns of Scotland. These are serious issues, and this is serious politics. People in Scotland want us to propose genuine ideas for a constructive way forward.

I will not take any more interventions, but I thank Shona Robison for her attempt. I want to make a constructive suggestion that came about as a result of consulting local GP practices and consultants. David Mundell made a constructive point about the information technology systems that are in place in the national health service. When I, with colleagues, met Greater Glasgow Health Board recently, we were concerned to learn that it takes a pretty fragmented approach to the IT systems that are available throughout the health board area. For example, many of the trusts have implemented individual IT systems, and there is no cohesive approach towards that work. It is important for the minister to take on board that issue, to ensure that a cohesive approach is taken towards the procuring and building of an IT system to serve the health board area. We should also consider another issue that David Mundell touched on: videoconferencing, which would give GPs the opportunity of conveying information to consultants without having to go through an appointments system that does not serve the public at the moment. The existing management structure of the health boards and trusts is complicated. In Glasgow, there is Greater Glasgow Health Board, the local hospital trusts, the primary care trust and many other health care organisations. We must consider whether those organisations are actually serving local communities. I call on the minister to consider the possibility of a study being carried out—

I would welcome consideration of an independent study on whether those management structures—the local health boards, the trusts and other organisations—are serving local communities properly, with what must be described as the substantial additional resources that have been made available to them. I welcome the debate. If we are genuinely to move forward, we will have to work together for the betterment of the national health service in Scotland.

Has there been an improvement in police response times since September 1999, when I raised a question following an incident when it took one and half hours to respond to the mugging of an elderly person in Glasgow?

We must welcome the investment in policing, but does the minister think that there is a need for a top-to-bottom review of policing in Scotland that considers poor police response times, the lack of community policing strategies and some of the other issues that members face in their constituencies?

Like my colleagues from Glasgow, I would like to say how proud I am as a Glasgow member of the Scottish Parliament to take part in this debate. In this debate, we should bring forward constructive action points—which is what I want to do in this speech—and not talk down Glasgow with negative soundbites. There are key points to Glasgow's regeneration. Many positive points about Glasgow have appeared in the contributions of many agencies and authorities. In particular, Glasgow City Council has been the catalyst of much regeneration and improvement, which has arrested the downward trend of some time ago. We must acknowledge that a mammoth task faces us. We must consider the fact that Glasgow has the infamous statistic of having five constituencies with the highest unemployment rates in Scotland. We must also take into account the positive stories about Glasgow, including the 70 per cent growth in the tourism industry since 1991, the 15,000 new jobs since 1995 and the fact that we provide work for 18 per cent of Scotland's population. We should reflect on that and ask why, then, our communities have been by-passed with regard to the distribution of jobs in Scotland. I mentioned action points. My action point for tackling unemployment must be to follow the St Rollox initiative in my constituency. We are encouraging a major employer, Tesco, which is bringing 600 full-time jobs to the area. It is committed and contracted to bring those jobs to  the local community and to give local people an opportunity to take them up. We should encourage that—to ensure that Glasgow jobs go to Glasgow residents. We should also consider our approach to tackling unemployment. We should streamline it to ensure that unemployed people do not feel excluded in any way. If we are to regenerate Glasgow's housing successfully, we have to consider genuinely how we might improve the city. As a former Glasgow councillor, and now as a Glasgow MSP, I am forever touched by the commitment of the many communities in my constituency that are committed to their local areas, such as Sighthill, Ruchazie, Springburn and Royston. People in those areas look to us for options for improving housing in their areas. That is why I welcome that, for the first time in 20 years, the council—in partnership with the Scottish Parliament—has introduced a proposal for improving housing in Glasgow.

Fiona Hyslop is talking about a small solution—capital borrowing. We are talking about major investment and new ways of dealing with the large problems in Glasgow. It is not for us to decide what is good for people. We will put the options to Glasgow tenants and let them decide whether that is the best way forward. I am glad that the minister made her announcement today. We should ensure that this information is brought to tenants as a matter of urgency and that they are not left in limbo with the various pieces of information that have been provided to them. I will allow tenants to decide.

I am sorry, but I have been asked to wind up. If we wish to regenerate communities, we must consider crime as a major issue. Phil Gallie touched on the issue of Strathclyde police. We must consider how we manage police authorities and the way in which police authorities manage local communities. I would call for a full review of Strathclyde police so that we can consider ways in which to regenerate areas such as Glasgow, bringing employment into Glasgow and improving the city's housing.  I commend the motion to the chamber.

I support the motion. Nicola Sturgeon said that the Executive should not expect singular praise for the work of the Parliament on this issue. Before the business manager sends me one of the dreaded pager messages, I would like to say that I agree with Nicola on that point. As Hugh Henry suggested, the whole Parliament should take credit for prioritising an issue that faces parents, pupils and organisations that have been affected  by decades of being—as Jamie Stone pointed out—the poor relations. I would like to focus on the special educational needs of pupils who have physical disabilities and health needs. Like my colleague Robert Brown, I would like to mention Ashcraig school in my constituency, and to put on record my admiration for the dedication of the pupils, staff and parents who make Ashcraig such a successful school. In the Executive's document, great emphasis is placed on ensuring that children are educated in mainstream education. I think that all of us would agree with that emphasis. One third of the pupils at Ashcraig school come from mainstream primary education. Many of those children do not continue into mainstream secondary education because of issues such as wheelchair access, the absence of peer groups and intensive medical needs. Many of the children at Ashcraig school spend an hour of their school day on intensive medical needs. We must take that into consideration. I should like the minister to comment on that point. We should always take parental choice into consideration. Parents must always have quality choices. The Riddell advisory committee has set out the need for additional specialist provision to meet the needs of children who attend schools such as Ashcraig. For us to move in that direction, there will have to be a cultural shift within local authorities and education authorities. Schools with specialist requirements are the poor relations. I have taken up a case on behalf of Ashcraig secondary school: it applied for public-private partnership funding and was advised that it was not part of the bid for Glasgow's programme. We should address the serious matter of why Ashcraig secondary school has been omitted from the original plan that every secondary school in Glasgow should be included in the public-private partnership programme. We want the action plan to be implemented. That is clear and that is why I support the Executive's motion; it is clear that it wants to act. It is our job as a Parliament to ensure that the action plan is monitored and that we continue to monitor it.

Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable that additional funding is not being made available for health, when additional resources have been made available for matters such as housing and social work services that are making additional demands of local authorities?

To ask the First Minister what impact the new deal has had in reducing youth unemployment in Glasgow and elsewhere in Scotland. (S1F-246)

Does the First Minister agree that although the 36 per cent drop in unemployment in my constituency is to be welcomed, at 10.2 per cent it is still well above the Scottish average? Can the First Minister assure me that the success of the new deal will be matched by wider initiatives that will include other age groups and deal with the harsh realities that the long-term unemployed have had to experience as a result of 20 years of John Major and Margaret Thatcher?

Does the First Minister agree that we would take Fergus Ewing and his colleagues more seriously if they proposed alternative council budgets rather than carped from the sidelines?

I welcome the opportunity to exchange horror stories about Stracathro and Greater Glasgow Health Board. Primarily, I want to touch on the issue of Stobhill hospital and the similarities between the situation there and at Stracathro. The Stobhill petition raises serious concerns about consultation with local staff. Ministerial guidance in the past—I understand that it is still the same—has been that changes in health care should be clinically led. None of us wants to move away from that and, indeed, Margaret Smith touched on that in her speech this morning. It appals me, therefore, that the medical staff at Stobhill hospital were not consulted on the proposal for the first medium secure unit in Scotland. As at Stracathro, the staff were advised of the proposals through the media. That is appalling in the 21 st century. Staff want to be involved in health care and want their specialist knowledge to be taken on board. I want also to mention the bad practices employed by Greater Glasgow Health Board, in particular in relation to consultation with the local community. Iain Gray quite rightly pointed out that we must enter into meaningful consultation. Why then were people advised in a question-and- answer session that the only consultation that would take place between Greater Glasgow Health Board and the local community on the secure unit would be through the statutory planning process? How meaningful is that? Is it meaningful consultation when members of the local community have to drag the health board kicking and screaming to public meetings to relay the fact that they want to be involved? Is it meaningful consultation when the local health trust chief executive feels that it is inappropriate for her to attend public meetings? Of course not. Dr Simpson's report on the situation at Stobhill hospital has shown the need for condemnation of the practices used on that occasion. The lack of statutory guidelines has been noted, but does not remove the moral obligation on health boards to engage with the local public when public concerns in local areas are identified. Injustices have clearly taken place against the local community at Stobhill. It is not good enough to say that we will learn from the experience and move on; we must correct those injustices, particularly those experienced by the local community at Stobhill. Health boards must clean up the mess that they have left. Andrew Welsh  described the situation at Stracathro as a dog's breakfast. I would use similar words to describe the situation at Stobhill. The atmosphere among the local public makes the acute services review difficult. Richard Simpson touched on that. How can the acute services review genuinely move forward, if consultation on the first secure unit in Scotland was so poor? Finally, I want to touch on the issue of health councils, which was mentioned by the convener of the Health and Community Care Committee. It is appalling that health boards should interview applicants for health councils, which is what happened in Greater Glasgow Health Board. We must ensure that health councils are wholly independent. I commend the motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to provide detailed and comprehensive assistance to families who are victims of crime. (S1O-1131)

I thank the Lord Advocate for his positive reply. Taking into consideration the circumstances of Margaret and Jim Watson, who so tragically lost their son Alan and daughter Diane, does he agree that the present framework for victims of crime is inadequate, and will he consult such families to ensure a framework that will deliver for victims?

I thank the minister for his proposals. Will he confirm that he will seek applications from the unpaid local heroes in organisations such as tenants associations, housing associations and health councils? I also ask him not to rule out the possibility of electing applicants.

I welcome the statement by the Minister for Communities. It is important to acknowledge that if we do not deliver on housing we will have great difficulty delivering our programme in areas such as health, education and social inclusion. This Parliament should put on record the value and commitment of the tenants movement until now and in the future. The unpaid local heroes in the housing association and tenants association movements should be recognised. Many tenants' representatives spend at least 30 or 40 hours a week, unpaid, helping to manage local housing stock. A great deal is expected of the tenants movement. For example, in Glasgow, there are letting initiatives and estate action groups, in which local people have an input into managing local stock. I sometimes wonder whether the members of quangos who are paid large sums of money for attending eight to 10 meetings a year have the same commitment as many tenants' representatives have towards their local communities. We have to reward the tenants movement for its commitment. It is screaming out for investment proposals. That is why I support the proposal for the new housing partnership in Glasgow. I stress the word "proposal" because the local people in Glasgow will have the final say.

I have been involved in many of the neighbourhood forum meetings in my constituency, and will be happy to provide Tommy Sheridan with a record of those meetings. Representation on Glasgow City Council housing department's citywide forum has been identified as an important issue. It is quite clear that the new housing partnership proposal for Glasgow will not be a success unless local people are involved, and I hope that the minister—

Tommy Sheridan takes that point out of context. It is important to emphasise the fact that local people have been involved in the proposal until now and will continue to be involved.

Fiona Hyslop is being somewhat premature. She must accept that independent advisers have still to be appointed in Glasgow. That process will take more than a year's consultation. After that, local people will have the opportunity to scrutinise the proposal through the independent advisers. Fiona Hyslop must consider whether she opposes the new housing partnership in Glasgow. In his closing remarks, perhaps Kenny Gibson can pick up on that point.

I am sure that Mr Adam's views on the situation in Aberdeen are noted. Perhaps Frank McAveety will mention that point in closing. Tenants have been involved in the Glasgow proposal and will continue to be involved in a more prominent role.

I shall close by saying that Cathy Jamieson made an excellent point yesterday. She said that it is not good enough to set aside housing for young people without providing proper support mechanisms. That is lacking in the present proposals. Young people must have the support they need when they take on tenancies,  and the Hamish Allan model provides an excellent example of how that can be achieved. I support the minister's proposals.

Will the member give way?

I wonder whether the member will confirm that eye test charges were introduced during the years of Tory rule. Can he give me a yes or no answer—did his party introduce those charges?

I welcome the fact that the bill will be passed today. I am sure that I speak for all members of the Audit Committee when I say that I welcome the minister's contribution to the process. The Audit Committee has had a constructive debate on the bill; that is to be welcomed. I welcome the fact that the minister has accommodated a number of points that were raised during the committee's proceedings, particularly the point on value-for-money studies. The 25 per cent threshold will certainly be a start to the process. The Parliament has been the subject of much criticism recently. The bill establishes financial accountability to ensure that we have a fully transparent process that will be a credit to the new Parliament. I ask that the public and the press give us some credit for what has been done so far. I see that three members of the press are sticking out the debate this evening. [Interruption.] I stand corrected—four members of the press are in the gallery. Quite rightly, the Public Finance and Accountability (Scotland) Bill has leaned towards the FIAG recommendations. Those recommendations have been largely welcomed and have allowed us to ensure maximum transparency and financial accountability. Given that we have more than £16 billion at our  disposal, we must target funding towards priorities and avoid waste. We are entering a refreshing era, where the spending of public funds is under fierce scrutiny. I believe that the model that we are debating meets those aims. I am pleased, in particular, with the bill's emphasis on plain English. As an ex-member of Glasgow City Council, I know that officials used to compete with one another to create new jargon. The only way in which we can excite interest in the budgeting debate is if we use plain English to make our accounts more accessible—that will ensure proper accountability. The proposal to transfer the Accounts Commission's responsibilities for the health service audit to the Auditor General is crucial. I have been frustrated by not being able to raise in the Parliament issues concerning local health boards. The proposal recognises the prominent role that the Parliament must play in the health service audit. The Executive's plans to consolidate public accounts give us real powers to obtain information from bodies and to allow information to be audited. That is another example of effective financial management. As Keith Raffan said, we will have a financial framework that will receive worldwide recognition. That framework will ensure the highest possible standards of financial accountability.

I understand that the minister and her team have visited several homelessness organisations to discuss matters with homeless people and their representatives. Will she give specific details about the issues that have been raised by those organisations and individuals and how she intends to deal with them?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will call for an independent consultant to carry out a design survey regarding the proposal to reduce the size of the ambulatory care and diagnostic unit at Stobhill hospital. (S1O-521)

Does the minister share my concern that Mr Andy Black, the so-called independent adviser who carried out a design briefing in December, was not in fact independent and that he had tendered for the work to carry out the ACAD proposal at Stobhill hospital?

rose—

Kenny has been critical of the financial plan that Jack McConnell put forward, but can he tell me where the SNP will make a difference? What will it suggest as an alternative to Jack McConnell's plan? He can phone a friend, or do whatever he likes to get an answer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I made it clear that there were a number of questions that I wanted the minister to address. Is it possible to say that, in future, the questions should be answered first, before any historical piece on the framework of mental health? It is important. If a member puts a number of questions, they should be given priority in the winding-up speech.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it a possibility that we could have more time to address some of the points that have been made?

I would like to acknowledge the fact that I am able to raise this issue in the Scottish Parliament. The Parliament is beginning to show how effective it can be for local communities; the fact that we have been able raise this issue proves that. I can assure members that the future of Stobhill hospital is a local issue—that has been made clear by the large amount of correspondence and telephone inquiries I have received. It is important that the Parliament is aware of the reasons for my objection to proposals to build a secure unit on a greenfield site of approximately 10 acres adjacent to the hospital. The site that is earmarked for the secure unit is where we wanted an ambulatory care and diagnostic unit. The ACAD unit site is now a 2 acre hospital car park. That is one of the reasons for my concern. We want the ACAD unit to develop into a state-of-the-art facility that will be a benchmark for other facilities in the UK. It would receive more than a third of a million visits every year. The facility needs an opportunity to develop. The concern in my constituency is that the facility will not have the opportunity to develop if it is overshadowed by the proposal to build a secure unit. I have been accused of being a NIMBY member of the Scottish Parliament, but I am not alone in my view. The medical staff association and the widely respected Dr Frank Dunn recognise the importance of the secure unit, but say that they are unable to support the present proposal because it would seriously jeopardise the functioning, development and ultimate success of the ACAD unit. That is the view of the professionals—some with as many as 20 years' experience—at the hospital. It is important that we listen to their views and to the views of patients. I  am concerned that those views have not been taken seriously. One would expect the first secure unit in Scotland to be the subject of extensive consultation, but there has been no formal consultation on the proposal. The only consultation with the local community will be through the statutory obligation that results from the planning process. That reeks of arrogance and shows contempt for the community and the medical staff. At a recent meeting, the chief executive said that if the community had been consulted, it would have opposed the secure unit. What right do highly paid officials have to tell me that they know what the community will say? Do they have a monopoly on knowledge of how a community will react to proposals? Of course the community will have a point of view, but is not it important to listen to the community and to learn from that point of view, rather than take a decision and then speak to the community? Some of the public meetings have been constructive. It is disappointing that decisions were made beforehand. We should discuss local communities' concerns with those communities. I am sure that the minister will agree that consultation is crucial to the health service and that we should be taking part in consultation. Government policy is clear—hospital policy should be clinically driven. That view is shared by the former health minister, Sam Galbraith. In March 1998, he told the Kirkintilloch, Bishopbriggs & Springburn Herald that changes at Stobhill hospital should be clinically driven and made after consultation with doctors. I will repeat the question that I have asked on a number of occasions: why were medical staff not consulted on the revised proposals for building a secure unit at Stobhill hospital when there was such clear guidance from the then health minister that medical staff should be consulted on clinical matters? There is a great myth that local people are NIMBYs. The same accusation has been levelled at me. Some local people might be concerned about any proposal, such as for a new supermarket, that affects the community, but they are entitled to hold and express their opinions. Our great concern about this proposal is that we have not had an opportunity to air our views. I have had a helpful meeting with the Minister for Health and Community Care, but the Parliament has to take action to make a difference to local people's lives. There are no representatives from the local community on the local NHS trust, which  is an issue that needs to be dealt with. I want to be constructive in this debate and raise some points to which I want the minister to respond today. This Parliament should not be a talking shop—we need to take prominent action. First, the proposal should be withdrawn from the planning process to allow for real and meaningful consultation with the local community and the medical staff. I reiterate that the medical staff and the patients are the people who matter. If we want to make progress in hospital care, we need to include those people in discussions about the future of their hospital. There should be a comprehensive study into the effectiveness of a 2 acre ACAD unit. This is the future of hospital care. Will the unit be given a chance to develop if it is built on a 2 acre car park site where the secure unit might inhibit and overshadow it? There should also be a comprehensive study of other possible sites for the secure unit. I understand from documents that I have received from the health board that 14 sites were appraised. I can exclusively reveal that some of those sites were being sold when they were being appraised. I want proper appraisals of those sites to be carried out. Organisations such as City of Glasgow Council and East Dunbartonshire Council, which were involved in the appraisal process, were not clear that they were appraising sites for a secure unit, but thought that they were being asked for an opinion on the sites. They did not realise that their opinion counted towards a final decision. There is no clear medical evidence that a secure unit has to be placed next to a general hospital. That point has to be clinically proven before we place such a facility next to Stobhill hospital. In question time a couple of weeks ago, I asked the minister to meet the medical staff association in the hospital. Unfortunately, she was not able to do that, but her visit to the hospital on Monday was much appreciated. However, I ask her again to meet the people who matter, such as representatives from the medical staff association, to discuss their concerns about the proposed secure unit. They are concerned that, as Dr Frank Dunn said, the secure unit will inhibit the ACAD unit from developing into a unit that will be able to serve the Glasgow North area. The minister should also ensure that Glasgow North residents are included on the board of North Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust. That serious flaw in the new merger of the hospital trusts needs to be addressed. Local trust officials have advised me that a place on the trust board has been available for some time now and they have asked me to give them some names.  If trusts are serious about having local representation, they should reach out to local communities. They should not have to use me to reach out to local communities. They will make direct links with the community if they are serious about community consultation and representation. I will finish now as I understand that a number of members want to speak. I live next to Stobhill hospital. I was born there, my wife was born there and almost all my family was born there. We feel a great link to Stobhill hospital. I am not taking this view in a NIMBY way. The leader of East Dunbartonshire Council is also opposed to the proposal. Some of his constituents stay 10 to 15 miles away from the facility. They are concerned about the future of the hospital and that the secure unit will inhibit any possible development of it. Our case is about the future of the hospital and how it will be affected by the proposal to build a secure unit.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the Minister for Health during her visit to Stobhill hospital will meet the Medical Staff Association to discuss its concerns in connection with revised site proposals to build an ambulatory care and diagnostic unit on the grounds of Stobhill hospital. (S1O-295)

I am obviously disappointed that the minister is unable to deal with the matter. I think that the days of rehearsed, "I've baked you a cake" visits to hospitals are past.

Does the minister share my concerns that the Medical Staff Association was not consulted about the proposals to reduce the ACAD unit from 10 acres on a greenfield site to a two-acre site on the hospital's car park?

I understand that a number of SNP members, particularly Kenny Gibson, have been awaiting my contribution to the Scottish Parliament. Some members will be forgiven for being somewhat overawed by the so-called calibre in the SNP ranks. For example, Duncan Hamilton is the fearless world debating champion from Bearsden. I have stayed in Springburn all my life and I have never known a fearless fighting champion from Bearsden, so we have already learned something in this Parliament.  The proposed legislation sets down foundations for the future. Donald Dewar is right in saying that it has been a long road and one from which we cannot be diverted. My constituents will welcome transport legislation. Gone are the days of bus companies being able to cherry-pick profitable routes. People want us to make a difference in transport matters. I look forward to that and to local authorities having a dominant role in ensuring that the legislation is delivered.  We have made clear that we will not accept underperformance in schools. I have been most impressed by the calibre of teaching in schools in my constituency and I look forward to working with many of the teaching staff, but we must make it clear that we will not accept underperformance.  Trish Godman touched on the issue of drugs education. I subscribe to her points of view. I agree that young people should be the focus of examining the best ways of improving drugs  education. In particular, I am concerned that we have not gone to young people to ask them about the best ways of getting involved in drugs education and the best ways of lecturing to them on how we can deal with drugs.  Local government will welcome the proposals to scrutinise it, but we should remember the hard work that councillors do and the commitment they show in many councils, for example Glasgow City Council, which is at the cutting edge of council services provision and is required to take difficult and complex decisions.  My constituency has some of the highest unemployment in Scotland. I look forward to the Scottish Parliament dealing with that matter.