4. To ask the Scottish Government what the estimated cost is of upgrading the east coast railway line between Aberdeen and the central belt at Montrose. (S4O-02870)

There are two ways to address the costs that the minister has just mentioned, as well as the challenge of reducing journey times between Aberdeen, and Glasgow and Edinburgh, which is indicated as something that the next Scottish railway franchise would support. One is to improve the infrastructure and the other is simply to have trains stop at fewer stations. Which route does he intend to go down? Is the Scottish Government committed to making progress with the infrastructure challenges that are responsible for so many of the long journey times on those routes?

I am sure that Mr Yousaf will confirm that British embassies have supported ministers from successive Scottish Administrations in an absolutely professional and effective manner in promoting Scotland’s interests—not one day a year, but every day and on every occasion on which Scottish ministers have sought that support.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to local authorities to address the risk of flooding. (S4O-02819)

The minister will be aware of the flooding in Aberdeen and Stonehaven in recent years and the plans that the local authorities have put in place to reduce the risks of flooding in future. Given the high capital cost of flood prevention in Stonehaven in particular, does the minister agree that, despite the fact that the changes that he is introducing in the way that the Scottish Government funds such schemes are broadly supported, Aberdeenshire Council should not be disadvantaged as a result? Will he ensure that, in spite of those changes, the Stonehaven scheme receives the financial support that it needs and deserves from next year onwards?

I congratulate Tavish Scott on bringing this important issue for debate. He has rightly highlighted the impact on patients and their families from Shetland and Orkney who must now travel to the central belt for care and treatment that used to be but is currently not always available in Aberdeen. I have family connections with Shetland, as Mr Scott knows, and I am keenly aware of the close ties between the islands and Aberdeen, in healthcare and much besides. One such tie is CLAN—Cancer Link Aberdeen and North—which provides outstanding support for cancer patients and their families who travel to Aberdeen for treatment from across the north and north-east of Scotland, as well as the northern isles. I pay tribute to that work, as Mr Scott did. I also mention CALICO—Cancer and Leukaemia in Children Orientated—which works to support children with cancer and their families in the north-east. Last year, CALICO drew my attention to its concerns about the planned retirement of the radiation oncologist at Aberdeen royal infirmary, who has specialised in radiotherapy for children with cancer—that was one of three oncologist retirements in the offing. If the individual is not replaced by a consultant who is able to deliver the same service, far more children might have to travel to the central belt for treatment in future. Although it was willing and able to provide information, NHS Grampian could not tell me whether or when a new consultant with the same level of specialism will be recruited. It would be a tragedy if such a valuable service were to be lost from Aberdeen, particularly if that were to happen by default. It is one thing to plan the delivery of services in the context of a managed clinical network; it is quite another to lose local services through an inability to recruit staff. Families understand that there will be times when a child is required to travel to Glasgow or elsewhere for a specific treatment, but most curative and palliative radiotherapy has been delivered locally in Aberdeen in the past, and the families very much want that approach to continue. It is not just an issue for children. Over the past few months, as has been said, many other patients have had to travel to the central belt for cancer treatment. That can be extremely hard for seriously ill adults as well as for children and families. Again, that comes down to difficulties with recruitment. It is up to the Scottish Government to help to meet those difficulties. Last month, Alex Neil told Parliament that every post that had been reported to be vacant for more than three months had been filled as a result of joint working between the relevant NHS board and the Scottish Government. Clearly, that is welcome, but three months is a long time for cancer patients who need treatment. When a number of oncologists are reaching planned retirement dates at much the same time—as has happened recently in Aberdeen—more could and should be done to recruit consultants and ensure that properly trained people are available in advance of those dates. That is surely the point of workforce planning. In the meantime, I hope that the minister can undertake today to work with NHS Grampian to ensure that the post of radiation oncologist specialising in radiotherapy for children will be filled. I also hope that ministers will look again at the case for supplementary pay for NHS staff in Grampian, where recruitment at all grades is hampered by a high cost of living that is comparable only with that of greater London. Quite apart from pay, the funding of NHS Grampian still falls more than £30 million short of what it should be under the NHS Scotland resource allocation committee formula that was calculated and endorsed by the Government as long ago as 2007. There is surely scope for a positive initiative to support recruitment and retention in NHS Grampian, as well as specific action on oncology. I hope that ministers will take steps in that direction after the debate.

The minister is seeking to sustain radiotherapy services. Will he confirm that that will include curative radiotherapy for children in Aberdeen?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council regarding a new exhibition and conference centre. (S4O-02786)

Given that Aberdeen hosts offshore Europe—Scotland’s largest conference and the largest energy event in the world outwith Houston—as well as many other major events, will the minister acknowledge that Aberdeen’s exhibition and conference centre is of national and international significance? Will he ensure that Scottish Enterprise approaches the centre’s redevelopment on the same basis as it approached the redevelopment of exhibition centres in Glasgow and Edinburgh in the recent past?

This debate highlights the choices that are to be made on how best to support children and families and, as we have heard, it reflects the wider political debate on Scotland’s future. The SNP has chosen to argue—today and in launching the white paper six weeks ago—that it is unable to deliver all its ambitions on childcare unless people in Scotland first vote for independence. Of course, the present Scottish Government has had responsibility for this policy area since it was first elected nearly seven years ago. As we have heard, it has taken the SNP all of those seven years to begin to deliver on the promises that it made on childcare while in opposition. Today, the Government has offered to do a little bit more. As Malcolm Chisholm said, that is great encouragement to all those who have pressed it to do more since it highlighted the issue when it launched its white paper. The Government’s defence for not going further is that it does not have the money to do more than make incremental improvements to existing childcare provision and that it cannot reach all those in low-income families without having access to all the tax revenue from Scottish taxpayers. It is just as well that the Labour-led Executive in the first session of this devolved Parliament took a different approach, or there would be no existing childcare provision on which to build. I served on the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in 2000 when MSPs passed the Standards in Scotland’s Schools etc Bill and provided a statutory basis for childcare that is in essence the basis of the system that we have today. There was no question then of failing to act because women returning to work would not pay all their taxes directly to Scotland’s devolved Government. The Scottish ministers in that Administration made a choice and found the resources to make it happen. It is open to ministers in this Administration to do the same. SNP ministers have the money to make a start with the Barnett consequentials from money spent in England, but they choose to spend those consequentials on other things instead. There is of course a case to be made for extending free school meals. Again, in office, Labour made choices—for example, to fund free fruit in schools and to support breakfast clubs. I know from constituents in Aberdeen and the north-east what a difference access to a healthy breakfast can make to children from disadvantaged homes. I also know that for many families in my area providing a school lunch without charge will make no significant difference either to the household budget or to the nutritional status of the children. The issue here, though, is not whether free school meals or better childcare are good things in themselves—both clearly are—but what choices Governments make in using the resources that they have to hand.

That is why it is a very good thing that the most vulnerable children have access to free lunches as well as to free breakfasts. It is precisely interventions with children in the poorest families that should be the priority of any Scottish Government, rather than extending benefits to those without the same need for them. Scottish Governments can really make a difference using the powers and resources that they have, not least in the area of driving down child poverty—that is the issue that Joan McAlpine raised. I recently looked again at a study by the Institute of Fiscal Studies that was funded by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation and published only a matter of weeks after the change of Government at Westminster in 2010. They used households below average income data, published after the election by the UK Department for Work and Pensions, and took the difference in the cost of living among the various nations and regions of the UK into account. Their findings provided very strong evidence of the success of a Labour-led Administration at Holyrood working in tune and in partnership with Labour Government policy at Westminster. Relative poverty fell almost everywhere over 10 years, but it fell twice as fast in Scotland as it did in the UK as a whole. By 2009, fewer people in Scotland than in London or in seven of the other 10 nations and regions of the UK were living in relative poverty. Scotland had the second-fastest fall in child poverty, and by 2009 the second-lowest level of child poverty in the UK. Scotland also had the second-fastest fall in pensioner poverty to reach the second-lowest level of pensioner poverty in real terms. Of course, many of those changes have been set back by the austerity policies of the Tory-led UK Government over the past four years. Any Scottish Government would have to work even harder to reduce poverty for children, families or older people in these hard times. However, the issue today is what choices are most likely to produce a new phase of progressive reductions in relative and absolute poverty, and in poverty among children and pensioners. The SNP has chosen to follow the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats at Westminster in what it chooses to put at the top of its agenda—that is its choice. At the same time, the SNP wants voters to believe that its ambition is to transform childcare but that it is somehow held back by Scotland being part of the United Kingdom. The truth is that serious investment in childcare does not have to wait. Ministers could choose to invest the consequentials today not only to make an immediate difference to many working families living in poverty, but to show that they are serious about their future plans. They could do so within Government spending rules and within the envelope of the consequentials that they have over the next two years. The white paper rehearsed the arguments for making a step change in childcare, arguments which were made by Labour ministers in the first session of this Parliament and which we on this side continue to support. The challenge to SNP ministers is this: they have the means to make a step change in childcare and if they have the will, they can make it happen, whatever the result of the referendum in September. They should make it happen now.

Will Michael Russell give way?

There are wide areas of agreement on many aspects of the negotiations and it is right that the members who lodged the motion and amendments have highlighted them. Everyone now recognises that to catch too many fish would be the surest way to deny fishing communities a future, but to follow a prescriptive regulatory regime without paying proper heed to science can be equally damaging. That danger has rightly been highlighted today in relation to the cod recovery plan. It is important that both the Scottish and British Governments approach the negotiations with the objectives of maintaining current effort levels and current good practice to manage fish mortality and that ministers seek to build a consensus for that approach among industry and environmental interests. Although the cabinet secretary told us the position on quotas that he proposed to ministers, it would be useful to know how far the various negotiating positions he outlined are common to both Governments. Today’s debate is about the latest in a long line of annual fisheries negotiations, but it is also important in the context of the on-going reform of the common fisheries policy. The reformed CFP, which is due to start on 1 January, will be the third European fisheries policy to be considered in this Parliament since 1999—as Alex Johnstone reminded us—and the fifth in the past 40 years. We on the Labour benches have long supported objectives such as the regional control of fisheries and achieving long-term sustainability; other parties share those aims too. They are core objectives of the new CFP, as is an effective ban on discards at sea. The difficulty is how such laudable aspirations can be turned into practical change in the real world. When I spoke in the CFP debate last year, I drew an analogy between how the European Commission manages its fisheries policy and the proposals that it actively promoted for a time in relation to the offshore energy industry. In the latter case, it wanted to replace a focus on outcomes and culture with prescriptive regulation, which would have increased the bureaucratic burden of box ticking but reduced the active engagement of all parties with the culture of safe working in a hazardous environment. The problem with fisheries policy reform may parallel that, as the regulatory mechanisms can become more important than the outcomes that they are supposed to deliver. There is a broad consensus in favour of the regional management of fisheries in the European Union, but responsibility for marine biological conservation remains with the Commission in Brussels. The delivery of policy is devolved to regions such as the North Sea and the north-east Atlantic, but the content of that policy continues to be driven from the centre. That reservation of responsibility cannot be changed without amendment of the European treaties, so the question for the Scottish Government is how its impact can be managed. Everyone wants discards at sea to end, but Bertie Armstrong of the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation drew an analogy this morning with having a legal ban on traffic accidents in Europe—everyone would applaud that in principle, but enforcing it in a literal way could have unintended consequences. It would be useful to know the Government’s view on the best way to move towards complying with a ban on discards by 2019. The Scottish catching sector needs to be ready for implementation, but it cannot act in a policy vacuum. That issue will not be settled this month, but it is bound to dominate debate in the months and years ahead, so it is important to go beyond the detail of catches and effort in the next 12 months—although that is important—and for ministers to give a clear view on how the new common fisheries policy can be made to work in the interests of having a sustainable and productive Scottish fisheries sector in the medium to longer term.

Is the First Minister aware that funding for NHS Grampian falls short by £35 million a year of what it should be under the Government’s own funding formula? Does he agree with the chief executive of NHS Grampian, who told the health board this week that trying to run health services without proper funding is like running a race against Usain Bolt and having to give him a four-yard start? Will the First Minister help Grampian to catch up by setting a firm timetable for full implementation of the Government’s own funding formula in the very near future?

Will the member take an intervention?

On the matter of being accurate with regard to historical matters, can the member tell us how much social rented housing in Scotland was promised in the SNP manifesto on which he was elected?

I am grateful to the minister for taking an intervention. Does the minister accept that what the Institute for Fiscal Studies says in part is that the population of Scotland is expected to age more rapidly and that the consequences of that for the Government in Scotland, were Scotland independent, would be even greater than the consequences for the UK as it currently stands?

The cabinet secretary and Patricia Ferguson rightly paid tribute to the people who conducted the 2011 census, but it is important that we do not take their professionalism or the impartiality of a national census for granted. When Mary and Joseph were required to travel to Bethlehem, the census was designed to enable a poll tax to be collected. That poll tax was as unpopular as the later version in the 1980s. When medieval Scottish and English kings surveyed their kingdoms in the Senchus fer n-Alban and the Domesday book, they, too, had taxation in mind. When the first version of the current census was brought forward in December 2009, it included detailed questions about household incomes and, to many, it looked and felt like the poll tax revisited. That was one of the reasons why I and other members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee resisted the draft order in question and spent some weeks seeking to achieve some important changes to the questions that would be asked. The then minister, Jim Mather, eventually accepted that questions about income could not be included without putting at risk the consent of the wider public. The draft order also posed a false choice between Scottish and British, which is a choice that many people do not wish to make. Again, the minister came to agree that a less stark choice made more sense. We debated a number of other issues. For example, we agreed that Africans should be able to identify themselves as African rather than as black, and we dropped the original proposal that the census should count pagans but not Episcopalians. The point of that process was to achieve a consensus on the census. Such a powerful tool of Government must be subject to effective parliamentary scrutiny, and the questions that are asked or not asked are a matter of legitimate political debate. I am glad that we got there and that we can debate the results of the census in the knowledge that we all agreed that the right questions would be asked in the first place. We on the Labour side have raised the issue of Scotland’s demographic balance and the challenge posed by a population that is ageing faster than that of the UK as a whole. Of course, as has been said, an ageing population is not an insoluble problem but it poses a challenge to future Governments of whatever party. The census confirms that Scotland’s current over-65 population is 1 per cent greater than that of England and the IFS has pointed out that over the next half century the Scottish people’s median age will increase by six years as opposed to a UK average of only four years.

A very important point is that those figures are starting from a higher base. My point is that, between now and 2062, the median age will increase by more in Scotland than it will in the whole of the UK. As the cabinet secretary pointed out, the Labour-led devolved Governments in the first and second terms of devolution saw immigration as part of the answer to helping to change the demographic balance and increase the proportion of taxpayers to pensioners in the future population. Clearly, Scottish National Party ministers hold the same view. I guess that the difference between the approach pioneered by Jack McConnell and that now promoted by Alex Salmond lies in our view that increased immigration is best achieved in partnership within the UK while the SNP proposes to increase immigration by leaving the UK. That difference matters because we and our neighbours in England and Wales occupy the same island, share many of the demographic features that have been highlighted today and have had the same systems for managing migration within a single UK market for the past 300 years. When ministers argue that Scotland needs immigration in a way that England does not, they seem to overlook one vital part of the picture. Operating within a single immigration system under the same rules and on the same island, Scotland in recent years has achieved only half the level of net migration achieved by England next door. That is why Jack McConnell persuaded the then UK Labour Government that Scotland needed a stronger system of incentives for overseas students to stay after graduation and why Labour introduced the fresh talent initiative in Scotland in the context of UK immigration policy. When, last week, Alex Salmond published his “Scotland’s Future” white paper, he suggested that a UK Tory Government was holding back more migration into Scotland because it did not suit south-east England’s needs as opposed to the needs of the rest of the UK. Indeed, the cabinet secretary made a similar point this afternoon. However, the truth is that, for all its faults, the UK immigration system is not the reason why fewer people have chosen to migrate to Scotland than to England. It is about the choices that people have made and, above all, the opportunities that have been open to them.

That is not the point. The point is that in Aberdeen, a city that the member knows well, 16 per cent of the population were born outwith the UK, and they are here because of the many opportunities to train and work in the energy industry. Although that figure is comparable with English cities of similar size, it is double the average for Scotland as a whole. Fresh talent can be attracted to Scotland, even in the context of an increasingly restrictive UK immigration policy over the last three years, but what we cannot have is a Scottish immigration policy that is different to and separate from that in the rest of this island—unless we want border posts between Scotland and England to control the movement of people who are legal migrants—[Interruption.]

It is a straightforward point. If there are people who are legal migrants in one part of this island but illegal migrants in another, it is inevitable that controls on movement within the island will be required. Members: Nonsense! I hear members saying “Nonsense” but I would like them to answer that point rather than simply shouting abuse.

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will have the opportunity to respond to the point. I understand the Government’s need to argue that everything will be better in the event of independence. However, after next September, when I believe that most Scots will vote to remain in the UK, I hope that we will return to the question of how we attract fresh talent to Scotland in the context of UK immigration policy and that we look to develop further the sort of policy that brought so much benefit to Scotland’s demographic balance in the 10 years before the latest census was carried out.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Government when it will provide a substantive response to written question S4W-16703 regarding the First Minister’s engagements in Aberdeen in June 2013, which received a holding answer from the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs on 10 September. (S4O-02642)

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary. There is nothing like an oral question to concentrate the mind. I and my MSP colleagues and the MP for Aberdeen South would have been delighted to welcome the Government’s contribution to the Pound for Piper Memorial Trust’s fund at the time, if the First Minister had seen fit to tell us about it then or, indeed, in any of the weeks after the Aberdeen Donside by-election and before the anniversary of the Piper Alpha disaster. Can the cabinet secretary confirm whether there has been a breach of the “Scottish Ministerial Code 2011” in this instance? If so, will an apology be issued by her or by any other responsible minister?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise that, in the national health service in particular, changes that were made some nine years ago to replace London weighting with high-cost supplements allow such a measure to be applied to other parts of the United Kingdom? It is open to the Scottish Government to use that model to recognise the exceptional costs that apply to NHS staff in and around Aberdeen and to look at funding and introducing such a system for staff in NHS Grampian.

I thank the minister for those comments and I am sure that Aberdeen City Council will approach him on those terms. Does the minister accept that the options on the table need not be confined to one particular form of rail link and that a rail link that could be built economically and effectively could make a real difference to the connectivity of Aberdeen airport? Will the minister agree to join the council in considering the feasibility of different options, clearly recognising that if he does so, he will have an opportunity to influence the terms of that study?

15. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of Sir Ian Wood’s recent report on developing Scotland’s young workforce, what it is doing to support collaboration between schools and colleges. (S4O-02606)

I welcome that positive approach, but in the light of the recommendations to join up activity, timetables, and resource allocation across schools and colleges in order to deliver effective vocational pathways, does the minister anticipate that the outcome of those discussions will be that colleges will be provided with additional resource in order to support collaboration with schools, or will they be expected to stop doing something else in order to prioritise that collaboration with schools on vocational education?

The Deputy First Minister has lodged amendments that appear to bring the bill closer to the model that applies under the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 and the model that the Electoral Commission prefers. Nonetheless, the approach that is being taken to postal and proxy votes in the referendum is somewhat novel. I have been involved in many elections and a number of referendums in Scotland over the years, but I have never been involved in a poll in which voters could appoint on polling day a proxy to vote on their behalf. A high turnout can be expected next September, and measures to encourage a high turnout are welcome but, on balance, although the provisions that we have agreed and the amendments will move absent voting nearer to the Electoral Commission’s original position, they will create a novel situation. Does the Deputy First Minister agree with the commission’s response to the amendments, which is that the complexity created by successive Government amendments at stages 2 and 3 will result in “a new category of application” for emergency proxy votes between the 11th and sixth days before the poll, for which new guidance will be required? It might have been easier all round if the Government had followed the existing approach, instead of introducing novel arrangements.

Amendments 56 to 58 bring us to the heart of the bill, which is the rules that govern those who campaign in the referendum. We have agreed on a cross-party basis on most of the rules about designated organisations, permitted participants and spending limits to ensure fairness and transparency and so that voters can hear both sides of the argument and know who is making those arguments. However, spending limits will be effective only if the rules about who can spend the money are effective. The amendments in this group are intended to ensure that organisations and individuals that are permitted to spend money are open and honest with the voters about who they are. People who are not seasoned campaigners are of course welcome to take part, and the amendments would not affect that. However, they would make it more difficult to have front organisations or to come up with clever means of registering twice, because they would explicitly deny access to separate spending limits for any organisation that is not genuinely separate from another permitted participant or designated organisation. So no body would be recognised as a permitted participant if it was largely run or funded by another such body or shared with that body a lead officer with powers of representation, decision making or control, nor would the lead officer of a permitted participant be able to register as a permitted participant in his or her own right. Those restrictions would not limit the ability of individuals or organisations to take part in the referendum, but they would ensure transparency about who they are. At stage 2, the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee divided on similar amendments, which were opposed by the Deputy First Minister and rejected by Scottish National Party members. However, I ask the Government to think again, because I believe that the amendments that Nicola Sturgeon has lodged on spending to a common plan make my amendments all the more necessary. We will debate the Deputy First Minister’s amendments in a moment when we reach group 7. At this point, I simply note that any reduction in accountability of small organisations for spending under a common plan should be balanced by an increase in transparency about who such organisations actually are. The amendments in group 6 would provide for such increased transparency and would do so in a way that I believe is compatible with the Government’s approach. They do not run counter to any of the provisions that are supported by the Electoral Commission; rather, they build on them to address a specific concern. I believe that our amendments would make the bill stronger and give voters greater certainty about just who is seeking to influence their vote. I move amendment 56.

I welcome the support expressed by Annabel Goldie and Tavish Scott, I agree with Mr Scott that Nicola Sturgeon has shown her sympathy for the principle of increased transparency during the passage of the bill, and I welcome the tone of her comments. However, I think that the issue remains a real one that will not be fully addressed by the provisions for the common plan. Yes, such organisations would be covered by those provisions: that is clear. In response to Patrick Harvie’s question about the definitions in my amendments, the term “powers of representation, decision-making or control” reflects language that has been used in other legislation that is under consideration. It essentially means a person who has a lead role in each of two relevant organisations, not someone who is simply a member. The intention is not therefore to prevent campaigners from engaging in the campaign in different ways or while wearing different hats, so to speak. It is to prevent one organisation from effectively acting as a proxy for another. That is a real concern and it should be addressed. On that basis, I will press amendment 56.

The bill is a procedural bill, and the process has been concluded with a high degree of consensus, as is borne out not least by the record progress on amendments this afternoon. The bill will be passed without substantial division in a few minutes’ time. Of course, that is only part of the story. The price that we have paid this afternoon for our willingness to compromise on amendments has been an endless queue of what I might generously describe as excited SNP speakers. Many made good points; some perhaps made less good points. What was perhaps most surprising was that Rob Gibson, speaking towards the end of the debate, decided to criticise us for indulging those speakers. Perhaps that is a sign of things to come. Of course independence matters to the SNP. We know and expect that—that is part of the deal. However, for those of us who believe that Scotland’s best future is as part of the union, the referendum bill matters too. Next year’s vote represents, in our view, an opportunity to reaffirm Scotland’s firmest longstanding friendships and, at the same time, to move our country’s story on to a new phase. Whether members think that that new phase is about the maturity of devolution, which has rightly been praised by members of all parties this afternoon, or independence, it is important that we get the ground rules for the referendum campaign right and agreed by all sides. Experience in other referendums shows that the results of the poll will be accepted by all sides, if all parties are engaged in defining who should be asked what and how.

I promise Kevin Stewart that Labour’s plans for devolution will not be a secret and will indeed be made public at an early date. Members: When?

I am glad to hear that the party of Government recognises the party that created the Scottish Parliament and is looking to us for a lead on the next phase of devolution. That is only as it should be. We have agreement on how we go forward on the referendum, and what we have broadly agreed is to follow the Electoral Commission’s approach in ensuring fairness and transparency in elections and referendums across the UK. At stage 2, I was reminded that in my submission to the Scottish Government’s consultation I said that we should follow the Electoral Commission’s lead on the rules that govern the conduct of the referendum. The bill, as amended, largely does that, with the one exception of the approach to absent voting. I expressed concern about that earlier this afternoon, and although Nicola Sturgeon did not accept my point I am glad that I did so. I am, after all, as interested as any other member is in how to get the vote out at elections, and not just at the referendum. It was a unique experience to be advised by Kevin Stewart on how to do that better. I am of course grateful and I will bear his advice in mind for future reference. On absent voting, the genuinely novel aspects of the voting system will require specific guidance and impose new burdens, but I believe that the counting and electoral registration officers will be well able to meet those demands. The other area of debate has been on spending to a common plan, on which we thought that the bill could reasonably be strengthened to ensure transparency and to avoid campaigning by proxy through organisations that are invented for that purpose. Again, the issue is one of balance, this time between enabling participation by as many campaigners as possible and ensuring that no one seeks to mislead voters. Ministers have acknowledged the importance of getting that balance right although, unlike others, they believe that the bill achieves that as it stands. It will now be all the more important that the Electoral Commission builds on the framework that is provided by the bill and brings forward clear guidance on how campaigners should account for work that is done as part of a common plan. That way, the letter of the law will be clearly understood and, I hope, its spirit will be respected, too. So the stage is set and the rules are clear, and those who are charged with ensuring a fair and transparent process know what tools they will have to hand to carry out their tasks. Now the country will decide and the world will be watching.

Nobody who has been involved at any stage in the process could doubt its significance, which is why, as many members have said, the debate should be conducted in a respectful manner.

It is important to say that Scottish men and women who take part in the debate should not lose the right to that respect on the basis that they are elected members of the Westminster Parliament. Those rules apply there, too. It is not enough for Parliament to set the stage; it is also our job as members to scrutinise legislation, as we have done, and the wider policies and actions of the Scottish Government. That is why, at stage 1, we raised the issue of scrutiny of the white paper. Now that we have come to the point at which the referendum rules have been settled, decisions must soon be made about scrutiny of the white paper. There is a case to be made for that to be done by a committee of Parliament, constituted in a similar way to the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee. If ministers do not support that, I hope that they will tell us how they wish to proceed, so that the Parliament as a whole can come to a view. The people of Scotland have a momentous decision to make, which we have enabled through the proceedings on the bill. Over the next few months, Parliament will have a role in ensuring that the proposals on which people will vote have been examined and interrogated, as we would do for any other measure. After all, that is what a Parliament is for, and it is through Parliament that the people of Scotland will continue to hold ministers to account, before and after the referendum.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will support the development of a major new performance venue in the city as part of a new Aberdeen exhibition and conference centre. (S4O-02579)

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s positive tone. I wonder whether she recalls that during the previous parliamentary session Scottish Enterprise offered grants and loans to conference centres in Glasgow and Edinburgh, which in both cases were worth many millions of pounds, but failed to provide comparable support to the conference centre in Aberdeen. If the cabinet secretary agrees—as I think that she does—that Aberdeen’s exciting new centre is vital for both staging major performances in the city and hosting events such as the offshore Europe and all-energy conferences, which would not in any likelihood be staged in any other Scottish city, will she today offer the Scottish Government’s enthusiastic endorsement of Aberdeen’s ambitious approach to the centre?

In the light of the minister’s statement, can he confirm his Government’s continuing support for the European offshore wind deployment centre in Aberdeen bay, which has attracted European Union funding? What constructive discussions has he had with UK ministers about the contributions of both offshore wind and offshore carbon storage to the future role of Aberdeen and the north-east as a global centre of excellence in offshore energy?

I agree with the minister, and I welcome the importance that he places on the AWPR. However, I ask him again about the junction of the A90 and the A96 at the Haudagain roundabout—a project that he has endorsed for the Scottish Government to undertake. I have not heard any good reason why that project cannot be brought forward soon. Is he prepared to reconsider the matter?

In meeting the transport challenges of the 21st century, the question is always this: which ones should we meet first? Connectivity for the Aberdeen city region should be a fairly high priority for Governments in Edinburgh and London, because few places contribute more per head of population to either the Scottish or UK economies. Aberdeen City Council is the first council to raise more for the Scottish Government in business rates than it receives in Government grants. The oil and gas industry, which is largely based in the north-east, contributes a quarter of all corporation taxes in the UK and accounts for billions of pounds in export earnings. Barriers to economic growth in Aberdeen are bad news for the whole country, so reducing those barriers should be a top priority for government at every level. Three weeks ago, we learned an uncomfortable truth about the potential economic impact of HS2, which is a major project that has cross-party support here and at Westminster. The UK Government asked KPMG to calculate the impact of HS2 on city regions across the country, including those that would lose out as a result of other regions becoming better connected with London and each other by high-speed rail. KPMG concluded that the Aberdeen city region could be the hardest hit in the UK, with economic output reduced by as much as £220 million a year. However, HS2 does not have to be bad news for Aberdeen, any more than for Scotland as a whole. The Scottish and UK Governments can do things to mitigate the displacement effect—which will apply not just to Aberdeen but to other places in the country, including Bristol and Cambridge—by ensuring that Aberdeen becomes better connected to London and to the northern end of the high-speed network.

I have looked closely at the methodology—or at as much as has been published, which is very little. It is important to remind Maureen Watt that the second-largest concentration of oil and gas jobs in the UK is not in Shetland or the Moray Firth but in greater London, so we should not assume that oil and gas jobs cannot be displaced to elsewhere in the United Kingdom. Top of the list of mitigating measures that the Scottish Government should take is a cut in journey times on the intercity routes between Aberdeen and the central belt. Ministers identified how to do that in the strategic transport projects review in 2008: by removing the one short stretch of single track at Montrose and building a new line from Inverkeithing to Halbeath, with the ultimate aim of linking the Aberdeen to Edinburgh and Aberdeen to Glasgow lines at Perth. Those options were flagged up, but they have not been given the green light. As long ago as the then Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s consideration of the national planning framework 2 in 2009, I raised the absence of the Halbeath project from the framework, but there is still no firm commitment from the Government to those projects as we move towards NPF3. Top of the list for the UK Government—and of vital importance to the Scottish economy—is that it maintain and strengthen air links between Aberdeen and London. HS2 will make many domestic air routes redundant, not just between London and other English cities, but perhaps ultimately between London and Glasgow and Edinburgh. However, high-speed rail can never substitute for air travel between the north of Scotland and London, simply because of the sheer distance that is involved. More passengers fly from Aberdeen to Heathrow every year than to the hub airports at Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Paris, Copenhagen and Dublin put together. Heathrow is by far the most important destination for the Aberdeen economy, which is why the north-east of Scotland transport partnership—Nestrans—has this week called for guaranteed access for Aberdeen flights to landing slots at Heathrow, and for such slots to be written into any future development there. It is open to the UK Government to protect those slots, especially given that the European Union is currently reviewing its landing slots regulations. Under current rules, that would not be possible in the event of Scottish independence, since Aberdeen and London Heathrow would then be in separate countries, but it is in the UK’s interests as well as in Scotland’s interests to protect Aberdeen’s international competitiveness. If the Scottish ministers want to help Aberdeen’s economy, there are things that they can do with the powers that they already have. They could confirm that expansion of Aberdeen harbour is a national priority by giving a fair wind to those plans—the TV celebrities at the Crown and Anchor would expect no less—and they could help to fund a feasibility study into a light rail link from Aberdeen international airport to the city centre, as the city council has invited it to do. If ministers were to look again at the Scottish transport appraisal guidance report on the Haudagain roundabout they would find that there is no reason not to progress with it. Their taking those steps and mitigating the impact of HS2 would show that ministers understand that Aberdeen’s transport needs go beyond the western peripheral route and that investment in Aberdeen’s transport infrastructure is not an optional extra but is essential to the future success of Scotland as a whole.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister accept that, even at the point at which high-speed rail arrives in Glasgow and Edinburgh, the benefits for the north of Scotland will be realised only with investment in the rail infrastructure between the north of Scotland and the central belt?

As Christine Grahame nearly said, it is a pleasure to take part in a debate on stage one of a justice bill on a Thursday afternoon. Willie Coffey and Colin Keir mentioned much-missed members of the Parliament who are no longer with us and, of course, when the late great Donald Dewar advocated devolution at Westminster, he always listed as one of the causes for that change the fact that there was simply not the time or the opportunity to update Scots law and the Scottish legal process in the way that we would all have wanted. That is something that we are addressing now. Finding parliamentary time to debate such matters is no longer a challenge. The real challenge is not, as some members have suggested, to fill in the time that we have found. It is to get the process of reform right when have the time to do it. As has been said, tribunals deal with more cases in Scotland each year than the criminal and civil courts put together. The most striking thing about the Justice Committee’s stage 1 report is its view that the bill still has some way to go to get it right. It is agreed that tribunals will be more accessible and better understood if they operate in a common framework and the bill’s general principles command broad support. Of course, the Conservative-led Westminster Government might argue that it is enacting the same general principles in its reform of UK-wide tribunals, but some of its reforms do not command broad support. Employment tribunals appear to be under attack for political reasons. In Scotland and across the UK, working people are less likely to seek redress against unfair treatment at work because of the introduction of fees. The statistics, albeit that they are only for the first few months, suggest that already there is a fall in the number of cases brought, in particular those brought by individual employees rather than those brought by several workers or their trade unions on their behalf. That matters for two reasons that are relevant to the bill. First, the introduction of fees in employment tribunals is arguably a matter of procedure rather than statute, and procedures in Scotland, even for UK tribunals, are defined in terms of the law of Scotland. There might therefore be implications for devolved areas. I would be interested to hear the minister’s view on whether more might have been done to debate the issue here before we all gave legislative consent to the relevant Westminster legislation. Secondly, the bill creates a mechanism to allow the Scottish ministers to introduce fees and charges for use of tribunals in devolved areas, including tribunals where—as John Pentland said—no such fees apply at present. That provision has rightly caused concern to members of the Justice Committee. As the Faculty of Advocates commented, imposing fees on users of, for example, the Mental Health Tribunal would be “unthinkable”, yet it would be possible under the bill as it stands. The intention to require an affirmative resolution before fees could be introduced is welcome, but the committee is right to call for wider consultation to be required before any such resolution is passed. It is hard to see why an existing power for some tribunals to charge fees should require provision for other tribunals to be given the same powers, unless it is in pursuit of uniformity for its own sake. The parallel reforms of UK tribunals have brought in fees in a way that tilts the balance of the tribunal system against users and the bill must be proofed against that outcome. The fact that there is a parallel process is itself a cause for concern. One of the distinctive features of the Scottish justice system is that there are areas where justice is done without too much reliance on courtrooms, lawyers and formal proceedings. Children’s hearings are the best example of that, but many other tribunals work because they retain a user-friendly informality that we should work hard to protect. The committee raises a number of concerns about the risks of turning tribunals into something more like a formal court of law. The merging of the UK Tribunals Service with Her Majesty’s Courts surely runs the risk of the judicialisation of those tribunals, and I am sure that the Scottish Ministers will think long and hard about how to maintain the distinctiveness of Scottish tribunals, if indeed they follow the UK Government’s model of administrative rationalisation, as proposed in their consultation earlier this year. Children’s hearings are also an area on which the Justice Committee sounds a note of caution. In the last parliamentary session, ministers came perilously close to damaging what was most Scottish and most valuable about the Scottish approach to young offenders: children’s hearings that are centred on the child, rather than youth courts focused on proving guilt. Happily ministers came back from that particular brink, but there has to be a real concern about ministers pushing children’s hearings into a tribunals service straitjacket, which could put their distinctive character at risk again. Likewise, as a number of members said, the distinctive character of the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland needs to be protected. The decision to treat it as a stand-alone chamber is welcomed, but the commitment to protect its distinctive role needs to be given greater certainty in the medium to longer term. At the opposite end of the spectrum is the Lands Tribunal for Scotland. As Elaine Murray reminded us, the Lord President described it as “a court of law in all but name”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 17 September 2013; c 3195.] and said that it was “not broken” and did not need fixing. The Lands Tribunal itself is against being pulled into the new system and, indeed, it appears that no one is particularly keen to do so, except ministers. We should not allow that to happen, simply because its standing alone as a separate pillar prevents everything from being the same. Clearly everything should not be the same. A common framework should by all means be created where appropriate but the urge to make all our tribunals fit precisely into a single template should surely be resisted. The important question is how things work in practice and I hope that ministers will listen to the concerns that have been raised and, as has been said, amend the bill to make it fit for purpose.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what public consultation there will be on the proposed closure of Scottish Fire and Rescue Service control rooms. (S4O-02495)

Is the minister aware that more than 1,200 people already have signed an online petition to save Aberdeen fire control room and that many people in the north-east agree with the Fire Brigades Union that neither the highly trained control room staff nor anyone else have been properly consulted on the scale of the cuts to front-line services? If the minister will not instruct there to be a full public consultation, will she at least agree today to instruct the board of the Fire and Rescue Service to publish the criteria on which it will decide which further control rooms to close and which to keep open?

As we have heard, the debate on carbon capture and storage has already moved on beyond the issue of whether it is desirable to the issue of whether it can practically be delivered at scale in a sustainable way and, if so, when and where that should be done. In recent years, a general view and indeed a consensus has developed among most parties at Holyrood and Westminster that the technology is worth taking forward for environmental and economic reasons. Of course, there will be debates about how best to support projects, which part of the technology to do first and where to start, but the principle is widely agreed that capturing carbon from electricity generation can be done and that storing it securely can help to reduce levels of CO2 in the atmosphere and to reduce the damage that is caused by climate change. More than that, whatever the source of the carbon, the North Sea offers the best opportunities for storage in Europe, and Scotland is particularly well placed to provide storage for carbon that is captured in Great Britain and further afield. There are arguments about whether captured carbon should be used to enhance oil recovery, as we have heard. There is much less dispute about the security of depleted oil and gas reservoirs offshore or saline aquifers as a safe place of storage for captured carbon. With other members, I have had the opportunity to hear at first hand from project leaders twice in recent weeks—three weeks ago in Aberdeen and this week here in Edinburgh. We wait a long time for a briefing on carbon capture then, just like buses, two come along at once. Clearly, there is something going on. As Patrick Harvie said, this is not the first time that the Parliament has debated the merits of carbon capture and storage, although previously we have done so in the context of the wider energy debate, including in particular as part of the inquiry into Scotland’s energy future that was carried out by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee in the previous session of Parliament. As part of that inquiry, I went with colleagues to Germany to visit the pioneering carbon capture plant die Schwarze Pumpe in the brown coal producing area of the former East Germany near the Czech and Polish borders. That plant was already pioneering the technical feasibility of carbon capture in the days of the former East Germany, but the problem, which still existed when we visited, was how to transport the carbon without emitting more of it and where to store it. As Stewart Stevenson said, a number of European countries have still not found a solution to those problems that they are happy with. Clearly, we have a solution in the North Sea and the existing pipeline network. Just as offshore oil fields that have produced hydrocarbons can now provide storage for captured carbon, so pipelines that have taken oil and gas ashore and carried it to Grangemouth or St Fergus can now be used to carry carbon in the opposite direction. Scotland and the United Kingdom have a big advantage in the potential for carbon transport and storage. For those issues, the timing is also good. Offshore operators are beginning the complex and costly business of decommissioning redundant fields and equipment. That creates new opportunities for Scottish engineering companies, but it will also sharply reduce future Government revenues as a result of tax breaks on decommissioning costs. It is therefore timely to consider how to reuse and recycle offshore pipelines and platforms to support the new business of carbon transport and storage. Delaying some aspects of decommissioning will spread the costs for operators and Government and will extend the life of the offshore sector as a whole. If the North Sea and its associated infrastructure provide a competitive edge in the transport and storage of carbon, the capture of carbon has been proven in a technical sense and now—as has been said—needs to demonstrate that it can be commercially sustainable and efficient at scale. That is the next challenge to be met. Successive UK Governments have offered financial incentives for carbon capture demonstration schemes. Something like £1 billion is currently the prize for the successful developer. As we have heard, Shell’s Peterhead project, which aims to capture carbon from an existing gas-fired power station and store it offshore in the Goldeneye field, is one of two preferred bidders in that competition. Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce called this week for full support from both the UK and Scottish Governments. It pointed out the benefits for the north-east and highlighted that this would be “the first industrial-scale, full-chain CCS facility at a gas-fired power plant anywhere in the world, and ... a global landmark project.” There is every possibility of Peterhead securing at least half of the £1 billion for a project that would give the UK a global lead, although it should of course be noted that Scotland will have to be part of the UK for that to happen. The captain project at Grangemouth is based on using the German gasification technology that we saw at die Schwarze Pumpe at a new-build, coal-fired power station, and it is looking for contract price support from Government rather than capital funding. The hydrogen that it will produce as part of the gasification process could have a number of uses, not least powering public transport fleets on the model of the hydrogen buses project that is currently being piloted by Aberdeen City Council with Scottish Government support. There is clearly a strong argument for taking forward coal and gas CCS at the same time, and I hope that that approach will find support from Government at every level. I hope, too, that the Scottish ministers will keep their carbon capture road map up to date in the light of developments over the past two or three years and that, if they do so, carbon capture and storage can continue to command broad support in the years ahead.

As the cabinet secretary will recall, there was great disappointment in Aberdeen that the promised sum of several millions of pounds in business rates incentivisation did not materialise for the latest financial year. Can he offer any better hope that Aberdeen will benefit directly from its great success in increasing its level of business rates generation and, indeed, the level of economic activity in the city over the past 12 months?

Full-time equivalents?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, congratulate Richard Baker on bringing the debate to the Parliament, and I also congratulate Patricia Ferguson on preparing a bill to reform fatal accident inquiries. Twenty-five years ago, after the Piper Alpha disaster, survivors and bereaved families demanded change in the culture and regulation of safety offshore. Trade unions such as the Transport and General Workers Union and the Offshore Industry Liaison Committee campaigned for workers to have the right to elect safety representatives offshore, while members of Parliament such as Frank Doran called for the regulation of offshore safety to be separated from the functions of the energy department. It is therefore fitting that offshore safety reps are in the public gallery for our debate; that unions such as Unite and the RMT are again campaigning for change, along with the British Airline Pilots Association; and that there is a growing demand for an independent public inquiry into helicopter transport in the North Sea. That inquiry must be UK wide, because the issues affect the whole UK sector and because regulation of civil aviation is the responsibility of the UK Department for Transport. However, the Scottish ministers are responsible for inquiries into the causes of fatal accidents in Scottish waters, so they can act on that. I hope that, as Richard Baker said, we will have FAIs in the coming months not just on the 2009 disaster but on this year’s fatal accident. A number of inquiries have been announced. The House of Commons Transport Committee, the Civil Aviation Authority and the helicopter operating companies have all said that they will undertake inquiries or reviews of one sort or another. Those are all welcome, but they will not of themselves answer all the questions that the families, survivors and those who work offshore are asking. Workers in the UK sector know that Norway has a better recent record on helicopter safety, but they will want to know why that is. Is it because of the hours that pilots fly, the maintenance regimes that are in place or the regulatory regimes within which helicopter companies operate? As Richard Baker and Mark McDonald said, those people welcome this week’s announcement that Eurocopter will look at reconfiguring the seats on helicopters to improve safety, but they ask whether there should be fewer seats or emergency lighting at doors or windows to help people to escape in the dark. FAIs and an independent inquiry can help us to understand those things and to answer other questions such as whether helicopter operating companies should be empowered to set standards for the equipment that is issued to their passengers by third parties; whether helicopters should fly at all when the waves are so high that fast rescue craft cannot be launched; and whether safety reps offshore have enough time to carry out their duties in full and enough confidence to raise concerns before things go wrong. Following Lord Cullen’s public inquiry into the Piper Alpha disaster, he recommended many changes, which were endorsed by all concerned and which have made a real difference to the culture of safety offshore. Many years later, the same Lord Cullen recommended changes to the system of fatal accident inquiries, but those recommendations have not yet been implemented. Today, the North Sea is a mature oil province and much of the offshore infrastructure is nearing the end of its design life. From now on, making profits will demand much higher rates of investment, so the need for effective maintenance is increasing just as the financial rewards become harder to obtain. That is why this is a good time for a comprehensive review of safety in the North Sea, starting with the journey to and from work. Early and effective fatal accident inquiries can help to set a new benchmark for the next 40 years, and I urge ministers to help make that happen.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether the participation of police officers makes a positive difference to road safety education in schools. (S4O-02403)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the principle of preventative spend should apply to road safety as well as to other areas and that police investment in road safety education is a good way in which to spend to save? If so, how will Police Scotland continue to do that work in regions such as the north-east, where the police have previously been active in road safety education? In particular, how will the police approach community planning in order to continue the good work that Grampian Police did as a community planning partner?

In the event that the Tory Government does indeed—regrettably—privatise Royal Mail, and in the event of a yes vote in the referendum, will it be the SNP’s policy to renationalise Royal Mail?

Most of us will never cast a more important vote than the one that we will cast next September. A vote that Scotland should be an independent country, which would be a decision to leave the United Kingdom, would be final and irreversible; a vote to reject that option would be equally momentous, although perhaps not in quite the way that Linda Fabiani vividly imagined. Members from across the chamber have said many times that all sides must be able to accept the referendum result, whatever it is. The referendum on devolution in 1997 demonstrated the settled will of the Scottish people, and it may be that the 2014 referendum will do the same. I hope that members on all sides of the chamber will be able to accept the result, whatever it may be.

I would be delighted to give way to Margo MacDonald.

I would not expect Margo MacDonald or anyone else to stop campaigning for what they believe in, but the proposition that voting no will be Scotland voting itself out of existence is one of the most extraordinary things that I have ever heard in this Parliament. Our job for now is to ensure that the rules of engagement are agreed in advance, that no shadow of doubt lingers over the fairness of the process and that there is no opportunity for anyone to bend the rules in ways that might affect the final outcome. That is why members of the committee must continue to be vigilant and rigorous in scrutinising the bill to ensure that there is no uncertainty about whether the result truly represents the will of the Scottish people. The question about what to ask has been settled. The question about whom to ask has largely been settled, too. Although we might have great sympathy with Scots outwith Scotland who will not be able to vote next year—including, for example, most of the Scotland football team—we are agreed that there must be a clear and consistent basis on which people do or do not have the right to vote. Using the Scottish Parliament and local government franchise is the best way to achieve that clarity. However, as Patricia Ferguson said, one franchise issue that is still not settled is that of 16 and 17-year-old children of members of UK armed forces personnel who are serving abroad. Those young people should have the same right to vote as others of the same age. The worst outcome of extending the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds would be to give the vote to some and not to others. Therefore, we welcome the fact that ministers are consulting on the matter. I ask the Deputy First Minister to indicate whether she expects that we will know the outcome of that consultation before stage 2.

I certainly agree with Bruce Crawford that all those with an interest or concern in the matter should work together to get the outcome that we have described. As we have heard, the main focus of the bill is not so much on what to ask, when to ask or whom to ask—in the main, those issues have been settled—but on how to ask and, in particular, on the rules governing the actions of the Government and of participants in the referendum campaign. There are a number of questions that arise about purdah, including which organisations will be covered. Although it is clear that ministers are following the general approach of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000, it would be helpful if Nicola Sturgeon could clarify whether there are any public bodies that will not be subject to purdah under the bill, but would be subject to purdah under that act, and if so, which ones and why. The Government’s plans for Parliament to meet during purdah are also an issue. As we have heard, Thursday 21 August 2014, which is at the beginning of purdah, is scheduled to be a sitting day, and Friday 22 August is similarly covered.

No, thank you. It is not clear whether that is simply an error on the Government’s part or whether ministers intended the overlap to arise. As Nicola Surgeon said in committee, it is hard to imagine a question time on the last sitting day before polling day in which ministers would not seek to influence the outcome, yet apparently Parliament would be unable to publish their words. It was concerning to hear SNP members respond so negatively to that issue being raised. The question is simply whether the issue can be sorted out at stage 2—whether it happens at the initiative of the Government or Parliament is of little importance. There is also the question of what will happen if the purdah rules are breached. The run-up to a parliamentary by-election is not the occasion to rehearse the on-going issue of the application of purdah, even though that remains an important and topical question. Suffice it to say that a regulated period is effective only if it is effectively enforced. I suspect that how to secure that is a matter to which we will return at stage 2. Even more important than the purdah issue is who is allowed to spend what to influence the outcome. We know that the designated lead campaigners will be Better Together and Yes Scotland. We look forward to seeing the Government’s amendments to include those designations. Perhaps the Deputy First Minister will say what date she has mind for the coming into force of the designations. The bill sets limits for spending by political parties and other permitted participants. What the bill does not do is ensure transparency about the relationship between spending by designated lead campaigners and other permitted participants—an issue that was raised by James Kelly and Patrick Harvie. We do not want a situation in which a lead campaigner could be tempted to delegate its spending to other permitted participants on the basis that that spending would not count against its permitted spending limit. It is interesting to note how sensitive that issue has been for some members in the debate. That reinforces the proposition that the matter needs to be addressed at stage 2. Permitted participants will register as participants on one or the other side of the vote. Perhaps their spending should be subject to an overall limit on permitted campaign spending by each side. Ministers have so far resisted the committee’s sensible proposal to reduce the threshold for reporting donations from the current level of £7,500. Clearly, a large number of small donations can be worth as much as a small number of large donations, so I encourage ministers to think again about the threshold before stage 2. I also draw ministers’ attention to the provision that the identity of donors of less than £500 need not be disclosed and simply ask whether ministers have considered whether that might create a loophole that would allow donations from outwith the UK that are not otherwise permitted in the process. Margo MacDonald said that there are those who will seek ways around the rules, so it is essential that we take whatever measures may be necessary to prevent that. As Richard Baker mentioned, we await the Government’s white paper on the subject matter of the referendum. Parliamentary scrutiny of the document will be essential if the propositions that are in it are to be tested properly before people cast their votes. I hope that Nicola Sturgeon will tell us how that parliamentary scrutiny will be done. It is a noble aspiration to aim for a “fair, open and truly democratic process, conducted and regulated to the highest international standards.” Scotland will fall short of that aspiration if anyone seeks to find ways to evade the spirit of the limits that are agreed by Parliament or, indeed, if members continue to declare that a result that they do not like is somehow a denial of democracy. This Parliament and the bill cannot force people to behave in the right spirit, as Bruce Crawford said they should, or in the spirit of the law. However, clear legal requirements and protections can be put in place, and those can be backed up with effective enforcement measures. That is what we must seek to do today.

Given the vital input of the trade unions to the work of the helicopter safety steering group in reaching the correct decisions that it has reached over the past few days, and given that it will conduct an inquiry, as the cabinet secretary said, will he agree to talk to the trade unions specifically about what further steps are required to restore confidence among the offshore workforce? In particular, will he do so before discussing further the remit of any future inquiry with law officers and UK ministers?

The cabinet secretary will know the difference that was made to offshore health and safety on rigs and platforms in the North Sea by the Cullen inquiry, which was established following the Piper Alpha disaster. Given the high number of serious helicopter incidents in the UK sector of the North Sea compared with other parts of the same province, will the cabinet secretary support calls for a public inquiry into helicopter transport in the UK sector—one that would go beyond an internal industry review and would follow the model that was set by Cullen—in order to give the workforce the same confidence in helicopter transport in the North Sea as they have in safety on rigs and platforms following Cullen?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am grateful to the minister for giving way, even if he has done so when I was not seeking to intervene. Will the minister confirm that the STAG report actually says, on the connection between the Haudagain and the third Don crossing, that if the crossing is not built, the Persley bridge would require to be dualled by 2027 in order to have the same traffic impact? Does he not recognise that a good deal could be done, with or without the third Don crossing, before 2027 and that that is precisely what Labour is calling on him to do?

Although Kevin Stewart offered to move on from the knockabout, he went on to produce one of the most comical speeches that I have heard. He asked a number of questions of the Labour Party but would not listen to a single answer. That sets a poor example. I am sure that Christian Allard will make a more positive speech. We all know that investment in Aberdeen’s infrastructure has been delayed too long. The question is what can be done to accelerate that investment. There is no dispute over the responsibility of Scotland’s devolved Government for moving forward what are vital infrastructure projects. The decision to build the Aberdeen western peripheral route as a trunk road was made by Jack McConnell more than 10 years ago. SNP ministers took office in 2007, with clear commitments on the WPR and the Haudagain, although their first big decision, as Stewart Stevenson will recall, was to push back the WPR’s planned completion date to the end of 2012.

The Haudagain is part of the trunk road network and therefore the Scottish Government’s responsibility. I heard a little heckling from a sedentary position. I remind SNP members of Stewart Stevenson’s commitment to the Parliament on 27 June 2007. He said that he could not meet the then programme for the WPR, which he pushed back to the end of 2012. Three of the 22 most congested routes in Scotland converge at the Haudagain roundabout. All three are trunk roads under the stewardship of Scottish ministers. Journey time delays per vehicle mile are among the worst in Scotland. However, as we have heard again today, the SNP has not at any time—and certainly not since it came into government—accepted the case for urgent action on the Haudagain. Even when the WPR was held up by delay after delay in the courts, Keith Brown and his colleagues refused to accept that there was any merit in first sorting out the existing trunk road bottleneck.

To answer Bruce Crawford’s question, let me explain exactly what the evidence is. Unlike the WPR, no protracted legal challenges have been brought by objectors to improvements to the Haudagain junction. There are no third parties for ministers to blame. Inaction on the Haudagain is entirely ministers’ choice and responsibility. We have heard again today that the SNP’s only explanation is that “attempting to re-engineer the junction prior to the opening of the AWPR would result in traffic chaos”. Because ministers take that view, we must all wait until at least 2018 before work is even started on this trunk road junction, for which ministers are responsible. I went back to the STAG report, which recommended progress. The STAG report was commissioned by Aberdeen City Council, which was led in 2008 by the SNP. I read it again from cover to cover. The report does not say that work on the Haudagain has to wait until the WPR is open. The report describes in detail what is now the preferred option, which is “retention of the existing roundabout at Haudagain and a new dual carriageway link” between North Anderson Drive and Auchmill Road. The “retention of the existing roundabout” does not sound to me as if there should be any need for traffic chaos, far less any need to close the roundabout, as claimed by the SNP earlier today. The report says: “It should be possible to construct the new signalised junctions on Anderson Drive and Auchmill Road by using lane closures without the need for contra flows ... delays will result from the need for lane closures but should be of short duration.” For the avoidance of doubt, and for those who do not understand road engineering language, the report summarises the preferred option at the end. [Interruption.]

It says: “This option is implementable, but would cause some minor disruption during construction.” Ministers say, “Traffic chaos”. Kevin Stewart says, “Closure of the roundabout”. The STAG report says, “some minor disruption during construction”— that sounds like good advice to me. Advisers advise; ministers decide. There is no good excuse for continuing inaction at one of the worst pinchpoints on Scotland’s transport network. SNP ministers need to fix the Haudagain, as they have promised, and they need to do it now.

I am very grateful to Maureen Watt for taking an intervention. I accept that some disruption is caused if lanes must be closed in order for traffic lights to be installed. In the case of the Kessock bridge, some 17 weeks of disruption have been caused. That has been a matter of regret for the drivers who have been stuck on the bridge but, in the long term, it was the right decision to press ahead and install those traffic lights. It would be the right decision to install traffic lights on the new link road at the Haudagain, too.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I simply seek clarification of a comment that the minister made a moment ago. I think he said that, if it could be done sooner than 2018, that would be great as well. Is that a commitment to look at bringing forward the target date for the project? If so, will he spell that out, please?

I am very pleased that the cabinet secretary supports Willie Young in his view of the importance of libraries in Aberdeen and elsewhere. Given that she agrees with him, will she agree also to work with Aberdeen City Council to take forward the modernisation and further improvement of a fantastic public library service in the city?

I agree with the cabinet secretary that the focus should be on making progress. Given that within the WPR project there are a couple of discrete sections—one connects to the airport and the other is from Balmedie to Tipperty—can the cabinet secretary indicate when she expects progress to be made so that at least those discrete sections of the project will be completed and ready to use?

I, too, congratulate Mary Fee on bringing this important debate today. She is right to highlight the importance of breaking the cycle of reoffending, for offenders and their families, and to put that challenge in a wider context. Mary Fee is also right to say that there is no single solution to the problem of reoffending, which remains relatively static and far too high. Using the interests and experience of prisoners and engaging with families have to be part of the way forward. There has rightly been concern about the lack of enough purposeful activity in Scotland’s prisons. An average of 21 hours a week is simply not acceptable, and Hugh Monro was right when he said that the purpose of sending offenders to prison in the first place was being undermined. That needs to be addressed. It is equally vital that work continues after an offender has been released. Every prison governor and every third sector organisation that I have met has made the same point: whether released prisoners are sent back to prison for reoffending will depend most on what they do, where they go and what company they keep in the first few days and weeks after their release. That is why Prison Service support for throughcare services is vital and to be welcomed, and why agencies such as Includem and Families Outside are important, too. Engagement with families is equally critical, as Mary Fee said. The charity Families Outside found that offenders are six times more likely to reoffend if they lose contact with their families. Therefore, support for that contact and linking it to resettlement are clearly of wider benefit. In my area, achieving that engagement with families will be much harder because of the decision to close Aberdeen prison and replace it with a prison an hour away from the city, at Peterhead. HMP Grampian is supposed to be community facing, and I have no doubt that its first governor, Jim Farish, and his team will work very hard to fulfil that remit. However, it is hard to be community facing from the other end of the A90. If we are serious about engagement with families, it is not enough to say so, or even to fund pilot projects. The strategic decisions about Scotland’s prisons have to reflect that priority too, and in Aberdeen’s case an opportunity has been missed. If family contacts are critical for offenders in general, that is even truer for young offenders. The lack of purposeful activity has been a particular issue for young offenders at Polmont and Cornton Vale, and I hope that this week’s announcement on Polmont will produce a significant increase in investment from the Scottish Government. I welcome the engagement of Education Scotland. When I visited Polmont last year, I was stuck by the commitment of staff and the work that was being done to address the poor communication skills of many young men in prison. Research suggests that 60 per cent of young people who come into contact with the justice system have communication problems. Extra education classes will not work if young offenders are not first enabled to take advantage of them by improving their communication skills. The work done at Polmont is such that it has earned prison officers and national health service staff the giving voice partnership award from the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, yet only 15 hours a week of one-to-one speech therapy are available at Polmont, and that is simply not enough. This debate is about offenders getting support during and after their imprisonment, in order to resettle in their communities. I believe that speech therapy is one tool that can play an important role in enabling that to happen, and I hope that the minister will indicate that that is also the view of the Scottish Government.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s closing comments. We will take up his offer of further discussion outwith the forum of parliamentary debate. There is general agreement about the importance of redesigning the community justice system. The Government’s decision last year to consult on how that should be done was uncontroversial. The Government’s decision to call a debate only two days after the consultation closed is perhaps more surprising. I listened closely to what Kenny MacAskill had to say, but even he cannot have had much opportunity to read and consider the views of everyone who contributed their thoughts to the consultation—far less to make those views public or to reach a considered response on the part of Government. Last week we debated the cabinet secretary’s wide-ranging proposals for cuts in the functions of and the closure of many of Scotland’s local courts, which he had taken only a couple of days to consider after the details of the consultation on that were made public. The cabinet secretary could not have had prior knowledge of all the informed and detailed contributions on community justice that no doubt landed on his desk earlier this week, so I am not at all sure—and the cabinet secretary’s closing comments suggest that he is not at all sure—why this should be the day for this debate. That is why our amendment calls on the Government to schedule a further debate before it introduces any draft legislation later this year—a debate that can be informed by the consultation process and the Government’s response. In common—I hope—with the other parties, we approach the substance of the issues with an open mind. We acknowledge the need for change in how community justice is delivered, but we are not dogmatic about the direction of travel. We are, as ever, open to the arguments to be made in favour of the options on which the Government has consulted. I am keen to see the evidence of what works. In the final analysis, structures are only a means to an end. The objective behind reforming the structures must be effective action to reduce the scale of reoffending. The efforts of the people who work in the field should be applauded. However, last November’s Audit Scotland report on reducing reoffending, which the cabinet secretary mentioned, showed that there is no room for complacency. It found what it described as a “relatively static” rate of offenders reconvicted within one year, with 30 per cent in 2009-10 compared to 32 per cent in 1997-98, and more than 42 per cent reconvicted within two years. It also found that 22 per cent of those convicted in 2010-11 had 10 or more previous convictions, that the prison population had risen by 27 per cent in a decade and that less than a third of the public money that is spent on dealing with convicted offenders is spent on services specifically to reduce reoffending. Elish Angiolini’s commission on women offenders last year had, as we have heard, important things to say that are relevant to offenders in general. The proposals included one-stop-shops based on the 218 service model to allow offenders to access services in one place, with multidisciplinary teams in those centres to meet the needs of offenders for support on health, addictions or social work services, and naming key workers for those who are at risk of reoffending in order to provide a single contact point for navigating through the criminal justice system. Those are all significant changes—quite apart from the specific issues of community justice structures in which the services might be delivered, to which the cabinet secretary referred. The question is therefore whether those services require a single national service in order to be effective or whether they require more responsive and flexible local services. The Angiolini report also identified “inherent barriers in the structural and funding systems for criminal justice social work and working practices which inhibit greatly the potential to reduce reoffending.” That is why, as Mr MacAskill said, the report called for a new national community justice service, in place of the existing community justice authorities, to commission, provide and manage adult offender services in the community. It also called for a national community justice and prison delivery board to promote integration between the proposed new community justice service and the prison service, in order to achieve a joined-up approach to reducing reoffending “across the community and within custodial settings.” That brings us back to the essence of the Audit Scotland report: that tackling reoffending will succeed only if what is done in prison is also included in the bigger picture. We need greater focus on meaningful activity in prison to go alongside more effective delivery of community justice services. Earlier this year I asked the Government how many hours a week prisoners spent in purposeful activity, whether in work, education, training or rehabilitation. The answer was an average of 21 hours a week across the estate, with HM Young Offenders Institution Polmont being one of the lowest, at 16 hours a week. No wonder the chief inspector of prisons concluded in his latest annual report that the “current poor access to purposeful activities is not acceptable and contributes to a negative picture when considering whether prison is working.”

I am grateful for that intervention. I do not doubt for a moment the commitment of many leaders in the Scottish Prison Service to achieving precisely that change, but they require resources to make that happen. Of course, I welcome the conclusions of the Justice Committee that more could and should be done on purposeful activity in prison. In developing a strategy to tackle reoffending, ministers need their starting point to be the scale of the challenge not only in reducing reoffending through the community justice service, but in joining up those with what is being done in prison to address reoffending. If there is no room for complacency about reoffending in general or about the joining up of services, the same is also true of community disposals, for which the community justice system is responsible. Community payback orders have, indeed, increased the number of hours of unpaid work that the courts are handing down—in some cases, several times over—but the approach is worth while only if the orders are obeyed. Kenny MacAskill mentioned the number of orders and hours, but 1,391 of the more than 11,000 community payback orders that were handed down in 2011-12 were breached—a failure rate of 12 per cent—and many of those breaches were not pursued. In those cases, the community disposal did not work. Of course, there was no automatic adjustment in the funding of services to meet the increased demands on community justice social work budgets, which is one of the reasons why the review is so important. Although we do not agree with the claim in the Conservative amendment that CJAs were doomed to fail, we recognise that their current structure has to change. The Government’s options offer ways forward; option A, which is to enhance the CJAs, is clearly one such way and might well be supported by a number of people who are involved in the existing authorities. Others, however, will favour option B, which is to return responsibility to local authorities. Councils are already the ultimate providers, albeit that it happens under the CJA umbrella, and there are obvious democratic benefits to placing both responsibility and authority at the most local level of government possible. The proposal for a national service also has clear advantages as the most direct route for ensuring common standards and shared approaches to community justice across the country. It is clearly what the Angiolini commission believed would deliver the best outcomes in reducing reoffending; however, such an approach also raises concerns about centralisation and ensuring that that goes no further than it needs to. Whatever new system is designed on the basis of the consultation, we must not forget the role that CJAs play in monitoring high-risk offenders who have served their time in prison and are returning to live in the community. It is essential that whatever changes are made to the community justice system, the funds that are provided for multi-agency public protection arrangements to monitor those individuals are protected. I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s assurance that, whatever option is chosen, MAPPA funding will continue to follow need. We call on ministers to assess the evidence carefully and to come back to Parliament with a considered review, so I am pleased that they have promised today to do so. It is important that we strike the right balance between the successes of community justice over the past eight years and the need to move the system on; between the imperative to build on those successes and the general recognition that they must now change; and between the coherence of a national system and the local accountability of services delivered by local councils. Whatever conclusions ministers reach, they should be informed by the central objectives that have been highlighted both by Audit Scotland and the Angiolini commission of reducing reoffending and joining up community justice and Scotland’s prisons to do so. On that basis, I move amendment S4M-06433.2, to leave out from “acknowledges” to end and insert: “commends the work of local community justice practitioners in making progress to tackle reoffending; notes the recent reports from Audit Scotland and the Commission on Women Offenders that highlight shortcomings in the community justice system; further notes the publication of the Scottish Government’s consultation document, Redesigning the Community Justice System, and looks forward to an informed future debate, based on an analysis of the submissions to the consultation and publication of the Scottish Government’s response, prior to the introduction of any primary legislation; agrees that the status quo is untenable, and recognises the importance of continuing to work constructively with all relevant stakeholders including the Scottish Prison Service, COSLA, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and the Association of Directors of Social Work to put in place arrangements that support strong leadership and robust accountability and bring together the public and voluntary sectors to deliver better outcomes for victims, communities and offenders and their families; believes that further improvements are required to address reoffending, and considers that substantially greater engagement by offenders in meaningful activity while in prison would assist in making changes to the community justice system more effective.”

We have brought this debate to the chamber today to allow all members to have a say in the closures and cuts in function of Scotland’s courts—closures and cuts that were fully and formally supported by Kenny MacAskill on behalf of the Scottish Government last Friday morning. The proposals will, of course, be subject to scrutiny by the Justice Committee, but that procedure will allow MSPs to express a collective view only if the committee votes to reject the statutory instruments in question. Today, members have the opportunity to stand up and be counted, and to tell ministers what they think of Mr MacAskill’s cuts and closures plan, whether or not they have a vote on the Justice Committee. The Scottish Government has made no secret of the fact that the plans are about reducing the budget of Scotland’s courts, regardless of the delays and inefficiencies from which many of them already suffer. Two weeks ago, the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service said: “By 2015 the court service running cost budget will reduce by 20% in real terms and the capital budget will reduce from £20m to £4m.” The secretary of the Scottish courts branch of the Public and Commercial Services Union, Brian Carroll, made the same point. He said: “these proposals are about fitting the delivery of justice into a reduced budget and nothing to do with modernisation or with the proposed justice reforms that are under consultation presently.” Kenny MacAskill has not denied that money is at the root of the proposals, but his amendment seeks—predictably, I suppose—to place all the blame for the cuts on Westminster. He is, of course, the same Cabinet Secretary for Justice who failed last year to avoid the single Scottish police and fire services becoming liable to pay VAT, at a cost to those services of well over £20 million a year. The police and fire services cannot afford those cuts, as hundreds of police staff who fear for their future can testify. For Kenny MacAskill to say that he can afford to take a £24 million hit to the police but cannot avoid cuts of £1 million a year to Scotland’s courts simply lacks credibility. They are his cuts and closures, and to pretend that somebody else is responsible for his decisions is an insult to all those who stand to lose access to local justice. If members are unsure about the cabinet secretary’s personal responsibility for the decisions, they have only to consider the timetable. Reports of possible closures first emerged in December 2011. The Scottish Court Service invited service users to take part in dialogue events in May 2012. The consultation on proposed closures was launched last September, and conclusions and final recommendations were published on Tuesday 9 April, which was barely two weeks ago. In other words, the Scottish Court Service took well over a year from first consideration to get to final conclusions. It no doubt recognised the seriousness of what was proposed. That is not so for the Cabinet Secretary for Justice. He did not need to think too much about the cuts and closures over which the Scottish Court Service had taken so much time because, in truth, they are his cuts, not the Scottish Court Service’s cuts. Let us consider just one issue: the impact of the closure proposals on the local economies of the towns in question. That issue was raised by, for example, Andy Willox of the Federation of Small Businesses. The FSB very fairly acknowledged that wider economic impact was not a primary responsibility of the Scottish Court Service but rather a primary responsibility of the Scottish Government. It noted that Nicola Sturgeon had launched the town centre review on behalf of the Scottish Government by saying: “We want to take every measure possible to ensure our high streets are vibrant places where local people want to spend their time and money.” Indeed, many Scottish National Party members have signed up to oppose the closure of Crown post offices in today’s members’ business debate for that very reason. Many have also signed up to oppose the closure of their local courts. Last week, I asked Kenny MacAskill whether he would “take into account ... the impact of court closures ... on the local economy of county towns” before he reached any final decisions. He said: “Yes. Those are matters that I will discuss with Cabinet colleagues.”—[Official Report, 16 April 2013; c 18535.] That was on Tuesday last week. He announced his decision on Friday. That must have been some discussion. Perhaps Kenny MacAskill will tell us whether he has formally met the Deputy First Minister and other Cabinet colleagues since he made that commitment in Parliament last Tuesday afternoon. Perhaps he will tell us what consideration of the wider policy context there was between Tuesday and Friday last week, as urged by the FSB. On Friday, the FSB said: “Anyone with an interest in the economic wellbeing of Scotland’s towns will question the Justice Secretary’s decision”. It said that that decision should be revisited.

As Mr MacAskill is a native of Linlithgow and I am not, I am sure that members will recognise that that was an entirely rhetorical question. The chairman of the Easter Ross branch of the FSB, for example, said that he was disappointed that the Court Service had taken no account of local economic impact and that he hoped that the cabinet secretary would take a different approach. Mr MacAskill has demonstrated that he has not taken a different approach.

That sounds like an excellent idea. I am sure that if Mr MacAskill does not manage to do that, Mr Findlay will. The economic impact is reason enough to have this debate. In our view, Kenny MacAskill has moved with unseemly haste to confirm his commitment to these cuts and closures. He has not had time to consider their wider economic impact, far less time to consider the many other issues that have been raised. Mr MacAskill cannot have fully considered them between Tuesday and Friday of last week. For example, concerns were raised in the Highlands about the high costs of police officers having to travel far further to give evidence if local sheriff courts were closed and High Court cases were transferred from Inverness to Aberdeen. The Press and Journal said in an editorial last Friday: “It would be an utter nonsense to save money on the courts system if it ends up with police officers being removed from duty more often as a consequence.” The editorial continued: “Ministers have to look at this issue in the whole rather than on a piecemeal departmental approach, which seems to be the focus at the moment.”

That is very interesting. I am glad that, several days after making his decision, Mr MacAskill is finally getting around to meeting some people from the police. Let us consider the example of Stonehaven, where the police and the Court Service very sensibly share a building at the heart of the town. Police Scotland told The Press and Journal 10 days ago: “There is no suggestion that the police office in Stonehaven will be closed or sold.” However, at the same time, the Court Service told the same newspaper: “Should Stonehaven Sheriff Court close then SCS will market the court building, any other proposals for the area where the Police is located is entirely a matter for Police Scotland.” There we have it: Kenny MacAskill decides to close the local court; the closure of the local court results in the closure of the local police station, although nobody bothers to tell the police force; and the closure of the local court and the local police station will reduce local access to justice and have a major impact on the local economy. However, Mr MacAskill does not appear to think that the impact on the local economy is any of his business and he does not appear to talk to the police about the impact of his decisions on their deployment of resources in the towns affected. What is true of Stonehaven is true of town after town across Scotland: the Government decides, and everyone else has to cope with the consequences, intended or otherwise. Austin Lafferty, president of the Law Society of Scotland, said last week that he was “disappointed and concerned” by Mr MacAskill’s decision to press on and close every single court on the list. He said on Friday: “Local courts are an integral part of communities across Scotland ... we don't believe closures on this scale are compatible with the commitment the government has expressed on widening access to justice ... this closure programme will fail to achieve significant financial savings in the long term ... Even with the introduction of video conference links, it’s likely that some of the remaining courts, which are already at capacity, will struggle with the level of additional business, which in turn could slow down proceedings and increase costs.” The Law Society’s view is reflected in submission after submission to the Court Service consultation, as other members will no doubt spell out this afternoon. Douglas Cusine, a retired sheriff in the north-east, said that “there must be a serious doubt” about the claim that the sheriff court in Aberdeen could accommodate the staff and the business displaced by the proposed closure of Stonehaven, given the cramped conditions in Aberdeen already. David Hingston, former procurator fiscal and local solicitor, described the proposal to close Dingwall sheriff court as “moronic”, because it failed to take account of the position at Inverness. He said: “All too frequently, trials in Inverness are put off because of a lack of time to hear them on the date fixed”. In his view, adding the Dingwall case load will mean that the current delay of three months for trials could double, and he said: “Justice delayed is justice denied.” Mr Cusine and Mr Hingston are powerful witnesses. It is because of the consequences that they describe that public opinion is so much against Mr MacAskill’s plans—of course, that includes many in Mr MacAskill’s own party. I enjoyed undertaking a television debate only a few minutes ago with Christine Grahame, who told the Peeblesshire News earlier this month, as she told the BBC a moment ago, that she would “continue to oppose closure” of Peebles sheriff court. She urged people to write to her as convener of the Justice Committee and said: “I know that many of those on this committee are unhappy about some of the proposals.”

Absolutely—that is indeed what Christine Grahame said. Roddy Campbell, who is sitting beside Christine Grahame, has expressed equal concerns about the impact of the court closure in Cupar. Members of the Justice Committee can throw out the proposals—they have it in their power to vote them down and send them back to the Parliament for a decision. They can do that, and I believe that they should do it. Other SNP members who are in the chamber but who are not on the Justice Committee have expressed concern. For example, Dave Thompson told the Ross-shire Journal that he was “extremely concerned by the proposal to close Dingwall Sheriff Court”. Nigel Don told the Mearns Leader that “The closure of courts such as Stonehaven is not yet a done deal”, and urged his constituents to make their views known. Local councillors of all parties in Aberdeenshire opposed the closure proposal.

I am sure that Mr Thompson was listening when I pointed out that the cabinet secretary wilfully allowed £24 million of police funding to be liable for payment to the United Kingdom Government in VAT. Even if that were not the case, it does not take a genius to work out that the idea that we take justice away from 17 courts across Scotland to save £1 million a year is a false priority on the part of the Scottish Government. SNP-led Angus Council and Mike Weir, the SNP member of Parliament in Angus, have argued that both Arbroath and Forfar courts should stay open. I will be interested to hear whether Graeme Dey backs up that view and will argue and vote to keep Arbroath sheriff court in being. This is not the first time in recent months that Mr MacAskill has proposed changes that many in his party could not support. After proposing to abolish prison visiting committees, he had to revisit the issue not once but several times. He might yet come up with a plan for that policy area that commands broad support, but now he needs to bite the bullet and take a different approach on courts. In the summer, Mr MacAskill will bring statutory instruments to the Justice Committee to give effect to his closure proposals. It would be best if he agreed to reconsider the whole matter before doing so but, if he will not do that, he could if he wished introduce separate orders for the several different closure proposals, which have different degrees of merit or demerit, to allow the committee to express a view on each of them. If he declines that suggestion, I hope that members across the chamber will reject the Government amendment and send a clear signal that ministers should enable proper decisions to be taken on each closure proposal, rather than put them all on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. That way, communities can see for themselves which members are prepared to vote to keep open their local court and which will meekly vote in favour of Kenny MacAskill’s cuts and closures. I call on members of all parties to rise to that challenge. I move, That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government’s decision to accept all of the recommendations made by the Scottish Court Service in its paper, Shaping Scotland’s Court Services, published in April 2013; regrets the haste of the Scottish Government’s decision to accept all of the findings without further discussion; believes that a number of these proposals will have a negative impact on victims, witnesses and other court users as well as the local economies of the towns affected, and rejects in particular the proposed closure of courts in towns such as Cupar, Dingwall, Arbroath, Stonehaven and Haddington.

I hear what the cabinet secretary is saying when he says that the proposals are not his and that he made a decision on the proposals between Tuesday and Thursday last week. Last Tuesday, he made a commitment to consult his Cabinet colleagues, so what consultation did he have between Tuesday and Thursday of last week on the impact of implementing those proposals?

In the light of Christine Grahame’s plan B, will she agree that her plan A would require her to vote against the proposal to close Peebles sheriff court when it comes to the Justice Committee, in order to allow the decision to be made in a debate in the chamber?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The Scottish Court Service’s report focuses on savings for the court service. Will the cabinet secretary also take into account in his consideration the impact of court closures as proposed on the local economy of county towns?

Will the First Minister give way?

Perhaps the First Minister, in his tone of considered reflection on the events of the past 10 years, will tell us why he believes that an independent Scotland as he perceives it would have access to better intelligence and a greater understanding of international events than the United Kingdom would have. If he has no such argument, why does he make the case that a Scottish Parliament would be capable of more informed or better decisions than any other Parliament?

This afternoon the Scottish Government asked us to talk about Iraq 10 years on, but then it and its party colleagues largely failed to do that—certainly not in terms of what we might do now to make things better. The members from other parties who have moved amendments have done so seriously and constructively, which I welcome. However, a number of SNP members, starting with the First Minister, have used this occasion largely to rehearse the arguments for and against a decision by the British Government and a vote in the House of Commons 10 years ago for which neither the Scottish Government nor the Scottish Parliament was responsible. As James Kelly said, 10 years on from the invasion of Iraq, the SNP appears not to have moved on at all. The centrepiece of the First Minister’s speech was his assertion that intervention in Iraq was an illegal military conflict. That is his opinion, but Alex Salmond, of all people, should reflect on his degree of certainty over the UK Government’s legal advice on the war in Iraq. So secretive has he been as First Minister on legal advice to his Government on an issue of international law that he went to court to avoid having to reveal the existence or otherwise of that advice, even though such advice did not in fact exist. The time of this Parliament might be better spent on scrutiny of that bizarre tale, because this Parliament’s job is to scrutinise the Scottish Government’s actions and to hold Mr Salmond and his ministers to account, rather than to listen to Mr Salmond’s opinion about the legal advice offered to others.

Of course the issue of war and peace is a very serious issue, but so is the issue of Scotland’s future. If it is right to say that legal advice on war and peace should be made known and if it is right for the First Minister to judge the legal advice given to a different Government, surely he can at least be open and honest about the advice given to him about the future of Scotland. If we are to consider the lessons of Iraq, surely we should not do so on the basis of divisions and controversies 10 years ago in Westminster. We on this side have not lodged an amendment, and what we have heard today confirms that that was the right approach. In an intervention, Christina McKelvie highlighted exactly the dilemma faced by any responsible Government in the real world in which we live: if we free people from tyranny in the middle east or anywhere else, we cannot guarantee that they will use that freedom to make choices with which we agree. We have seen that in Iraq, under its democratically elected coalition Government; we have seen it Libya since NATO intervened to bring down Gaddafi; and we can see the tensions of free political choices in Egypt, too.

If Christine Grahame is asking me to agree that the planning of the occupation of Iraq was inadequate and had very negative effects, it would be impossible to disagree. However, the problem with Christine Grahame and her colleagues is that, having identified the dilemma that we face in seeking to create a free society where an unfree society has existed, they failed to identify what to do about it. Bruce Crawford, for example, denounced the Saddam regime, he denounced what he called the “murderous sanctions” that were imposed as an alternative to war, and then he denounced the military intervention to bring down the regime. He did not say anything about how the international community should have engaged with Iraq in Saddam’s era. Even more importantly, he said nothing about how we should engage with Iraq now. Alex Salmond claimed that an independent Scotland would never make a bad decision on foreign policy. His only defence of that bizarre proposition was that war in Iraq was based on a Prime Minister misleading Parliament—as if such a thing could never happen here. The reality is that the decisions on the Iraq war were intensely difficult decisions on how to deal with a highly dangerous and ruthless dictator who did not hesitate to use illegal weapons in waging an illegal war against Iran—which cost more Muslim lives that any other conflict in modern history—and who did not hesitate to use those illegal weapons in conducting genocidal attacks against his fellow Iraqis. Margo MacDonald rose— Those were hugely—

Those were hugely difficult decisions. They divided opinion in the Labour Party and they divided opinion in the country, but it appears that no such divisions troubled the SNP. That might seem quite surprising; there is an SNP member’s motion before the Parliament now to commemorate 180,000 Kurdish victims of genocide in Saddam’s Iraq in the run-up to the first Gulf war. In a party that seems to be concerned about the repression of Iraqi Kurds under Saddam and his predecessors, it is surprising that not a single member backed the invasion of Iraq that brought that repression to an end.

It is also hard to understand why in all the speeches that we have heard today we have not heard a single speech from the SNP benches that welcomed the fact that that repression has come to an end in the past 10 years.

Of course. [Interruption.]

Indeed. It is surprising, given their apparent interest in the fate of Kurds in Iraq, how little SNP members appear to know about the real progress that there has been in Iraqi Kurdistan in the past 10 years. Why are they not interested in the fact that literacy has increased significantly, infant mortality has fallen, there are seven universities where there used to be just one—

—and there is a regional devolved Government in Iraqi Kurdistan, where there used to be the tyranny of Saddam in Baghdad? [Interruption.] I heard a heckling intervention from the SNP front bench just now. The member said, “What has this got to do with the war?” Surely now the issue is not the war that happened 10 years ago but the reconstruction of Iraq and the fate of the people who live there. That is what our Parliament should focus on if we want to talk at all about Iraq 10 years on.

Will the minister take an intervention?

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to tackle contraband in prisons. (S4F-01257)

The First Minister will have read in the Daily Record and elsewhere how smuggled phones are used to boast about smuggled drugs and to intimidate victims and witnesses on social networking sites. Does he agree with the prison officer who wrote to me the other day calling for phone-blocking technology to be used in Scottish prisons? Given that Westminster is now passing a bill to allow that, will the First Minister undertake today to use those new powers to protect victims, witnesses and prison staff from the consequences of prisoners illegally using mobile phones?

Will the minister give way?

The cabinet secretary will recall that he replied to some written questions that I lodged on this matter last month. He will know that the average number of hours spent on purposeful activity, including physical education and all other purposeful activities, is as low as 16 hours per week at Polmont and 18 hours per week at Glenochil, compared with 29 hours per week at Kilmarnock and 27 hours per week at Low Moss. Does the cabinet secretary have a number of hours per week in mind as an appropriate number of hours of purposeful activity, either for young offenders or for adult prisoners?

2. To ask the Scottish Government which minister has portfolio responsibility for the rural payments and inspections division. (S4O-01906)

Given the minister’s responsibility for the management of estates, can he tell us when the decision was made to put the lease for sporting rights on Raasay out to tender; when the decision was made to issue in November 2011 the notice to quit to Raasay Crofters Association; and how and when ministers were made aware of each of those decisions?

Another debate on policing, and another Scottish Government speech—and amendment—of breathtaking complacency. In December, Kenny MacAskill told us that the turf war would be over by Christmas. As we heard, Alex Salmond described the relationship between Stephen House and Vic Emery as one of creative tension. Some creative tension: a chief constable has had to argue for the right to make his own decisions about police staff and budgets, and a cabinet secretary has had to call in the Lord Advocate to tell the chairman of the board how to interpret the law. Kenny MacAskill is responsible for the 2012 act. He might want to hide from that responsibility, as if all members of the Scottish Parliament share in his failure as minister in charge of the legislation. However, if a minister brings in a law that is seriously flawed or subject to serious misinterpretation by those who are charged with its implementation, it is surely that minister’s job to take ownership of the problem and sort it out. If the problem has arisen following appointments that the same minister made, the responsibility is all the greater. Just as Kenny MacAskill has rejected the motion and the amendments from parties other than his party, he rejected amendment after amendment to the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill that sought to improve the transparency, accountability and effective governance of the new police service. It was he who made the ministerial appointments in question, too. The cabinet secretary has refused again and again—he did so a moment ago—to acknowledge the high price that will be paid by police staff for his approach to reform and the impact that that will have on the service as a whole. He claims that his policies will “safeguard policing from UK Government cuts”. That is because he is desperate to talk about anyone else’s cuts but his own. However, it is the Scottish Government cuts to policing for which he is accountable. Those cuts go far beyond savings that are made from reducing duplication—we are talking about £60 million in the coming financial year, another £60 million in the next financial year and a further £60 million in the year after that. No wonder the chief constable has said, time and again, on the record, that he cannot deliver those cuts year on year without reducing the number of police officers in year 3.

I suggest that Kenny MacAskill answers the questions that are asked of him as minister with responsibility for the area, rather than engaging in puerile attempts to divert the debate to something that is happening elsewhere in the United Kingdom. The cabinet secretary claims that he has seen no evidence of the backfilling of staff jobs. It is a shame that he was not able to attend the meeting that took place here last week to launch Unison’s updated report on civilianisation in the Scottish police service. If he had attended the meeting, he would not stand up in the chamber and claim to have protected policing in Scotland against cuts. Twenty MSPs, from all parties, attended the event and heard directly from police staff about the threats that they face and the backfilling of staff posts by police officers, which is already under way. There were staff at that meeting from every part of Scotland and from all eight existing forces, and they all had similar tales to tell. A custody officer from Central Scotland Police said that police staff are in limbo because they do not know who their employer will be in a few weeks’ time, where they will be working or even whether they will have a job. A worker from Lothian and Borders Police said that staff are working through sickness. A colleague from Northern Constabulary said that staff are working through their statutory breaks and into the evening. A custody officer from Grampian said that no one will admit to workplace stress. All that is happening because of a fear of being the person whose job is identified as no longer being required. “Low morale and inefficiency,” is how a control-room operator from Strathclyde Police summed up the situation. He said that it was a case of “McWinsor in Scotland for police staff,” with cops being brought in to do the jobs of support staff, and that, at the same time, untold damage was being done to the culture of mutual support and respect in the Scottish police family. Kenny MacAskill wants to talk about how bad things are in England because he does not want to face up to how bad things are in Scotland. He wants to talk about numbers of police officers rather than about what those officers will be paid to do because he does not want to admit that more and more of them will be forced to become backroom bobbies. Sooner or later, the cabinet secretary will have to face up to reality. Unless he does so soon, his legacy will be a police service that is starved of resources, a governance structure that is divided against itself and a loss of confidence among officers and staff at the grass roots. If that happens, the biggest losers will be the communities of Scotland, which the police are there to protect and serve. The new service goes live in only a few days’ time. It is time for the Government to start listening. I move amendment S4M-05899.1, to leave out from first “believes” to “service” and insert: “considers that many of these uncertainties could have been avoided by improving the accountability and transparency of both the Police Service of Scotland and the Scottish Police Authority; notes the clear and repeated warnings from the chief constable and the staff union, Unison, that current spending and staffing plans are unsustainable; believes that the scale of cuts in police staff numbers will result in backfilling of civilian posts by police officers, reducing the effectiveness of the service;”

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for stepping outside his parallel universe for a moment. I hope that he heard me say in my speech that the absolutely central relationship of mutual trust and support that should exist between police officers and police staff is under threat from the policy approach that he has taken. Reflecting on the importance of that relationship, will he say something now about what he will do to repair the damage that has already been done?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what contribution Scotland’s offshore wind resources will make to meeting European Union renewable energy targets. (S4O-01867)

Does Fergus Ewing acknowledge that it is because Aberdeen has the highest concentration of offshore energy expertise anywhere in Europe that the EU wants to invest in a wind energy deployment centre in Aberdeen bay? Does he agree that it is important to send out the right signals about the priority that Scotland gives to further development of offshore wind technologies?

Does the cabinet secretary not acknowledge that we already have a currency union, that we have had one for 300 years and that the only threat to that currency union is from his party?

Did the First Minister also see this week the comments by Geoff Holmes of Talisman Sinopec Energy UK? He said that the growing investment in the North Sea needs to be underpinned by skills in order to ensure that that development can continue to be as safe as it has been in the past 25 years. If the First Minister saw that comment, does he agree that the answer is to locate the energy skills academy in Aberdeen without delay, in order to support the oil and gas industry going forward?

7. To ask the Scottish Government whether the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities has had discussions with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth on the impact on cities of the business rates incentivisation scheme and whether she has communicated the outcome to the city councils. (S4O-01815)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that, when she met the chief executive and the leader of Aberdeen City Council late last year, she discussed the scheme with them? At that time, it was estimated that the scheme was potentially worth more than £7 million to Aberdeen City Council in the current financial year. If that is the case, and if the £7 million is no longer available to the council, will she explain to the citizens of Aberdeen why that is and what has changed since November?

Investment in capital projects matters everywhere, and nowhere more than in Aberdeen and the north-east. Aberdeen is the most successful city of its size anywhere in the UK and it is currently the best place in Britain in which to find a job. In the next financial year, Aberdeen City Council will become the first council ever to raise more in business rates than it gets in Government grants. Aberdeen and the north-east are best placed to lead the country on the road to recovery and growth, but weaknesses in the area’s infrastructure still constrain its economic potential. It is more than 10 years since Jack McConnell announced the devolved Government’s support for the western peripheral route, at an Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce conference in January 2003. It is very nearly six years since the SNP was elected and became responsible for delivering that project. To date, little has been delivered on the ground. Preliminary work has finally got under way, in the current financial year, largely because Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council could meet the up-front costs. Despite the long lead-in to getting started, the AWPR is still largely missing from the Scottish Government’s spending plans for the next financial year. A business community that is frustrated by years of delay is—understandably—anxious to see evidence of investment coming forward, especially given that NPD is an unproven funding mechanism for infrastructure projects of such a scale. When Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce surveyed its members during north-east business week last year, 87 per cent identified the AWPR as a key infrastructure investment that would drive growth. That is why the chamber of commerce is calling this week for “publication of the full business case for the AWPR, in the interests of transparency, to ensure that the full funding package is in place.” I ask the Scottish Government to agree today to publication of the detailed business case for the AWPR and a full timetable for delivery of the Balmedie to Tipperty and airport sections of the project in particular. I also agree with the chamber of commerce in its call for “urgent progress” to be made on delivering improvements to the Haudagain roundabout. I ask for a clear commitment today to a date on which that work will begin. Labour’s amendment rightly highlights community engagement in the delivery of capital projects. On 20 December, the third Don crossing was raised in the chamber, and Nicola Sturgeon agreed with me that councils should always take local opinion into account. She said: “Such considerations are first and foremost for local communities, balancing the needs of the economy and regeneration with the interests of individual communities.”—[Official Report, 20 December 2012; c 15022.] If almost everyone in Aberdeen is for the AWPR and improvements to the Haudagain, almost everyone in Tillydrone is against a third Don crossing being built in that community.

Perhaps I might not have offered that the Scottish Government would pay the legal costs of the objector on one occasion, and perhaps I might have—[Interruption.]

Perhaps I might have taken a different approach to the planning inquiry. It is interesting that Mr Swinney in particular is so extremely sensitive to criticism of the delay in the project, which has happened on the Government’s watch.

In spite of the objections of so many people to the building of a third Don crossing in Tillydrone, a majority of councillors, including members of the SNP, voted to build it regardless. Nicola Sturgeon’s comments on the importance of local opinion were noted at a public meeting in Tillydrone last week and I agreed to pass on an invitation from the local community for her to come to Aberdeen to hear people’s views. I hope that she will take up that invitation and that she will convey the views of local people to others in her party.

In that way, Nicola Sturgeon will hear for herself what local people really think about spending priorities, and she will perhaps conclude that those projects that have public support—

—are the ones that should be delivered without further delay.

5. To ask the First Minister who will administer any fund established from the proceeds of a victims surcharge on offenders. (S4F-01178)

A victims fund is a splendid idea that is to be welcomed. However, the issue—as ever—is how the idea will be implemented. Has the First Minister read the Government’s policy memorandum to the bill, which was published today? It says that the Scottish Court Service expects fully one third of court fines to remain unpaid 12 months after they have been imposed and that more than half the fiscal fines that have been imposed in the past three years have not yet been paid in full. How will the victims surcharge be different?

In December 2011, the cabinet secretary made a commitment that no council in Scotland should receive less than 85 per cent of the average revenue allocation to councils. Given that he has reported on the transfer of resources in relation to the police and fire services, can he tell us what percentage of the revenue average will be allocated to Aberdeen City Council in 2013-14?

Will Mr Stewart take an intervention?

What is the member’s response to Mr Swinney’s decision that Aberdeen City Council should no longer receive 85 per cent of the Scottish average revenue funding per head?

Will the minister give way?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has approved plans for staff redundancies suggested by the Scottish police authority. (S4F-01165)

Let us just assume that that answer to my question was actually a “Yes”, because as far as I can interpret it, that is what the First Minister said. If, indeed, his answer is to imply that he has approved the plans, will he confirm that we are talking about 1,400 police staff being made redundant or being offered early retirement? Will he confirm a cost of £61.3 million for that? Will he tell us how those redundancies and retirements are to be funded and at what cost to the police service in the forthcoming financial year?

Can the cabinet secretary tell us when we will be told about responses to proposals for court closures in the islands and elsewhere and when he intends to make a decision on whether to bring forward a measure to close Scottish courts?

The amendments in the group take us to the heart of the weaknesses of part 2 of the bill, and particularly the reasons why we saw industrial action in our courts over the Christmas period. I am pleased that the justice secretary has told us today that he has conceded the point that the threshold that he initially set was far too low and that he has adjusted it upwards. When we considered the bill at stages 1 and 2, we did not dispute the principle that contributions should be made by those who can afford them; what we disputed was the impact on the poorest people in society. The removal of the estimated 6,000 people whose disposable income is between £68 and £82 is clearly welcome, so we will vote for amendments 1 and 2. However, the justice secretary said that the cost of meeting that increased threshold is to be borne by those at the upper end of the criminal legal aid spectrum—people whose disposable income is still around £11,000 or £12,000 a year. Those are not wealthy people but the working poor, and they will bear the burden. I would be interested to hear from the minister when he sums up what he anticipates the impact will be on the number of people for whom the legal aid that is available becomes such a token amount that it is easier for them to remove themselves from the legal aid system altogether. Margaret Mitchell’s amendment 24 addresses another issue that existed in the bill as introduced. Under the current assistance by way of representation system, only the income of the legal aid applicant is considered. We believe that it would be wrong to change that in the way that the cabinet secretary proposes, and for that reason we will support amendment 24.

Amendment 7A does indeed seek to amend amendment 7, in the name of Kenny MacAskill. It relates to the charges that can be imposed or the fees that can be set by the Scottish Legal Aid Board in return for collecting legal aid contributions on behalf of defence lawyers. This is not a matter of mere detail that should be left to the regulations or to future discussions. By suggesting that, I think that the cabinet secretary has put his finger on one of the fundamental flaws of the bill. This is an extremely important piece of proposed legislation, as it will introduce the principle of contributions to criminal legal aid in a novel form. The bill should not simply give permission for regulations to be drawn up to address the details. Although the Law Society of Scotland accepts the general propositions in amendment 7, many of the bar associations across Scotland do not. Many lawyers who are members of the Law Society and a bar association believe that the Scottish Legal Aid Board is best equipped to collect contributions to legal aid, given that it has years of experience of doing so on the civil side, as well as the infrastructure to do it. The full cost recovery that is outlined in the Government’s amendment 7 is full cost recovery on a case-by-case basis. That will still leave individual lawyers exposed to the risk that clients will not pay their contributions and the risk that they will receive an open-ended bill from SLAB when collecting contributions racks up significant costs. The board has estimated that it would cost £600,000 annually for it to take responsibility for the collection of contributions. If it can come up with a definite figure for the cost of its services to solicitors, it is surely reasonable that the legislation should reflect that, and that it does not create the risk that open-ended charges will be imposed on lawyers who use the board’s services. Amendment 7A would simply manage the financial risk to law firms by creating a set fee for the collection service instead of unspecified charges. That flat fee would, of course, reflect the costs incurred by SLAB in collecting the fees, and it could be calculated on the basis of the figures that it has not brought forward. I know that a flat fee for the collection of legal aid contributions would be welcomed by many people who are concerned about the approach that has been taken. It seems to me that none of what the cabinet secretary said—he talked about detail and regulation—explains why a charge should be recovered on a case-by-case basis instead of having a fee that would apply across the board.

I accept the cabinet secretary’s point regarding his discussions with the Law Society of Scotland, but what has he to say about the continuing objections and views of the bar associations in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow and many other places throughout the country?

When we debated the bill at stage 1, I said that we were in the familiar position of addressing a Scottish Government justice bill that dealt with two quite different subjects. That was a relatively marginal criticism, because Labour supported the general principles behind both parts of the bill. Sadly, we are now in a position that is even more familiar, because in recent months we have seen what happens when the Scottish Government ignores the views of others and presses ahead with legislation that is not fit for purpose. That, for example, is how the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 appears to be viewed by the chief constable of the new police service of Scotland. As some of us heard at the lobby outside the Parliament today, that is how this bill is viewed by many of those who practise criminal law in our courts. Reform of the justice system is just as important as reform of our police and fire services. The bill is only the first of a number of measures that ministers propose, and decisions that ministers will be required to take in the next few months, that will affect the delivery of justice. It must therefore concern us all that ministers have so signally failed to build a consensus in support of the proposed measures in part 2 of the bill, covering criminal legal aid. The cabinet secretary finally found the time at the end of last year to talk to representatives of the legal profession and to offer some changes to meet some of their many concerns. However, Mr MacAskill did so only after they had withdrawn their services from clients in an effort to convince the Government that their concerns were real and substantial, and after he had resisted efforts by other parties, including the Justice Committee, to insert the changes into the bill that were clearly required. We welcome the Government’s concessions—late and reluctant though they may have been—because they meet in part some of the concerns that we raised during the passage of the bill. In particular, we were quite clear that the proposed threshold for liability to pay contributions—a disposable income of £68 a week—was far too low. It would have captured many of those in the greatest poverty, for whom making any level of contribution to legal costs would be one extra cost too far. Therefore, we welcome the fact that the threshold has been raised to £82 a week, which is more realistic, although of course it does not answer the question of affordability altogether. People with disposable incomes of £82 a week are still on very low incomes, which is why the working of the new system will need to be carefully monitored if those people are to retain fair and reasonable access to justice. It is clear from what the Scottish Legal Aid Board has told us—indeed, the cabinet secretary confirmed it today—that the higher threshold will be paid for by increasing the contributions that are payable by those who are entitled to legal aid but who are at the higher end of the income scale. SLAB has also offered us comparisons with the impact of changes in England. It expects the consequence of that change to be that many of those who remain theoretically entitled to criminal legal aid will in fact cease to have access to the legal aid system altogether—they will be represented as private clients, because the assessment will leave them eligible for only a token amount of legal aid. SLAB’s figures confirm that those people are by no means well off. A disposable income of around £11,500 a year is still poverty relative to the population as a whole, even if it is at the higher end relative to other people who are entitled to receive legal aid. Again, especially given SLAB’s expectation that many solicitors will persuade those clients to go private, the impact of the new system on those at the upper end of the eligible group will need to be monitored closely, to ensure that they can achieve access to justice. We have also raised the issue of what should happen when people who have been drawn into payment towards legal aid costs for the first time are acquitted. Graeme Pearson eloquently moved an amendment to that effect. The Government has offered no movement in that area—not even on giving discretion to the judiciary to have contributions refunded only in certain cases, as Graeme Pearson proposed. That would have been a modest improvement, protecting a few of those poorer people brought to court and then acquitted, but creating no general presumptions with implications across the justice system as a whole. It is a pity that the Government did not see fit to take the opportunity to support that compromise position. Another critical issue has been in relation to the collection of contributions. A key argument at stage 2 was that the cost and burden of collection might for some solicitors be enough to tip the argument against offering criminal legal advice in the first place. For small rural firms doing only a small proportion of criminal work, a decision to stop doing any such work could impact on access to justice for any accused person in that area. The Government has conceded that SLAB could collect contributions on behalf of solicitors. By doing so, it has accepted the principle of such collection, but the way in which it has done so fails to engage with the legal profession’s concerns and will not attract the support of many. To provide for collection by a Government agency would have been a useful support for the introduction of contributions, and it is again disappointing that Mr MacAskill has chosen not to take the opportunity offered by a Labour amendment to enable solicitors to seek that service without the risk of taking on an open-ended liability to cost recovery by the Legal Aid Board. If the job of Government is to produce the necessary reform and build support for a reform agenda, it seems to me that the Government is, once again, not doing that job with this bill. We support the principles underlying both parts of the bill: the modernisation of the civil justice system and contributions to the costs of criminal legal aid by those who can afford to pay. Many others support the principles, too, but they continue to be concerned about the detail and the practicality of how the Government proposes to implement the changes. It is surely a matter of regret that the Government’s approach has divided the legal profession and left so many defence solicitors believing that the Government does not care what happens to them or their clients. It is equally regrettable that the approach has divided the Parliament and that those on our side cannot support the bill.

We are, of course, here to debate the bill that the cabinet secretary has introduced. Will he respond to some of the points that have been made about the impact of the way in which he has drawn his bill up on those whose incomes are just above the bare poverty level?

I hope that the cabinet secretary will accept that when Parliament voted for the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, it did not expect that the outcome of its implementation—on Mr MacAskill’s watch—would be two directors of human resources and two directors of finance, not to mention duplication in legal advice, communication and other areas. For clarity and understanding, and for the hundreds, if not thousands, of people who are concerned about their employment in the police service, can the cabinet secretary tell us who will be responsible for a voluntary redundancy scheme for police staff? Will it be the director of human resources who is accountable to the chief constable or will it be the director of human resources who is accountable to the chair of the SPA?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government allows convicted criminals to post online material purporting to cast doubt on their conviction. (S4F-01119)

Will the First Minister confirm that rule 73 of the Prisons and Young Offenders Institutions (Scotland) Rules 2011 forbids the use of “films or recordings” obtained in prison “for … transmission ... by any form of electronic medium” without “the prior written consent of the Governor and subject to … such conditions as the Governor may impose”? Will he confirm whether the Scottish Prison Service gave such written consent in the case relating to the murder of Jodi Jones, whether it imposed conditions to prevent the film being posted online and what action will be taken in the case if conditions attached to written consent have been breached?

It is right to celebrate successes and opportunities in oil and gas, but it is important also to remember that those successes and opportunities have come at a cost. When we last debated oil and gas, in November 2011, I spoke of the impact of the Piper Alpha disaster 25 years ago, which Rhoda Grant and others have mentioned. Offshore workers have died in the intervening period; indeed, a support vessel crewman died at sea only a few weeks ago. However, there has been a step change in safety since 1988 and the gains that have been made in that time must not be taken for granted. Before Christmas, the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on oil and gas heard from Terry O’Halloran, who is a safety representative of the offshore workforce that is taking part in the investigation into the causes of the two helicopter ditchings in the North Sea in 2012. He and his colleagues told us about the work that is under way, and they confirmed that the manufacturers and operators have agreed that the helicopters in question should be grounded for as long as it takes for the causes to be found. That is what it means to put safety first; not warm words, but firm actions, even if they come at a cost to business profits and Government revenues, because those financial costs matter less than the human costs of getting it wrong. I welcome the further development of a Scottish oil and gas strategy. When Parliament first debated oil and gas, in Aberdeen in May 2002, I said that we were only halfway through the life of the industry and that we had a shared priority “to secure the benefits for enterprise and employment in Scotland of extracting the remaining resources”—[Official Report, 29 May 2002; c 9274.] from the North Sea. That is still true today. Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce published in November its latest oil and gas survey of its 400 member companies in the sector. Skills gaps and difficulties in recruitment came up time and again. The chamber of commerce highlighted the need for progress with the energy skills academy, with “appropriate resources from both the private and public sectors.” That must mean investment by the Scottish Government and the Scottish Higher and Further Education Funding Council in the oil and gas academy of Scotland, which is a new initiative that is being developed by the universities and colleges in and around Aberdeen. Investment in OGAS at this critical time can help to secure the position of Aberdeen city and shire as the leading centre of excellence in oil and gas outwith North America, second only to Houston on the world stage. It would help oil and gas today, and would also help to build a strong platform for development of offshore renewable energy skills and capability in the future. I welcome Fergus Ewing’s renewed commitment today to working in partnership with the UK Government and industry through PILOT. That is essential to tackling the barriers to maximising production and to maintaining the highest safety and environmental standards. Last month, Professor Alex Kemp at the University of Aberdeen produced his latest report on potential production of oil and gas. In his view, to extract even half the remaining potential reserves in the UK continental shelf would require a continuing high oil price and increased levels of exploration, enhanced production from existing fields, fewer shutdowns, improved access for new operators to other companies’ pipelines, and investment to extend the life of existing infrastructure. Those are not simply technical problems for economists and engineers to resolve; they go to the heart of the issues of safe working offshore and potential future production. We can achieve nothing in relation to either if issues including ageing infrastructure are not addressed in good time—as the minister acknowledged and as Tavish Scott emphasised. Although new technology such as horizontal drilling will enable harder-to-reach oil and gas reserves to get to market, much of it will still find its way onshore via production platforms and pipelines that are now 40 years old. Maintaining that infrastructure and affording the new technology depend on the price of oil and uncertainty about future costs and returns. With oil at $111 a barrel, Aberdeen will continue to lead the world in developing new technologies to extract oil and gas in a most hostile environment. However, that innovation is dependent on price and is focused on production. It is vital that safety is not compromised in the extension of the working lives of production platforms and pipelines, which is why the step change in safety must be protected and why the industry’s growing willingness to be open and transparent is so important. I commend Eurocopter and the helicopter safety steering group on their willingness to put safety first when it comes to journeys to and from workplaces offshore. It is just as important that accidental releases of hydrocarbons are now routinely publicised on Oil & Gas UK’s website and that the industry body’s step change in safety has led it to include elected safety representatives from the offshore workforce. Those changes suggest that the industry recognises what its future priorities have to be and that a safe and sound working environment is the key to greater production, revenue and profits. It knows that untapped reserves will stay beneath the sea bed unless they can be extracted safely, efficiently and in an environmentally responsible way. None of that can be taken for granted. If people are asked to go to work in such a hostile and hazardous environment—Tavish Scott rightly highlighted the particular challenges that will be associated with the developments west of Shetland—those people should be confident that they have the support of Parliament and all of us in putting their safety first.

He should.

I welcome the minister’s approach and tone. However, it is my recollection of the debate in Aberdeen 11 years ago—which I believe he attended—that all the major parties acknowledged the long-term future and importance of the oil and gas industry at that time, and they have done so since.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that Tillydrone community council also met yesterday—in Mr Stewart’s constituency—and that far from welcoming the matter, it wanted to discuss with its local councillors what the impact of the project would be? When ministers next discuss the project with Aberdeen City Council, will they address the concerns of local people about the division of their community by a new road and about the impact on regeneration?

7. Thank you, Presiding Officer. I also thank you for your gracious comments earlier regarding the point of order that I raised with you yesterday afternoon. To ask the Scottish Government how many fiscal direct penalties have been discharged without having been fully paid since 2009. (S4O-01594)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that many alternative disposals do not apply in the case of fiscal direct penalties. Page 2 of the Scottish Court Service’s most recent quarterly fines report lists the fiscal direct penalties that have been paid for each financial year since 2009. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the percentages that are reported in that official statistics publication for Scotland have been calculated only after discounting the 17,000 fiscal penalties that were discharged over the period, thereby giving an entirely false impression of the success rate in collection of fiscal fines? On that basis, will he confirm that fewer than half of the fiscal direct penalties that have been imposed on offenders since 2009 have been paid in full? If that is the case, does he agree that urgent action is needed to put that right?

On a point of order under rule 13.5.2, Presiding Officer. On 9 October, after Donald Trump had published an email sent to him by a special adviser seeking endorsement of the decision to release the Lockerbie bomber, I asked a number of specific parliamentary questions to establish whether the Scottish Government had sent emails to other individuals or organisations seeking endorsement of that decision. On 5 November, I received a holding reply from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, which promised a full reply to my questions as soon as possible. On 6 December, the Scottish Government published on its website a number of emails sent by special advisers in the First Minister’s office in response to a freedom of information request from a newspaper, which contained precisely the information that I had asked for. The information was then published in newspapers on 7 December, but I received answers to the questions only yesterday, on 10 December. I am disappointed that the Government chose not to answer my specific questions but instead published the information separately some eight weeks after I had lodged the questions and four weeks after I was promised that I would be replied to as soon as possible. Mr MacAskill’s answer to question S4W-10134 assured me that copies of the relevant correspondence were being placed that same day on the Scottish Government website, when they had in fact been published several days earlier. The answer was provided after 46 days, rather than the 20 days that is laid down under standing orders. Presiding Officer, you ruled on a point of order raised by Mark Griffin last week. You said that the Scottish Government should not treat members “with such discourtesy in the future.”—[Official Report, Tuesday 4 December; c 14284.] I ask that you use your authority to ensure that there are no further such occurrences and that the Scottish Government answers all questions promptly, in accordance with standing orders, no matter how embarrassing its answers may be.

I congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the debate. I too had the opportunity to visit Camphill School Aberdeen in the summer. A young man called Steven welcomed me and explained what Camphill had meant in transforming his life and the lives of others. I am delighted that I was able to welcome Steven and his friends to Holyrood on their visit today and that they are in the public gallery this evening. Alison McInnes and Maureen Watt were right to highlight the importance of the city of Aberdeen to the worldwide Camphill movement. The theory and practice of what we now call holistic education are what characterise the movement—that is one more export of which Aberdeen can be justly proud. I live just downhill from the Camphill estate—or downriver, I should say—but when I visited it this summer, I discovered an even closer connection. When those progressive thinkers and educators fled from Nazi tyranny in Austria, the first place where they made a home in Britain was in the old manse at Insch—the village in Aberdeenshire where my late father was the minister and where I lived in my teenage years. That was the origin of the community that, after the outbreak of war, set up home at Camphill with the support of the publisher, SW Macmillan. The teachings of Rudolf Steiner about addressing the physical, emotional, intellectual and spiritual needs of every pupil, and celebrating our humanity, could hardly be more diametrically opposed to the inhuman creed from which those refugees had fled. It is therefore an honour that Aberdeen and the north-east are home to the Camphill movement, and that Scotland is the first among the 20 countries where its philosophy has been put into practice. When I met Steven and co-ordinator Laurence Alfred at Camphill in the summer, they told me about the opportunities that young people who have learning disabilities enjoy, such as access to an education, to practical skills and to vocational qualifications, allowing them to work and live as part of a real community within the safe environment that Camphill provides. It is the first school in Aberdeen to hold the prestigious autism accreditation after scoring 100 per cent in a parent satisfaction survey. In its latest report, Education Scotland graded Camphill school as excellent in three of the eight areas that were inspected and very good in the other five: a record that speaks for itself. As has been said, Aberdeen is home to a total of five Camphill communities that provide residential and day care, education and training, and care and support for people of all ages, from young children at the kindergarten, to Simeon Care for the Elderly. Today, for the first time, I had the opportunity to meet Jeannie Carlson from Simeon Care for the Elderly—she is among those who are in the public gallery. She explained that her unit at Bieldside is the only Camphill community in this country that is designed for older people and she talked about the £2 million fundraising campaign that has been launched to expand the residential care home and build a day care centre that would provide much needed respite for elderly residents and their families and carers. I was interested to hear that those plans will involve applying the logic of Camphill’s approach to younger age groups to those who are facing some of the toughest challenges of old age, such as dementia. Aberdeen previously had a pioneering home at Thorngrove that specialised in dementia care, but three or four years ago it was a victim of local authority cuts. It would be marvellous to have a unit that can give a national and international lead in supporting people at such a challenging time in their lives, and it would be fantastic to see all that has been achieved so far projected forwards and outwards to meet the needs of more people in more age groups and more communities in the future, in Scotland and around the world.

When the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill went through the Parliament earlier this year, Labour and other parties raised a series of concerns about the legislation itself and about the ways in which the creation of a single Scottish police force would be implemented. Above all, although supporting both the principle of the bill and the bill itself, we raised serious concerns that many hundreds of loyal and hardworking members of police staff would lose their jobs in order to balance the books and that, as a result, many hundreds of police officers would be taken off the front line to backfill civilian jobs in the new service. The Government amendment today highlights an increase of 65 police staff jobs across Scotland over the last quarter compared with the previous quarter. I fear that police staff will simply despair at such a superficial defence from a Government that fails to acknowledge a net loss of more than 900 civilian staff jobs over the past two years. Mr MacAskill laughs as if his defence is a significant one. More than 900 jobs have been lost over the past two years; there is a prediction by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland that a further 3,000 jobs will be at risk over the next three years; and Mr MacAskill comes to the chamber and asks members to regard an increase in one quarter of 1 per cent of the workforce as a significant difference from the pattern that he has set. We return to the central issue of staff jobs but in a context that I suspect few would have anticipated when the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 was passed. The most immediate issue that is confronting police staff is not what cuts will be made but who will make those decisions in the first place. When the chairman of the Scottish Police Authority and the chief constable of the police service of Scotland gave evidence to the Justice Committee last week, their failure to agree on who was responsible for what was there for all to see. The First Minister described that last week as “creative tension”. However, from the point of view of those whose jobs are most at risk, it was a lot more serious than that. These were more than differences of personal or professional opinion; they were also differences of legal opinion so important that both Vic Emery and Stephen House resorted to taking external advice at public expense on the proper interpretation of the new force’s founding statute. That quite remarkable situation deserves to be brought to the attention of the whole Parliament. After all, it was Parliament that passed the act, including exceptional provision that the Parliament should keep the new arrangements under review and provide regular reports. What the act means, what was intended by it and how it should be interpreted are matters that concern us all. The 2012 act establishes a single police force by amalgamating eight existing police forces and two existing national bodies. However, that amalgamation creates not one new national body, but two—a new police service and a new Police Authority board. The issue is which of those bodies should be responsible for what. The 2012 act provides that the forensic service should be delivered by the authority in order to keep a sterile corridor between police officers and forensic evidence. As Stephen House told the Justice Committee last week, as chief constable he has also conceded control to the authority over a number of important areas, most notably information and communication technology. He is not so willing to give up day-to-day control of police staff or of police finance—for good reason. Direction and control of police staff are the responsibility of the chief constable. They have to be, if he is to take operational responsibility for policing in Scotland. That is clear in the act, in the responses of ministers and in the Government’s amendment today. However, the chairman of the board, Vic Emery, has formed a different opinion on the basis of the legal advice that he received. He told the Justice Committee last week: “The police staff will always be employed by the SPA, but before they become police staff, they are staff. When they get allocated to the police service of Scotland, they become police staff; and when that happens, they come under the direction and control of the chief constable.” Stephen House gave the Justice Committee his own interpretation, again based on the legal advice that he received: “In effect, the board loans the police staff to the chief constable on a day-to-day basis”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November 2012; c 2127-8.] Then they come under his direction and control. Those statements require clarification—that is where the Government has a responsibility to clearly express its own view. The statement “before they become police staff, they are staff” is a proposition that does not appear to be supported by the 2012 act. People who are currently police staff with existing forces are about to become police staff of the single national force. It must surely be a matter of concern that the authority that is to employ them appears to believe that there is a point in that process at which they are not police staff at all. Equally, the idea that staff are on loan to the police service does not seem to provide a secure basis for the conduct of their day-to-day duties, as staff who are on loan between organisations on a day-to-day basis could presumably be there today and gone tomorrow. The Justice Committee invited Mr Emery and Mr House to share their conflicting legal opinions, and both have done so. The committee has not yet seen fit to publish those opinions. I hope that it will revisit that decision in the interests of transparency, but it is clear that that is a matter for it to decide.

I understand that, and it is clear that the committee is free to determine what to do with that information on the basis of the advice that it has received. However, we have on the record the views that have been offered on behalf of the Scottish Government by the head of police and fire reform, Christie Smith, to both the Scottish Police Authority and the police service of Scotland. They are available on the Justice Committee’s pages on the Parliament’s website and at the back of the chamber. His letter takes issue with Mr Emery’s central proposition that the authority rather than the chief constable is responsible for the administration of the police service. It refers to section 17(2)(b) of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012, which, it says, provides that “the administration of the Police Service is a responsibility of the Chief Constable”. The letter describes the question of who does what as “a business decision” to be agreed between the authority and the chief constable, and says that it is “not a question that is constrained by the Act.” If the Scottish Police Authority now accepts that view and seeks to make an agreement on that basis with the chief constable, it is clear that progress can be made. However, if it does not, or if agreement cannot be reached on the management and control of staffing and resources, the police service itself will suffer. Mr Smith’s letter is equally clear that the chief constable is not constrained in what he can ask civilian staff as opposed to police officers to do. That was a possible unintended consequence of the 2012 act, which caused the chief constable concern. According to Mr Smith, the Government’s view is that “There is nothing in the Act to prevent police staff, acting in support of policing functions, from operating autonomously or taking decisions in the course of their employment.” Again, it is important that that is made clear to the police, the authority and the staff themselves. We are holding this debate in order to give the cabinet secretary an opportunity to put on the record his own view on those matters; to endorse—as I expect and hope that he will—the responses of his senior official to the various legal opinions that have been offered on the interpretation of the 2012 act; and to tell us whether the differences of opinion have now been resolved or continue to be debated and disputed within the service or the authority. If they are not yet resolved, he should tell us what he will do about that. This is not an abstract debate about legal definitions, and it is not simply about the wisdom or otherwise of senior public servants seeking separate legal opinions on the interpretation of a brand new act of Parliament; it is about the security and certainty of employment of nearly 7,000 police staff. The civilians who work for the police already face enough uncertainties, with the very real prospect of many job losses over the next three years. We are calling for ministers to address those public servants’ concerns and to give them some confidence that the budget cuts that the police service faces will not simply be delivered at their expense. We want to see no more backfilling of staff jobs by police officers, whether in custody suites or call-and-command centres, or in administrative duties in police stations. We want to see no contracting out of jobs that are currently undertaken by civilian staff to G4S or anyone else. Most immediately, staff need to see an end to the jousting for control between the Police Authority and the police service and a recognition by the authority’s board that it is there to maintain the service, keep the policing of Scotland under review and hold the chief constable to account, not to run the police service at its own hand. We need to hear from the cabinet secretary today that the disputes have been resolved, or that they will be resolved before Christmas, so that all concerned can get on with the core policing task of making Scotland and its communities safe. I move, That the Parliament notes the view of the Scottish Government that “the Chief Constable has direction and control of the Police Service of Scotland and is responsible for its day to day administration”; regrets the First Minister’s description of the dispute between the Chief Constable and the Chair of the Scottish Police Authority over responsibility for the delivery of policing in Scotland as “creative tension”; calls on the Scottish Government to establish a clear deadline for the resolution of this dispute, and further calls on the Scottish Government to guarantee that there will be no back-filling of staff posts by police officers or contracting out of staff posts to the private sector to meet the budget cuts planned over the next three years.

The cabinet secretary talks of predictions, so will he now give us a prediction and say whether he anticipates that trend of increasing staff numbers to continue?

I acknowledge that many areas appear to have been resolved, but will Sandra White confirm that she said in committee that she did not accept the argument that there was no dispute and that there was a dispute that had to be resolved?

The cabinet secretary has not yet referred to the letter from Mr Smith to Mr Emery and Mr House, which is now on the public record and which attempts to resolve some of the differences in interpretation of the act that had been offered by their legal advisers. Do Mr Emery and Mr House accept in full the views that were put forward on the cabinet secretary’s behalf by Mr Smith, or do they continue to dispute any aspects of that advice?

2. To ask the Scottish Government how many people appeared in court without legal representation on 3 December 2012 as a result of protest action by defence solicitors in Aberdeen, Forfar, Arbroath, Dundee, Perth, Alloa, Falkirk and Dunfermline. (S4T-00150)

I am grateful for that information. However, it is clear that the impact of the action went beyond those who appeared in court. How many people who were held in cells over the weekend were liberated on Monday morning without having appeared in court? How many police forces instructed officers to consider discretion and other available disposals to avoid detaining people who might otherwise have been detained in preparation for such action?

I am surprised that Mr MacAskill is not interested in the liberation on Monday morning of people who were held over the weekend and that he has made no inquiries about that. That aside, I am encouraged to note that the cabinet secretary is due to meet the Law Society of Scotland and other representatives of the legal profession tomorrow. Will he approach that meeting with a fresh offer, with a view to resolving the dispute? For example, in line with the question that I asked the First Minister two weeks ago, will he consider the Scottish Legal Aid Board offering to collect all contributions and to charge the legal profession for providing that service?

Does the minister agree that the opportunity for the workforce at Remploy Aberdeen to make a realistic bid for its premises was fundamentally undermined by the failure of Remploy to provide them with a valuation of the factory and the price for which it was prepared to sell or lease those premises?

The post-war Labour Government developed the Remploy network in order to provide jobs and incomes for men and women who were returning from war-time service and whose injuries meant that they could not access the mainstream employment market. That initiative had broad support. As we have heard, a Conservative-led Government is closing down the Remploy network. The Government’s argument—perhaps like Mary Scanlon’s—is that its motive is not to cut public spending for its own sake, but that the Remploy model of sheltered employment is somehow not appropriate for the 21st century. I reject that view.

That, of course, is a profoundly unreasonable point. To try to posit the entire closing down of the Remploy network on the fact that a number of factories have closed in the past is precisely to confuse the responsibilities of Government and to try to pass the buck for a profoundly ill-founded decision. I reject the view that Mary Scanlon puts and the view of her colleagues at Westminster on the basis of the experience of disabled people and supported employment providers in the city of Aberdeen. Aberdeen has the highest mainstream employment levels of any city region in Scotland. Next year, Aberdeen City Council will become the first local council to give more to the Scottish Government in business rates than it gets back in grants. Aberdeen is now the best city in Britain in which to find a job. If supported employment really were out of date, it would be out of date first in Aberdeen, but that is far from the case. What Aberdeen proves is how hard disabled people will try to maintain a supported environment in which to work, whatever the failures of the organisations that are tasked with providing that environment are, because even in a full-employment economy, disabled people simply do not have equal access to mainstream jobs.

That is absolutely correct. The two key providers of supported employment in Aberdeen have been Remploy and Glencraft, which has otherwise been known as the Royal Aberdeen Workshop for the Blind. Both have faced the threat of closure in the recent past and both have survived until now because of the will of their workforces and the wider community that jobs should not be lost. When Remploy’s future in Aberdeen was under review in 2007, its future was secured through modernisation, in the way that Mark McDonald has said. The constituency MP, Frank Doran, lobbied UK ministers and Anne McGuire agreed that Aberdeen should have a new role as the flagship for social enterprise in the Remploy group. At the same time, I and others lobbied the Scottish ministers to promote procurement by public bodies from supported employment providers under article 19 of the European Union public procurement directive. Jim Mather also responded positively at the time, as Patricia Ferguson said. Glencraft was threatened with closure in 2009 as a result of the proposed withdrawal of subsidy by the then Administration in Aberdeen City Council. Glencraft workers came to Holyrood to lobby the First Minister to save their jobs, and Alex Salmond responded positively to encourage the council and other partners to find a way to keep Glencraft alive. As the minister has already said, that way was found thanks to the leadership that was provided by the Production Services Network oil services company, which is now part of the Wood Group—Duncan Skinner’s energy and drive and his personal commitment to the Glencraft cause are a fantastic example of what corporate social responsibility really means. That demonstrates that even the most successful businesses in the most competitive industries recognise that there is no substitute for supported employment for many disabled workers. I come to the present closure process. Aberdeen Remploy was unlucky enough to be included in the first phase of closures, and it has been a bitter experience. Aberdeen’s success in the past five years in developing a social enterprise model was disregarded. The bid that local social enterprises assembled to take over the premises and maintain employment was rejected. The factory is now closed and boarded up and, as of this week, it is up for sale. However, that is not the end of the story. The wider community continues to believe that those workers deserve our support. Social enterprises such as Instant Neighbour and Aberdeen Foyer as well as Aberdeen City Council, the University of Aberdeen and Remploy’s customers still want a positive outcome. Even Remploy has not entirely closed the door on a possible lease arrangement with local social enterprises if a business case can be made. Frank Doran MP continues to work on making that happen. As Fergus Ewing said, Mr Doran has done a tremendous job in keeping the option open in talks with Remploy’s national board and Esther McVey. In the meantime, the workers have not been idle. Kay Clark, Lorna Buchan and their colleagues have set up a new business, Aberdeen Textiles and Workwear Services, as a co-operative with eight members, full or part-time, who previously worked at Remploy in Aberdeen. When Esther McVey came to Holyrood last month, I asked her to ensure that the sewing and embroidery machines at the Remploy factory were made available to Kay Clark and her team. She agreed to do so and that has happened. The co-operative now supplies high-visibility coveralls to oil service companies across the city that stayed loyal to Remploy through the past few months, and it is even diversifying into making and embroidering school wear. Aberdeen Textiles shows what can be done with local initiative and support. The co-operative also shows the kind of model of supported employment that works for disabled people. It has already recruited one disabled worker who had given up hope of ever working again, and she will not be the last.

Not every local factory has such loyal customers on the doorstep or a private sector partner who is keen to put something back, such as Wood Group PSN.

That is why it is so important that the Scottish Government stands ready to help the factories that are involved in phase 1 and those in phase 2 to give disabled workers such as the team that I mentioned the right to work in an environment that gives them the support that they need.

I appreciate the member’s desire to support the workforce, but I simply point out that the restructuring plan that was carried out in 2007 was intended precisely to maintain the Remploy network and that what has happened in the past 12 months is the opposite of that, as it is closing down the network.

I simply add to Mr Stewart’s outrage that the value of the property is probably significantly less than £400,000; £250,000 would be closer to the mark.

The question of access to mainstream employment has broad support. However, does Mr Fraser agree with Liz Sayce that there is no place for supported employment? The view has been rejected by other parties during the debate.

6. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will increase access to college courses for senior school pupils. (S4O-01531)

The cabinet secretary mentioned skills for work courses. Other such excellent arrangements are in place. Given the view of the curriculum for excellence management board that the senior phase of the curriculum for excellence can be successful only if local authorities, schools, colleges and their partners work together on planning and delivery, what guarantee can he offer that all those senior school pupils for whom a college experience would be the most appropriate will be able to access college courses in the future? Given the budgetary pressures to which he referred, will he provide colleges with the necessary resources, provide education authorities with the relevant resources or support both to increase such access in future?

Given that, in practice, many councils are making the judgment to offer the same number of courses to pupils in a year group—specifically, we are talking about S4—will the Government consider issuing guidance to employers, colleges and universities to ensure that the judgments that local education authorities make do not disadvantage young people when they seek employment or post-school education?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what changes it will make in relation to people who have been released from prison early and then reoffend before the end of their original sentence. (S4T-00146)

Is the cabinet secretary’s intention simply to amend the 1993 act, which he mentioned in his reply, or does he believe that other statute requires to be amended? Can he tell us why he believes that the existing statute does not provide guidance that is clear enough for the judiciary? Can he offer examples and point to cases in which it is clear that the existing provision has not been properly understood or has not been acted upon according to the intention of Parliament? Can he tell us whether he was asked to produce reform in this area by the Lord President or others who are involved in our criminal justice system and what the genesis of the proposal might be?

I share the cabinet secretary’s hope that we will see clarity and transparency. What is his response to the victims of crime who say that the existence of concurrent sentences is an obstacle to justice in their circumstances? Given its nature, is not the matter the sort of thing that the Scottish sentencing council might be able to address? If he agrees with that, when does he intend to implement the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010, which allows such a council to be established?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans that the Scottish energy skills academy, as stated by the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism, will be anchored in the north-east of Scotland. (S4O-01523)

Given the demand for additional trained technicians in the energy sector in the north-east and the need for universities and colleges to have some certainty about future funding, will the cabinet secretary tell us whether funding for the initiative will be provided separately from the mainstream funding for further and higher education and whether it could be allocated for a number of years at a time by, for example, providing support for additional apprenticeships in the energy industries?

5. To ask the First Minister what the purpose is of the Scottish Government’s proposed changes to criminal legal aid. (S4F-00986)

I welcome the reference to parity. Given that contributions under civil legal aid are collected centrally by the Scottish Legal Aid Board, will the First Minister undertake to establish the full costs to the board of doing the same for contributions under criminal legal aid and instruct the board to discuss those costs with representatives of the legal profession before the bill returns to the chamber at stage 3?

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to Mr Stewart, not least for reminding me of that clear commitment, which I hope he has taken on board, too. Mr Stewart referred to principle. Can he tell me, on principle, which benefits he would wish to retain as universal benefits and which he would wish to vary? What is the difference, in principle?

The minister will recall that I wrote to her recently on the matter. I accept the point about availability of data, but does she acknowledge that the Scottish drug misuse database has been in existence in one form or another for more than 10 years and that some of the data in it are valuable and should be used as a guide to the position over a longer period?

The debate has illustrated the fact that drugs policy matters and that there is a real commitment across the chamber to getting it right, albeit that there are also different priorities. We heard concerns about the impact of drug addiction on users and their families. Perhaps the most important and challenging aspect of that is the cycle of poverty, desperation and drug addiction repeating itself from one generation to the next—even, as George Adam said, to a third generation. However, as Duncan McNeil said, there are equally strong concerns about the impact of drug use and dependence in the wider community. Drugs and addiction are responsible for many serious crimes, and too many in our communities have suffered the effects of chaotic and antisocial behaviour by drug users in their neighbourhoods, as Neil Findlay vividly described. To acknowledge that and ensure that we have the most effective policy approach is not to lack empathy with drug users. Far from it. It is to recognise that we all have an interest in getting it right. Richard Simpson laid out why methadone continues to be an essential part of treatment for heroin addicts. It remains an essential tool, but it is also important to be confident about how and when it is used. Central to that concern must be the black market in methadone, in which a duly prescribed drug is sold for cash with which to buy heroin to use on its own or as a top-up to methadone. The user who sells clearly runs a direct risk of harm as a consequence and, as Willie Rennie said, methadone that is sold on the open market is a major contributor to drug-related deaths. Jenny Marra was absolutely right to highlight further issues on the dispensing of methadone by high-street pharmacists, an issue that George Adam also mentioned. Jackson Carlaw suggests that no voices should be raised above a whisper on those issues. However, the public expect us to speak out on the issues connected with drug use that are of concern to them and we would do nobody a service by maintaining that low tone of voice.

If that is the point that was being made, it was clearly wide of the mark because the issues that Jenny Marra raised concerned the dispensing of methadone. Richard Simpson raised the same issues. The original idea behind dispensing methadone in the community was to reduce stigma. That is why the Scottish Drugs Forum, for example, thought that it was the right thing to do. However, many communities have had a different experience. In those cases, there is a perception that the delivery of services to the general public took second place to the business of dispensing methadone. Indeed, George Adam—who is sitting next to Mark McDonald—raised that point when he hit the headlines on methadone in Renfrewshire in August this year. It is a fair point. I expect that he reflected the views that he received from communities. The visibility of drug users in those cases is part of the reason why some who supported community delivery, such as the Scottish Drugs Forum, are now more cautious. I urge ministers to consider the issues around how and when methadone is dispensed, including the positive and specific proposals that Richard Simpson made and to which Jim Eadie referred. There must be a strong and decisive approach to the black market in methadone. We know the damage that it does to sellers and buyers. It needs to be tackled. Those guilty of trading in methadone need to feel the full force of the law, as, indeed, do those who deliberately set out to create high-value markets for drugs such as cocaine and crack cocaine.

There is clearly a disparity in that respect, but it is also extremely important to say that the call that is being made is that we should look not simply at the cost, but at the method and the locus of dispensing. That is why Richard Simpson made the proposal that he made. I hope that ministers paid close attention to it and that they will respond accordingly. Graeme Pearson highlighted the lack of reliable data, which undermines the objective of having a fully informed debate on progress in delivering the road to recovery strategy. The minister will know—as I have pursued the issue directly with her by way of parliamentary questions, in correspondence and earlier this afternoon—that too little appears to have been done to align the information that is available from before 2008 with the data that is being collected now. Indeed, members of the Scottish Government-established Scottish Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission, who have been involved in such work over a period of time, are concerned about “the tendency for government to forget the processes and initiatives undertaken in the past and the lessons learned”. They say that the effect of that is “demoralising for the field”, as well as “hugely inefficient”, and they call on the Government to take steps “to improve its Institutional Memory.” That is not a point for the current Government alone; I hope that ministers will recognise that we all have an interest in a debate that is fully informed. Therefore, I urge ministers to address the issue of access to information from the whole period of devolution as positively and promptly as they can. Although debate on the issue is very welcome, it is surprising that the Government has chosen to have such a debate just a few weeks before the data that has been collected on progress in the past four years is made available—that is to happen in December. It might have been helpful to publish the data first so that we could be fully informed in holding the debate, rather than holding the debate before we have the data. The “First Year Report” of the Scottish Drugs Strategy Delivery Commission highlights a number of areas in which improvements are required. It starts with the need for proper recording of individual cases and of overall progress and trends. The commission argues that it is impossible to know how well founded the concerns about people being parked on methadone are if we do not know how many people who have been assisted on the road to recovery have relapsed or have given up on recovery altogether.

We need to make full use of the rehabilitation facilities that exist—there is certainly evidence that that is not yet happening and there needs to be a strong emphasis on that aspect of policy. There has been much talk during the debate about the importance of consensus in drugs policy. I believe that there is much common ground on the urgent nature of the challenge and on the need for effective action. There is also a common interest in getting it right in the interests of those who are trapped in the cycle of drug dependence and of communities, and in the wider public interest. As Christine Grahame said, we should not be afraid to have a debate on how best we do that. We should not be afraid of constructive criticism of the roll-out of the strategy, so that we can make it better. That must be our focus. If ministers recognise the need for continuing review of what works best and provide the leadership that is needed, we will be able to maintain a high degree of agreement on and support for the road to recovery, but it is clear that there are areas in which improvements are needed.

Will the minister give way?

I acknowledge the points that the cabinet secretary is making, but will he confirm that the Government has no intention of delaying legislation in the area pending further discussions on the devolution of further power?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I start with the central issue: the limits on blood alcohol concentration for drivers. We think, as ministers do, that there is a strong case for early legislation. It was Labour at Westminster who commissioned Sir Peter North to consider the case for change across Britain, and the current Westminster Government’s decision to reject his recommendations is the reason why we are having this debate in the Scottish Parliament. In the context of that decision, Labour welcomed the devolution of powers under the Scotland Act 2012 to alter the drink-driving limit. I hope that Stewart Stevenson will agree that this is an area on which Scotland can give a lead, as we did on smoking in public places, which a future UK Government might follow. We welcome the Scottish Government’s decision to consult on a reduced limit of 50mg per 100ml of blood. However, ministers need to address the resource implications of the changes that they propose and should treat their consultation process with the respect that it deserves. The Scottish Government’s priority should be to take forward change on the basis of the powers that it has, rather than making the argument for the powers that it would like to have.

I am not in principle opposed to the devolution of powers in the area, but I am concerned that legislation should be introduced using the powers that are already devolved, to provide the basis from which we go forward. Random testing was one of the North recommendations, and North was able to elicit strong evidence for that; other issues that the cabinet secretary raised are less firmly evidence based. However, at this stage the priority is not the debate around other powers, but the need to ensure that the powers that we have can be implemented effectively. When we debated the Carloway report a few weeks ago, I made the point that we cannot have a realistic debate about law reform without considering the practical context in which the justice system operates. The same is true of changes in the law that widen the scope of offences or increase the powers and duties of the police. That is why our amendment highlights the link between limits and penalties for drink-driving and the justice system’s capacity in practice to deal with an increased number of cases. Changes in the law and the resourcing of the justice system need to be considered together. Jenny Marra raised the widespread concern about the risk of police officers being withdrawn from the front line because of staff job losses in the service. We know that nearly 1,000 jobs have already gone.

It is bizarre that the cabinet secretary responsible for the justice system in Scotland wants to debate only the justice system in another jurisdiction. That seems to be a weak defence of his position, which is to defend a particular number of police officers, with no regard to the jobs that they actually do. There is evidence that many of the police officers of whom Mr MacAskill is proud to boast are doing civilian jobs. Indeed, during the passage of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, the cabinet secretary told the Parliament that he supported a decision in Lothian and Borders Police to replace civilian custody officers with police officers, which put police officers in a civilian role. That is why his interventions are not acceptable or to the point. We know that jobs are going. The new chief constable, Stephen House, told the Justice Committee only last week—[Interruption.] I think that a minister is making an intervention from a sedentary position. I would be happy to take an intervention from Roseanna Cunningham if she has something to say in this debate.

Certainly. I am sure that the minister’s semaphore to the Presiding Officer will not be necessary, because our amendment is in the Business Bulletin and it states clearly that we regard the strengthening of the scope of offences and the role and duties of the police as intrinsically linked across the board. Changes to the law cannot be made without ensuring that the justice system is fit to deliver the changes.

Can the cabinet secretary, who is in charge of the justice system, give us a guarantee that police officers will not be withdrawn from carrying out front-line tasks of this type in order to cover jobs that are currently done by civilian staff? We know that it is not just about the police service and that there are issues for the justice system more widely. We know from our constituents that Scotland’s courts already face delays, with churn holding up trials for weeks at a time. That is an unacceptable state of affairs for victims and witnesses. The proposed court closures across Scotland, budget cuts in the Scottish Court Service and falling staff numbers in the fiscal service must all have implications for any measures that will increase the number of cases brought to court. I am sorry that Roseanna Cunningham clearly does not understand that, but the proposals around the drink-driving law must be considered in the context of the justice system’s resources. The Scottish Government’s consultation on drink-driving still has some weeks to go. It may well produce new evidence or fresh perspectives on the issue and it will undoubtedly highlight some of the practical issues that are bound to arise. The fully informed debate on the issue cannot happen until the consultation closes and the Government publishes its response. In matters of this kind, public opinion is important. I agree with much of what Kenny MacAskill said on the matter, because the vast majority of drivers recognise that driving while under the influence of alcohol is antisocial and a potentially lethal thing to do. Only a small number of people set out recklessly to disregard the law, but many drivers do so inadvertently, so the question of where the limits are set and how widely they are supported is central to the debate. The decision on that must be based on evidence and, like the original introduction of drink-driving limits, it must be capable of effective enforcement and command the respect of the vast majority of drivers. The evidence suggests, as the cabinet secretary has said, that drivers are five times more likely to be involved in an accident when they have a blood alcohol concentration of 80mg per 100ml, which is the current level, compared with a level of 50mg per 100ml. That is the fundamental basis of the case for change. However, it is important to acknowledge that there are other views. There is an argument that the level of accidents would be reduced further with a policy of alcohol levels at or close to zero, but I do not think that either the Government or Labour will support that. The British Medical Association will not support that view either and has highlighted some of the respects in which the policy could catch people who were not in any sense intentionally flouting the law, whether it be because of the alcohol content of mouthwash or because of the consequences of medical conditions such as diabetes. There are therefore clear arguments against a zero-alcohol approach. There are also legitimate concerns about enforcement in that respect and about how to ensure that priority continues to be given to detecting and detaining drivers whose blood alcohol concentrations are particularly high. The arguments around enforcement and priorities are not arguments for doing nothing, but they emphasise the importance of an evidence-based and proportionate approach. Part of what makes for a proportionate approach is to measure our objectives against best practice elsewhere. As Kenny MacAskill said, countries in Europe and beyond have plumped for the 50mg limit as effective and enforceable, so for Scotland to lead the UK in that direction would be in line with international standards. That in turn contributes to the need for changes to command consent in the wider community. When drink-driving limits were first introduced, there was broad support for the change, even though it took time for them to be universally accepted. The evidence that was gathered for the North inquiry showed that the public is willing to accept the introduction of a lower drink-driving limit, even if there is not yet whole-hearted support for it. It will be important to understand better where Scottish public opinion stands once the current consultation has closed. My guess is that many drivers who would accept an effective limit of a single alcoholic drink, as is proposed in the Government’s consultation, would believe that it was not proportionate for people to face the loss of a driving licence, the loss of a vehicle, a fine or even imprisonment for a blood alcohol concentration that would be legally safe in many other European countries. It is important that public sympathy continues to focus on the victims of irresponsible drink-driving, rather than on drivers who are banned on the margins of legal acceptability. I recognise that a reduction in the blood alcohol concentration limit will require resources not just for enforcement, but for driver education. The cabinet secretary helpfully raised on my behalf the issue that I wrote to him about, regarding drink-drive rehabilitation schemes such as that which is provided by Alcohol Support Ltd in Aberdeen but which are otherwise provided in Scotland by private companies that are based elsewhere in Britain. Such schemes offer offenders the opportunity to have their other penalties reduced if they undertake appropriate driver education. Ministers should consider supporting such schemes more widely as part of the process of making tougher limits work. I suspect that that could be achieved on the basis of executive rather than legislative devolution, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will tell us at the end of the debate whether he has explored or is willing to explore that possibility with UK ministers. We welcome debate on what else can be done in the field, such as random breath testing, but we do not believe that action should be delayed for longer than is necessary or pending any further devolution of powers. The powers exist to legislate on drink-driving limits and we believe that they should be used. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s confirmation that legislation will not be delayed and I look forward to the measure being brought forward as soon as is practicable after the completion of the consultation process. I move amendment S4M-04627.2, to leave out from “notes” to second “drink driving” and insert: “believes that a robust justice system is essential to the effective enforcement of a reduced drink driving limit and that this will be undermined by police officers being taken off the front line to cover reductions in police support staff and by closures of local courts; calls on the Scottish Government to guarantee that police officers will not be taken off the front line to cover reductions in support staff and to review its plans for the courts and fiscal services in advance of legislative changes in this area”.

Can I take it from what Mr MacAskill says that he will report back to Parliament on the progress that he makes in discussions with the UK Government on graduated licences and related matters, so that we can consider them further?

Will the member give way?

There are no limits to what the Government will do to avoid addressing the issues of substance around the independence referendum. It is ministers—and only ministers—who have turned the serious and substantial issue of legal advice on Scotland in Europe into their own political pantomime. “Yes, we have,” said Alex Salmond. “Oh no we haven’t,” said Nicola Sturgeon. They have now decided to hold an inquiry into the ministerial code to show that they could both be right after all. On Thursday, the First Minister told us that he had invited Sir David Bell to join the independent panel of advisers and to lead the investigation into his own conduct. Then, at the weekend, it transpired that Sir David Bell would not merely lead the investigation; he would be the investigation. The very same permanent secretary who had advised Mr Salmond to bring in Sir David Bell had, on the very same day, called Lord Fraser of Carmyllie and told him that he was to be stood down from the investigation. Perhaps that was because Lord Fraser recognises that the issue goes far beyond the confines of the ministerial code. Alex Salmond’s decision to stand down Lord Fraser and Dame Elish Angiolini is not part of the solution but a symptom of the problem, which is a First Minister who delights in manipulating the machinery of government to his own ends. His defence is that the investigation is into the law officers’ prerogatives. It is not. On Saturday, Alf Young reminded readers of The Scotsman that the primary source of legal advice to ministers is not the law officers but the Government’s lawyers in the Scottish Government legal directorate. Ministers are bound by paragraph 2.30 of the ministerial code to “ensure that the legal implications” of pursuing Scottish independence in Europe “are considered with SGLD at the earliest opportunity”. If they did not do that, that might have been a breach of the ministerial code. The code also says that law officers “must be consulted in good time before the Government is committed to significant decisions involving legal considerations” on the basis of a reference from Scottish Government legal directorate, which might be at the request of Government lawyers, ministers or the law officers. On the basis of what Nicola Sturgeon has said, it would appear that the Government’s lawyers did not refer the issue of Scotland in Europe to the law officers, whether it be at the request of ministers or otherwise. Given the requirements of paragraph 2.31 of the ministerial code, that looks like another breach. The much-loved paragraph 2.35 is also worth a closer look. Whether legal advice has been given to ministers by the Scottish Government’s legal directorate, which is the primary source of such legal advice, is not covered by that paragraph. Ministers are fully at liberty to tell us whether such advice has been asked for or given. The Lord Advocate has said today that he consented to Nicola Sturgeon revealing last week that she had asked for legal advice because of the exceptional circumstances of the case. In his letter to Ruth Davidson, which is now available in the Scottish Parliament information centre, he says: “(i) this is a matter of fundamental importance to the country and to the Referendum debate; (ii) a significant amount of legal comment and analysis on the issue ... is already in the public domain; and (iii) this is an issue of international importance which may set a precedent.” That is all true, but it has all been true for many months, regardless of the terms of the referendum agreement on which the statement was made in Parliament last week. The Lord Advocate clearly recognises the exceptional circumstances, and the fact that the responsibility for the failure to ask for his consent to reveal the fact of legal advice rests squarely with ministers. Ministers also have questions to answer about the ministerial code. They have failed to ensure that the legal implications of pursuing independence in Europe were considered with the Scottish Government legal directorate “at the earliest opportunity”. They have failed to ask Government lawyers to refer the matter to the law officers “in good time” before committing to “significant decisions” such as holding a referendum on independence. Ministers then went to court to cover up those failures. That court action was not just a waste of public money; it was also a cover-up for failures in the most basic responsibilities of Government—that ministers should make decisions about the future of their country “in a fully informed legal context” as demanded by the ministerial code. However, as Lord Fraser has affirmed, we are talking about more than breaches of the ministerial code. That is why an inquiry, appointed by Alex Salmond, with a remit written by Alex Salmond, to consider the actions of Alex Salmond in relation to the ministerial code just will not do. The deliberate exclusion of the two former Lord Advocates who might know how the code is supposed to work shows that the inquiry has been designed with only one possible outcome in mind. What we need is an independent inquiry into ministers’ words and actions and full disclosure of all the legal advice that has been offered and received on Scotland and Europe. Only if those things happen can we hope to move on to the issues of substance that should surely concern us all.

Having said what he just said, will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the position of the woman to whom he referred—the victim of domestic violence—will be unchanged by the bill?

I hope that you are right, Presiding Officer. Another parliamentary year, another two-part justice bill that is making two quite unrelated changes to Scotland’s legal system in a single piece of legislation. As if the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill was not enough of a stitch-together or enough of a mouthful, along comes the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance (Scotland) Bill to trump it, both in the length of its title and in the absence of a common theme underpinning the two important things that it is trying to do. The Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill was at least focused entirely on criminal justice, albeit in two quite different respects. The bill that is before us, however, combines a change to the oversight of civil justice with a change to the basis of legal aid in the criminal courts. That is why the bill is already being debated almost as if it were two separate pieces of legislation, although Parliament will vote on a single proposition at the end of the day. The proposal in part 1 to create a Scottish civil justice council has been broadly welcomed, but it has—as we have heard—prompted some important debate. The fundamental question is whether the measure should simply bring existing procedures for civil courts up to date, or whether it should seek to move the oversight of civil justice on to a different level. The existing rules councils for sheriff courts and the Court of Session focus on drafting and updating court rules or procedures. They are dominated by sheriffs, judges and lawyers, and effectively operate as in-house committees for the legal profession. The bill proposes to create a new civil justice council that will be involved in oversight of the system as a whole, which will include—as Jenny Marra highlighted—making an input to civil justice policy. The question is whether the way in which the council will be constituted is fully in line with its extended role and responsibilities. There is general support for measures to cut out unnecessary duplication and harmonise court rules, and for creating a new organisation that can seek to represent the wider community, rather than judges and lawyers alone. There is some concern, however, that the bill has not gone far enough to achieve that objective. As it stands, only two out of 20 council members must be lay members representing consumers, compared with nine judges and lawyers and three public officials. The remaining six places on the council are to be filled at the discretion of the Lord President, who could choose to fill some or all of the places with people who are not lawyers or judges. However, he does not have to do so, with or without discussion with ministers, which is what Kenny MacAskill offered. It would equally be open to Parliament to choose to legislate on who else should be represented on the civil justice council—for example, trade unions or the insurance industry, both of which are represented on equivalent bodies in other jurisdictions. Alan Rogerson said, with reference to having others represented in addition to those who earn their livings in the courts: “If we are going to reform the civil justice system, we need people who have experience of what happens before the court system takes over”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 26 June 2012 (am); c 1551.]

That echoes a point that Kenny MacAskill made. I do not disagree with that point, but I think that the oversight line of the council ought also to reflect a proper balance between legal and lay representation. There is an opportunity for Parliament to make that decision rather than leave it to the discretion of, or the choices made by, the Lord President or by him in consultation with the Government. The organisation Friends of the Earth, whose primary interest here is in the bill’s impact on environmental law, is concerned to ensure that “membership of the council should not be dominated by judicial and legal practitioners”, in order to provide a balance. Citizens Advice Scotland is keen to see a “balance from the start” between lawyers and lay members rather than rely on the Lord President’s discretion to increase the number of lay members eventually, after an initial period of rules division dominated by members of the legal profession. Clearly, this is an area in which the bill might be strengthened by amendment, to which issue we will no doubt return. Another aspect of part 1 that was highlighted in committee was the relationship between the civil justice council and ministers on policy matters, which Jenny Marra has mentioned. Professor Tom Mullen of the University of Glasgow described the bill as drafted as “confusing” in that regard and suggested that it might be “appropriate to include a provision that ministers could invite the council to look at a particular matter, and the council would then have a duty to do so.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 26 June 2012 (am); c 1558.] That seems reasonable if the civil justice council is to go beyond the narrow area of court procedures. Again, we may return to that issue in due course. The issues in part 2 are perhaps more fundamental—they are certainly more contentious—although, again, we have no difficulty with the bill’s general principles in that regard. Indeed, during the Labour debate on Scotland’s future earlier this month, I was happy to quote from the cabinet secretary’s defence of part 2, which was in similar terms to those that he used today. He told the Justice Committee that “it is right that those who can afford to pay towards the cost of their defence should do so ... That must be right when public finances are under such pressure.” He promised to target help “at those who need it most”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 18 September 2012; c 1717.] I could not agree more, and not just on the matter of legal aid. However, the question with any targeted benefits is how to ensure that support goes to those who need it most. Article 6 of the ECHR guarantees the right to a fair trial, including the right of anyone who is charged with a criminal offence “to defend himself in person or through legal assistance of his own choosing or, if he has not sufficient means to pay for legal assistance, to be given it free when the interests of justice so require.” That is not an unlimited right. The issues for any justice system in interpreting that are to determine when a person lacks sufficient means to pay for legal assistance and when the interests of justice require that that assistance be given free. The proposal in the bill to introduce a means test for those elements of legal aid currently with no client contribution and to introduce a single assessment for all types of criminal legal aid have been broadly welcomed, but some of the details of the proposals have caused concern. First, there is the level of disposable income at which contributions will be required. Kenny MacAskill mentioned that up front in his opening speech. I am glad that ministers have dropped plans to count disability living allowance and personal independence payments as part of disposable income. However, many remain concerned about access to justice for poorer people in general. The Law Society, for example, believes: “It is not realistic to expect anybody who has a disposable income of only £68 per week or a disposable capital of only £750 to be required to pay towards their legal costs.” Professor Alan Miller of the Scottish Human Rights Commission told the Justice Committee that he was “not at all convinced that a sufficient assessment has been done of the impact of the bill on vulnerable individuals who come into contact with the criminal justice system and are unable to pay for proper legal representation.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 11 September 2012; c 1692.] That impact might be to create a perverse incentive for accused people to plead guilty to offences that they did not commit or to go to trial without legal representation rather than take on legal aid contributions that they could not afford. The Government’s response—Mr MacAskill said it again today—has been that the means test that is being introduced for criminal legal aid is the same as already exists for civil legal aid. That begs the question whether the thresholds might disadvantage those on low incomes who seek access to civil justice, such as the victim of domestic abuse to whom the cabinet secretary referred. I would be interested to know when the thresholds for civil legal assistance were last properly reviewed. I note that the level at which the threshold is set was not uprated this year in the way that it has been uprated in past years. A second area of concern is the lack of a proposal to refund financial contributions in the event of an acquittal. Again, the Government’s reasoning is that accused persons who pay their own costs do not get a refund if they are acquitted, so there is no reason to allow refunds to those on legal aid. That defence again raises questions, such as why those who are cleared of a crime have to pay to prove their innocence whatever their income. In that regard, Dr Cyrus Tata of the University of Strathclyde observed that the cabinet secretary seemed to be arguing that “two wrongs make a right”. Thirdly—Christine Grahame mentioned this in the concluding part of her speech—there is concern about the proposal that solicitors should be responsible for collecting contributions from those who receive legal aid in summary cases given that collection is already done in civil cases and will be done in solemn cases by the Scottish Legal Aid Board. As the convener of the Justice Committee said, that responsibility will be unwelcome to solicitors, particularly to smaller firms, but it might also have implications for clients. Country lawyers might well decide that the costs and inconvenience of collecting contributions are not worth the effort, in which case their area could be left without a solicitor who is prepared to take on criminal cases. That would reduce access to justice at the very time when many rural areas are facing the threat of closure of their local court. As Christine Grahame said, unintended consequences might arise from a number of provisions in the bill, so they must be considered carefully at the next stage of proceedings. It is on that basis that we in this part of the chamber will support the general principles of the bill.

Mr Hepburn makes an offer that I cannot refuse. Does he accept that, although Friends of the Earth and others who have made representations support the principle of a civil justice council, they believe that it is important that the new body has from its beginning a balance between legal and lay representatives?

When Annabelle Ewing intervened on my speech, she suggested that some lay interests could well be represented by the council sub-committees. Is it not equally true that some of the specialist work that will be required for rules revision in the initial period could be delegated to sub-committees and that, therefore, the lay-legal balance of the council could be a separate matter?

Can the minister confirm that potential private finance partners remain interested in the AWPR under the non-profit-distributing model that the Government has taken forward? In the event that no competitive bids are received, what is the Government’s plan B for financing such a project?

Members will know that it is not only in this place that the relationship of the media with the criminal justice system is under scrutiny. Lord Justice Leveson’s inquiry has heard a good deal about the impact of press intrusion on criminal investigations and court proceedings and, today, the director general of the BBC has had to respond to the opposite—to allegations of cover-up in the Jimmy Savile scandal. Those inquiries are just as pertinent to Scotland as they are to other jurisdictions. A few weeks ago, the United Kingdom Government said that it would legislate to allow filming of some aspects of court proceedings in England and Wales. Here, as we have heard, the Lord President announced just last week a detailed review of policy on the use of television cameras in court. That review will no doubt take account of the evidence to the Justice Committee, which, as we have heard, has so far been largely—although not entirely—sceptical about or hostile towards increased media access. As has been said, filming in court has been permitted in Scotland, on the basis of consent, for the past 20 years. Christine Grahame mentioned the amendment to the notice that was made earlier this year. In practice, only very limited parts of a very small number of court cases have been broadcast in that time. I have no doubt that what Lord Gill intends to hold is a review of whether now is the right time to increase such coverage, as is happening elsewhere, or whether it should be curtailed. It is important to consider the wider context, starting with the European convention on human rights. The minister referred to the existence of almost universal values in this area, but Governments are also under specific obligations. The ECHR requires that an accused person be given a fair trial, that individuals’ right to privacy should be respected and that a free press should be able to “impart information and ideas on all matters of public interest”. That is a set of obligations that are potentially in conflict. As the minister said, it means that legislation must be properly balanced to protect the rights of all who are involved in court proceedings, as well as the rights and duties of the people who report them. Later this session, ministers will propose new laws on support for victims and witnesses, and I believe that that should be the starting point for and the centre of this afternoon’s debate. In dealing with the issue of filming in court, Alan McCloskey of Victim Support Scotland told the Justice Committee that “From the perspective of victims and witnesses, coming to court is one of the most traumatic things that an individual has to do ... The potential to be in the media spotlight and to be part of that circus adds a different dimension.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1779.] In other words, witnesses could be deterred from coming forward if trials were televised. They might be concerned about the impact that giving evidence could have on their families or on themselves. Indeed, although witnesses might be given assurances about confidentiality in a particular case or in relation to their evidence, they might find those assurances difficult to believe if they were seeing other cases being played out on television or their broadcasting being repeated in detail after the trial.

I will come on to the new media, but I completely accept Margo MacDonald’s point that the two issues are related and that any inquiry that the Justice Committee—or indeed anyone else—engages in in the area has to look at the relationship between the new media and the broadcast and print media, because if there are concerns about protecting victims and witnesses those concerns must apply to the accused as well. Accusations that are made in court will have a much greater impact on the lives of all concerned if they are broadcast to the nation. There will be an impact not only on the accused person himself or herself or only on those who are found guilty. A story, once written, can be accessed on the internet for ever more. Instead of today’s news becoming tomorrow’s chip paper, the risk is that today’s proceedings could become a virtual life sentence, whether the person is convicted or not. The broadcasting industry acknowledges some of that burden of responsibility. Its code of conduct says: “Broadcasters should try to reduce the potential distress to victims and/or relatives when making or broadcasting programmes intended to examine past events that involve trauma to individuals.” That safeguard and the practice of considering any application for filming in courts on a case-by-case basis provide confidence in the working of the current Scottish system. It is important that that confidence is not undermined. It will also be important when consideration is given to the benefits that broadcasting and greater access can have in increasing public understanding. It is important to recognise that the bits of court proceedings that are most likely to be of interest to most people are precisely the ones that are likely to be protected under any imaginable statutory provision. Nobody wants witnesses or victims—or indeed the accused—to become bit-part players in a soap opera, as happens in some other jurisdictions. Their rights to a fair trial and to a just outcome have to be at the top of our list of priorities.

I conclude by referring to the new media issue that was raised by Margo MacDonald. As has been said, those who tweet, text or blog can reveal unreported information, find out about cases or discuss the day’s developments with friends or strangers. If jurors do any of those things, they compromise their own impartiality and the judicial process. That is equally true of witnesses. In considering what priorities the Justice Committee should have, I note that a review of filming in courts is under way, commissioned by Lord Gill. The issues around social media are the ones where the greatest difficulties arise—that is a fact. Social media is not optional; it is there, and how the courts respond to it is something that bears future scrutiny.

I welcome much of what the minister has said. I am sure that he is aware of the PricewaterhouseCoopers report the other week that said that for Aberdeen to achieve its potential as a world energy centre will require 120,000 additional skilled workers over the next 10 years. Will he confirm today that the academy proposals that the Government has brought forward will support and build on the proposals from the universities and colleges in Aberdeen and Banff and Buchan in order to begin to address that enormous demand for skilled labour?

Will Stuart McMillan accept that it is perfectly reasonable for local councils to make their own decisions about setting local taxes? Indeed, is that not the right way to go in future?

Presiding Officer, “many people ... have accepted the principle that it is right that those who can afford to pay towards the cost ... should do so ... That must be right when public finances are under such pressure. The expansion of contributions will allow us to target ... assistance at those who need it most”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 18 September 2012; c 1717.] Those are not the words of Michael Russell in 2006 but the words of Kenny MacAskill to the Justice Committee, only two weeks ago, referring specifically to the Scottish Government’s plans to introduce means testing of criminal legal aid. Until now, Governments of all parties have backed universal access to legal aid in criminal cases, regardless of the resources that are available to the accused. Now the SNP plans to save £10 million, in real terms, from the legal aid budget over the next two years, and it is using the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill to end that universal entitlement.

Absolutely. We completely support the principle behind that. Let us remember that the proposal is not a means test only for those who are guilty of crimes; accused persons have been offered no way to recover their legal costs after the event, even if they are acquitted. Nor is it a means test that is targeted only at those who are well off. Limits on legal aid kick in at a disposable income level of only £68 a week, and there is to be no help at all for those with a disposable weekly income of more than £222. As Mr Finnie has said, we agree that it is hard to justify universal access to criminal legal aid in such financially tough times. I suspect that we will oppose some aspects of the Government’s plans, but we will support the principle that those who can afford to make a contribution should be required to do so. That principle could equally be applied to other universal benefits too. There are plenty of good things that could be done with the resources that have been saved by cuts in legal aid. Scotland’s courts face a cut in real terms from the SNP Government of nearly £11 million over the next two years. Proposals to close a series of local courts are currently out for consultation. Staff numbers in the Procurator Fiscal Service have fallen by 8 per cent in a single year. Last week, we debated the reforms to Scotland's criminal justice system that were proposed by Lord Carloway. He proposed that corroboration should no longer be required for a case to proceed in the criminal courts. The evidence from the Crown Office is that many more cases would come before the courts each year as a result. The Lord Advocate says that a change in the law would also allow hundreds of rape cases that have not been proceeded with due to a lack of corroboration to be looked at again. Many more new cases will be brought to court each year, as well as a backlog of cold cases. If millions of pounds are to be saved in criminal legal aid and the Scottish Government wants to pursue radical changes in the legal system, it could choose to direct extra resources into Scotland’s courts and fiscal services. However, that is not what the SNP proposes to do. It will make savings from means testing one formerly universal benefit, but it wants to take that money out of the justice system to fund all the other universal benefits that it lacks the political courage to review. The same situation applies in relation to headline targets. When the SNP promised to deliver 1,000 extra police officers, it forgot to say that all those officers and more would end up doing jobs that were previously done by civilian staff. Almost 1,000 civilian jobs have already gone in the past couple of years, according to the Government’s figures, but that is only a small part of the devastating cuts to Scotland’s police service that Kenny MacAskill has in store. Scotland’s new chief constable, Stephen House, let the cat out of the bag last week when he confirmed that “many, many hundreds” more jobs are set to go. At the weekend, we learned about the detail of the Government’s secret plans. Some £11.2 million is to be spent on dumping 550 civilian staff even before the new police force comes into being and another £74.3 million is to be spent on dumping thousands more in the three years after that. However, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will still not take responsibility for the thousands of jobs of loyal public servants that he intends to axe.

No, thank you. A Scottish Government spokesman told the Sunday Herald this weekend that “it will be for the new chief constable and the Scottish Police Authority to determine the balance between police officers and police staff in the new service.” No doubt he will soon be telling us that large-scale privatisation in the police service is also “an operational matter for the chief constable.” I do not imagine that Stephen House believes any of that, and David O’Connor of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents is clearly none too impressed either. They both know that “the balance between police officers and police staff” has already been determined by Kenny MacAskill, because the SNP will insist on keeping its headline figure of 17,230 warrant-holding police officers, even though hundreds and soon thousands of those officers will be turned into back-room bobbies doing civilian jobs. Just as the SNP will not face the conflict between law reform and courtroom closures, so it hides from the damage that it is doing to Scotland’s police service. It is not just about how many police officers we have; it is about what they do when they get to work. Most people in the service know that, and ministers must surely know it too. It is only when the SNP faces up to those issues honestly that it can make a real contribution to the debate on the future of Scotland’s police.

I come to the debate as a native of the Western Isles; as a frequent traveller there by land and by sea; as the son and grandson of people who are fluent and learned in the Gaelic language; and, most immediately, as the father of a child who, unlike most of my generation, has had access to a Gaelic-medium education. I took part in the first parliamentary debate on and partly in Gaelic on 2 March 2000. As well as being a milestone in the history of the relationship between Gaelic and the state, whether Scottish or British, that day also happened to be my younger daughter Iona’s second birthday. From the age of three to the age of 12, she was able to enjoy a Gaelic-medium education at sgoil-àraich agus bun-sgoil Gilcomstoun, learning through the medium of Gaelic in the Gaelic unit of an inner-city nursery and primary school in Aberdeen. We have come a long way in the era of devolution, but there is still a long way to go. Too often, a vibrant nursery and primary education in Gaelic is followed by a narrower experience at secondary level. In Aberdeen, studying Gaelic at Hazlehead academy limits the opportunities to study other modern languages and at that secondary school nothing is taught through the medium of Gaelic apart from Gaelic itself. Hazlehead and schools like it do a great job with the resources that are available, but if they are to do even more I hope that ministers will recognise that Gaelic-designated secondary schools in Scotland’s cash-strapped councils require adequate resources as well as words of encouragement, important though those are. After learning comes earning, so the national Gaelic plan is right to highlight the importance of the workplace. Targets are not really met just by counting the number of people who have learned the language at school—I learned Latin but I am not a Latin speaker. Gaelic will be part of young people’s lives after they leave school only if it is a living language, which is used in and by Gaelic speaking communities. The workplace is key to that and the largest workforce in many Gaelic-speaking communities is the local CalMac ferry. Ten per cent of CalMac’s workforce speaks Gaelic. That includes not just people who work directly with the passengers who travel to and from the islands but, as I have heard many times, people who work in the engine room and on the bridge. CalMac provides a rare example of workers, managers and customers alike speaking Gaelic. Consequently, its ferries are among the most important workplaces, if Gaelic is to have a future as the first language of people at work. CalMac has a Gaelic language plan that is as good as that of any other public body. It has—rightly—spent time and money on developing that. The company’s proactive support for Gaelic delivers huge benefits to the culture and language of the Hebrides and to the employment of local men and women. No other shipping or passenger transport company does more. The Scottish Government will soon put out to tender the contract for operating Clyde and Hebrides ferry services. It must not judge bids by considering only which bidder offers the lowest price. If ministers want to strengthen Gaelic in the workplaces that matter most, they should make it a requirement of the forthcoming procurement exercise that every bidder has in place a properly designed and resourced Gaelic language plan before the tendering exercise begins. In that way, CalMac will suffer no competitive disadvantage from its commitment to Gaelic, and nobody will be able to separate the jobs and services from the communities and the culture to which they rightly belong. Mòran taing.

I thank Dr Allan for his positive comments about my speech. Although I recognise that CalMac and the conditions for procurement are not his responsibility, does he agree that that is a matter worthy of his discussion with the responsible ministers?

I very much welcome the minister’s offer of a meeting. Has he had any engagement in the discussions with social enterprises and the council? If he is aware of the detail of those discussions, what conclusions has he reached?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise the wider impact on county towns such as Stonehaven in Kincardineshire or Haddington in Iain Gray’s constituency of proposals that local people should no longer look to those towns for local access to justice? Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that a town court can be just as important as a village school to a community’s sense of identity and, if so, that that is a matter for the Government as well as for the Scottish Court Service?

I welcome the debate. Can the cabinet secretary assure us that his comments about the process so far do not imply that this is the last that we will hear of these matters before a bill is produced? In other words, once the consultation is complete and we know the views of all parties, will Parliament have an opportunity to consider those responses?

The Government’s motion proposes that the Parliament “highlights the importance of delivering these measures in a coherent way alongside wider reforms to courts and tribunals”. We agree with the principle that underlies that phrase: that law reform cannot be considered in isolation from the practical context in which the legal system operates. That is why we lodged an amendment that makes even more explicit the link between the consultation on Lord Carloway’s proposals and the consultation on the future of the court service, which was flagged up by Iain Gray’s topical question earlier. We could hardly be in more topical territory. The consultation on the Carloway report is due to close in 10 days’ time, on 5 October, and the Government’s announcement of plans for a criminal justice bill was made—to Parliament at least—in the legislative programme on 5 September. Only last Wednesday, the Government’s budget confirmed that funding for the court service is to be cut by 10 per cent in cash terms and 14 per cent in real terms over the next two years, and the consultation on court closures began only last Friday. A lot is happening, but the question is whether the Government’s enthusiasm for changes to the prosecution of crime, its cuts to the courts budget, and the proposals for court closures add up to a “coherent” approach, which its motion calls for. The answer appears to be that they do not. Lord Carloway’s review made a compelling case for change, not least on the central issue of the need for corroboration. However, by any measure, the implementation of such recommendations is bound to increase rather than reduce the burden of work on Scotland’s courts, not to mention the implications of the parallel reviews by Bowen on sheriff and jury trials and Lord Gill on civil justice.

I absolutely accept John Finnie’s point. There are clear benefits in the proposals. My point is about the consequence of the removal of the requirement for corroboration on the sheer volume of cases that are likely to be placed before our courts and considered by them. On the impact of removing the need for corroboration, which John Finnie raised, the evidence is there in annex A to the Carloway report. The Crown Office examined the records of 600 serious criminal cases and sexual offence cases in 2010 that were dropped either after an initial court appearance or before they came to court, and it found that, in nearly 60 per cent in one category and two thirds in the other, there would have been a reasonable prospect of conviction if there was no requirement for corroboration. Had those 350 or 400 additional cases been taken forward, they would have represented a significant extra case load for Scotland’s procurators fiscal to take to Scotland’s courts. We should bear it in mind that, although I have been talking about serious and sexual offences, the proposal to remove the need for corroboration would apply to all crimes and not just to those categories. The number of extra cases would therefore be even higher than the numbers that are identified in the Carloway report and the Government’s consultation paper.

I think that I accept every point that the cabinet secretary made in that intervention. My purpose is not to say that there is no case for removing the requirement for corroboration or that we should not do so. I completely agree with the cabinet secretary that justice should be done in as many cases as possible. My argument is not that we should therefore have no change in the law of corroboration but that, if there is a change and it produces more work for the courts and the Procurator Fiscal Service, that should be reflected in the support that it receives from the Government instead of the trend going in the opposite direction. Since the research was done on the serious cases in 2010, the Procurator Fiscal Service has seen a 4 per cent increase in the number of crimes that were reported for action in a single year and an 8 per cent rise in the number of serious crimes that were reported on petition in the same period, but according to the Procurator Fiscal Society section of the First Division Association, there has been an 8 per cent reduction in the number of in-house legal staff over two years. The Lord Advocate has suggested that removal of the need for corroboration could have retrospective effect, not in cases that failed, but where no proceedings were taken because there appeared to be insufficient evidence to proceed. Again, that would clearly be welcome if the outcome was that justice was done, but if there are many such cases, there will be a particularly heavy demand on the time of procurators fiscal and the courts in the next couple of years, which is precisely when Government budget cuts are likely to have the greatest effect. The Law Society of Scotland and others have argued that changes on the scale proposed by Carloway should proceed only in the context of a full-scale review of Scottish criminal procedure. We do not favour endless delay, but it would be helpful if the Government’s budget decisions supported the law reform approach that it wants to endorse instead of undermining it by taking resources away from front-line service delivery at the very time when they are most needed. The Law Society is not alone in raising concerns about what it sees as undue haste and urging caution in how we proceed. Scottish Women’s Aid, for example, supports the proposal to remove the requirement for corroboration, but it has raised concerns about the proposals for police bail. It is worried that liberation from custody could allow an accused person to tamper with evidence or intimidate witnesses; indeed, in domestic violence cases, the victim might be under direct threat. From its experience, it is concerned about how a victim would be advised of a suspect’s liberation, how a suspect’s compliance with conditions would be monitored and how the courts would deal with breaches. Although such matters are not arguments against proceeding, they are not trivial and suggest that certain questions have not been answered for those who need those answers the most. In that sense, today’s debate might be a little premature. Members can raise issues and ministers respond but as the consultation process has not yet ended such a process is bound to be incomplete. It would clearly be helpful to have a debate when the Government responds to the consultation process and I am glad that Mr MacAskill has agreed today that that should happen. Of course, the key question of corroboration raises policy and resource issues. For instance, the Scottish Law Commission has argued that as corroboration and majority verdicts are two sides of the same coin there should be no change to one without change to the other. It is argued that if the requirement for corroboration were to be removed without reform of majority verdicts, an accused person could be convicted on the evidence of a single witness and a prosecution case that convinces only eight out of 15 jurors.

I have no doubt that members and ministers will want to reflect on that interesting proposition. As a non-lawyer, I feel that the lack of the need for corroboration would in principle apply to every offence or to none; however, I am sure that others will reflect on the matter in this afternoon’s debate. Linked with the majority verdict question is the not proven issue and the Scottish Law Commission has expressed concern about the retention of that verdict if there is no longer any need for corroboration. It argues, again, that if the only reason that a jury does not convict is the absence of corroboration it will, one would presume, straightforwardly find the accused person guilty; equally, if the evidence is still not convincing, even in the absence of the need for corroboration, it should straightforwardly find the accused not guilty. Whether or not one agrees with the Scottish Law Commission, many people clearly take the view that removing the need for corroboration must be followed by some indication of the safeguards that will take its place. So far ministers have chosen not to go down that route although, having listened carefully to the cabinet secretary’s comments on the matter, I was pleased that it sounded as if he had not closed the door on action in these areas. The Government’s consultation paper described the not proven verdict as one that offers the jury “a verdict which accepts there is evidence against the accused but not enough to convict”; however, surely in every case that is brought there is evidence against the accused. In the light of the proposed changes the argument for a third verdict must be that much the weaker. Earlier this month, in the debate on the legislative programme, I called on ministers to engage with Parliament in the evidence to be taken on Michael McMahon’s member’s bill on these issues, and I repeat that call this afternoon. It is important to get the balance right and pay heed to all the evidence. We should recognise that the Government’s proposed bill is not just about the issue of corroboration or police bail. As the cabinet secretary has made clear, changes are proposed to a wide range of procedure and practice. For example, important proposals have been made on the legal rights of vulnerable adults and children, and there are questions about the knock-on effects of extending the protection of children to those aged 16 or 17. Moreover, ministers themselves have admitted that “in a time of reduced budgets” and in light of their already controversial proposals to cut criminal legal aid even for people on relatively modest incomes they are worried about the cost of extending the right to legal advice to persons who are not being questioned. I hope that ministers will accept the link between the Carloway report and court restructuring; will agree that a fully informed debate must continue and, indeed, must come back to Parliament after the consultation closes; and will be prepared to carefully consider their stance on majority and not proven verdicts in light of evidence taken in the parliamentary process on Michael McMahon’s bill as well as their own. I move amendment S4M-04234.1, to leave out from second “programme” to end and insert: “; recognises the demands that these proposed reforms are likely to place on the Procurator Fiscal Service and the Scottish Court Service, which will require to be adequately resourced to meet these demands; encourages all interested persons to respond to the Scottish Government’s consultation on Lord Carloway’s recommendations so that the Parliament can debate these proposals on the basis of a completed consultation process and the Scottish Government’s response, and also encourages people to respond to the consultation on the future structure of Scotland’s court services to ensure that a coherent approach is taken to reform.”

On John Finnie’s point about the potential for courts to sit at weekends and on public holidays, does he accept that there are resource implications from any such developments, and does he believe that the Government should consider such changes in examining the Carloway proposals?

I acknowledge Stewart Maxwell’s point, but will he confirm that although the English system is as he described it, there is no reason why a reform of the Scottish system would be confined to either maintaining the status quo or to imitating other jurisdictions?

In confirming that the objective is not to get more convictions and in accepting that the outcome will be more prosecutions, will the cabinet secretary also accept that resource implications arise from that? Will he tell the chamber how he intends to address them?

Tomorrow marks the start of the legal year. I—and various colleagues, no doubt—will join members of the legal profession in marking that important point in the calendar. It is therefore a good moment to reflect on the nature of the profession and its important role in wider society. I congratulate Sarah Boyack on giving us that opportunity in today’s debate. As Sarah Boyack pointed out, the costs of entry to the legal profession can be a formidable barrier to access. Aspiring lawyers from low-income backgrounds have to be prepared for seven years of study and training before they can earn enough to begin to pay back their costs, if they are lucky enough to secure a permanent job in the current climate. The diploma in professional legal practice is part of that. Unlike the situation with many other postgraduate qualifications, law students have no choice but to complete the diploma if they want to go on to become solicitors. That means that the funding system must be carefully designed to ensure that the diploma year is affordable for poorer students. Sadly, as the campaign for fair access to the legal profession has pointed out, the funding system is moving in the wrong direction. That campaign is led by law students from across Scotland, including my home city of Aberdeen. Other North East Scotland members will be aware of the great work that law students have done through the Aberdeen law project to help people to access justice, including no-liability legal advice through members of the Scottish Parliament and the Westminster Parliament to their constituents. The concern for social justice that motivates those students underpins the campaign. Law students who are concerned about access to justice for clients on low incomes are right to highlight the issue of access to the legal profession for students from families of modest means. Socially aware law students such as those in Aberdeen might, after completing their diploma, go on to train in law centres, the public sector or the Procurator Fiscal Service, all of which do essential work but which do not in general offer the prospect of large financial returns in the way that the largest law firms can do. To enable graduates to make that choice, it is important that the Government should seek to mitigate the obvious disadvantages that students from poorer backgrounds face. However, campaigners believe that the changes that are being made strike the wrong balance by providing loans to more students, rather than providing larger loans to students who need them most. Further, the loans are enough to help meet the costs of fees alone, and diploma students have lost access to maintenance support in the past couple of years, so the scale of debt that they will have to take into their professional lives will be all the greater. I hope that nobody seriously pretends that it is possible to secure higher education on a large scale without students incurring debt. The issue is how much debt, and whether it is so great and over so long a period as to make that particular route of study unaffordable to large numbers of people. That is the risk with the diploma, but it can be avoided if the Government will at least recognise that there is a problem. There are a number of possible solutions, as Sarah Boyack has said. The diploma year could be incorporated into the first degree, as happens elsewhere and as applies to the equivalent stage in education and training in medicine or dentistry. Alternatively, diploma students could be allowed to apply for a student loan to cover their living costs as well as their fees, as postgraduate student architects and teachers can do. I hope that ministers will at least recognise that there is a problem and decide to act on Sarah Boyack’s suggestion of a summit involving all those who have an interest in improving access to the legal profession. As Sarah Boyack has said, if ministers do not do that, we will all be the poorer for it.

Will the minister at least acknowledge that by withdrawing support for living costs from postgraduate diploma law students he has limited people’s ability to access the course, and that the issue would be worth looking at again?

I echo the comments about Grampian Police’s domestic abuse service. Will the cabinet secretary comment on the fact that, with the 9 per cent increase in the domestic abuse figures across Scotland that was reported last week, the biggest increase was in the area of Northern Constabulary? Does he agree that the domestic abuse court in Glasgow has been very successful and that that approach can play a role in addressing the issue in other parts of Scotland, too?

Will Kevin Stewart give way?

Does Mr Adam recognise the findings in the report that Ofcom has issued today about the lack of balance in the Aberdeen referendum process? There were 338 radio broadcasts for one side of the argument but only 26 for the other, and tens of thousands of glossy leaflets were distributed through doors by unregistered groups whose campaign spending had no limits.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to Maureen Watt for taking an intervention. What would she have said if Labour had stood on a platform of not proceeding with the city garden project and had changed its mind after winning the election?

There are three possible responses to Aberdeen City Council’s decision on Union Terrace gardens. One is outrage. We have heard plenty of that this evening, and sadly it was tinged with far too much personal abuse. Another possible response is delight. If those who disagreed with the council are entitled to their views, so are the many thousands of Aberdonians who are absolutely delighted by the final outcome. The third possible response is to acknowledge that the decision was properly made by those who were duly elected to make it and then to move on and work together in the interests of the city and the region. That was the response of Fraser Forsyth who is the leader of the Conservative group on Aberdeen City Council. He was a strong supporter of the city garden project but, last week, he told The Press and Journal: “It would be detrimental to the city to keep talking about a project that was rejected ... its time to move on and focus instead on finding alternative proposals to regenerate the city centre.” Councillor Forsyth’s views are important. His was the only party to put support for the city garden project at the centre of its election campaign. If Conservative councillors are clear that the project is dead, then dead it is; all the girning in the world will not bring it back when such a key supporter says that the time for debate is over and the time to move on has come.

Certainly not. As the Labour group on Aberdeen City Council made clear at the time, a referendum was not an appropriate way of making a borrowing decision on behalf of a public authority. That is why it did not support that approach. It is now for ministers to choose either to follow Fraser Forsyth’s example and support future investment in Aberdeen City Centre or to do as some of the back benchers have suggested and take the huff and walk away. However, Aberdeen’s success is too important to the Scottish economy to be put on hold. I hope that ministers will now step back from some of the rash words that we have heard in recent days and consider Aberdeen’s revised bid for tax increment funding on its merits. There are plenty of reasons for the Government to invest in the success of Aberdeen, as colleagues who attended the local economic summit on Friday afternoon will know. Mark Higginson of PricewaterhouseCoopers told us: “Aberdeen must attract around 120,000 new recruits ... by 2022 if it is to realise its potential as a global energy capital”, while Derek Provan of Aberdeen airport warned that “future development ... could be put at risk by a lack of investment in the already congested road system”. That is why it should be welcomed that Aberdeen City Council confirmed today that improved public transport access to the airport could be achieved under a revised TIF bid. Paul Skinner of Infrastructure UK also spoke on Friday, and we heard that the United Kingdom Treasury is willing to consider supporting a bond issue by Aberdeen City Council to pay for essential infrastructure. A bond issue of up to £500 million would certainly be of interest to the many oil companies that are keen to invest in the city’s future success. I commend UK ministers for their willingness to work with the city council to enable essential infrastructure to be built, recognising, as they do, the huge contribution that Aberdeen city and shire make to the UK economy. The question is whether, after 13 years of devolution, the current Scottish Government can match that commitment. That choice is for Scottish National Party ministers to make. The time for outrage or delight over last month’s decision is surely over. We need leaders who are big enough to go beyond emotional responses and are prepared to work together to agree on what must be done and how. If local government and Westminster can work together to fulfil Aberdeen’s global potential, the Holyrood Government must not be left behind.

Which one?

The Scottish Futures Trust required that TIF bids should include enabling infrastructure. Will the minister tell us what enabling infrastructure was included in the original bid? Will he also tell us whether an increased amount of enabling infrastructure in a revised bid might indeed strengthen the TIF bid he has received?

I again ask the minister about the criteria for the application. Will he confirm that there was no requirement for private sector engagement in the original invitation to bid and what was required was that the bid should not be retail-led or have a renewables focus and that it should incorporate an enabling infrastructure component larger than £20 million? Does he not agree that a revised TIF bid will meet those criteria?

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether changes will be made to the arrangements for funding further education. (S4O-01229)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of this morning’s “Northern Lights: One Year On” report from PricewaterhouseCoopers, which concludes that maintaining the supply of appropriately skilled labour continues to be the greatest threat to Aberdeen’s ability to become a global energy centre of excellence? Will he assure us that, in assessing needs on a regional basis, he will take into account the need for skilled labour in industries that can lead Scotland’s economic growth, such as the energy, marine and engineering industries? Will he assure us that they will be central to the future funding of further education?

I am very grateful to Mr Russell for giving way. He should develop the habit, because it becomes him. My point was about the need for colleges to meet the economy’s needs. I alert the cabinet secretary to the fact that the particular colleges—in Aberdeen and Banff and Buchan—that have raised the concerns that I expressed have, as a result of changes to budgets, faced the need to reduce core education and training over the past two years. Will Mr Russell use this opportunity to assure us that that pattern will not be continued?

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the chief executive of Aberdeen City Council has written to the Scottish Futures Trust to ask that it confirms its willingness to consider an amendment to the application for TIF? Will he further confirm that the TIF application guidelines that were issued to Aberdeen City Council and other local authorities did not include any requirement for private sector funding per se? Will he give an assurance to the people of Aberdeen and the north-east that he and the Scottish Futures Trust will consider any amendment to the TIF application on its merits?

We welcome the announcement that ministers will bring forward bills to support victims and reform aspects of the Scottish legal system, and we will engage in the parliamentary debate on those measures, but we will also seek to strengthen them where we believe that they fall short or that the balance is wrong, and we will point out other areas in which Government action is still awaited. In particular, we welcome the proposal for a victims and witnesses bill, and we will continue to press ministers to ensure that that bill includes measures that will make it effective in meeting the aspirations of victims and those who champion their cause. The Scottish Government has thus far resisted Labour’s proposals for a victims charter and a victims commissioner. We believe that those proposals should emerge at the end of the legislative process. We broadly welcome the proposals in the Scottish Government’s consultation but believe that they do not go far enough. For example, it is desirable to provide victims and witnesses with advice before they attend court, but we know that the sentence that is handed down can be so complex that even legal experts have trouble disentangling the rules. When Parliament debated and agreed the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill in June, it was noted that many of the aspects of that act would not go far enough in sorting out those complications. On the other hand, a sentencing council was agreed by this Parliament two years ago and would help to resolve those issues by reforming complex sentencing options. That does not require new legislation; it requires political will, which is something that we have not yet seen. A victims charter would go further than the minimum standards that are proposed in the consultation. Enshrining the rights of victims and witnesses in legislation will encourage more people to come forward, and the specialist courts that deal with the victims of domestic abuse and sexual crimes should be rolled out across the country to ensure that people across Scotland have access to the same levels of justice. Many victims who fear that the justice system looks after the offender rather than them look to the Government to redress that balance, and a victims commissioner would help to do so. It has been said that a full-time commissioner could cost the taxpayer £500,000 and is, therefore, too expensive. However, victims know that legal aid for just one convicted criminal who is determined to pursue every possible avenue for appeal can cost the taxpayer that much, so arguing against a victims commissioner on the ground of cost will not persuade many people. If it is the right thing to do, Government should do it. That is an argument for proper support for victims; it is not an argument for restricting access to criminal legal aid. The Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill is already in the parliamentary process and will be one of the measures that will be determined in this session. As that bill goes forward, along with the criminal justice bill, it is essential that ministers listen to those whose concern is around access to justice for all. For example, at present, there is no provision for recompense for those who are found not guilty but who have spent their own savings to prove their innocence. There must be no perverse incentives to plead guilty for those who are not guilty but fear the financial consequences of a trial for their families. It will be up to ministers and Parliament to ensure that that does not happen. Scottish Labour welcomed the Carloway review, and we welcome the proposed criminal justice bill, which will implement its recommendations. However, the impact of changes to one part of Scots law on the balance of the system must be carefully and fully considered. Experts such as the Scottish Law Commission and legal practitioners must be closely involved and consulted on the implications, both in our domestic courts and internationally. The centrepiece of the Carloway proposals is the removal of the requirement for corroboration. That is not something to cast aside lightly, as the Scottish Law Commission has made clear. There is little doubt that some who have committed crimes have walked free because the prosecution case did not meet the test of corroboration in a technical sense, and it is equally clear that Cadder has altered the balance of the legal system in a way that increases the likelihood of that happening in the future. Crimes such as sexual violence, rape and domestic abuse often fail to produce convictions because of the requirement for corroboration as it currently stands. That should be addressed in order to convict the guilty, but removing the requirement for corroboration should be done in a way that protects the innocent too. At the moment, guilt in a jury trial must be proved beyond reasonable doubt to a simple majority of jurors: it is enough to convince eight out of 15 jurors that the accused is guilty, even when the other seven disagree. If the requirement for corroboration is to be removed, action on reforming criminal verdicts becomes all the more important. That is why my colleague Michael McMahon is proposing a member’s bill to include the question of the majority required for a conviction and to raise the issue of the not proven verdict. That verdict is variously seen as an anomaly or a secondary finding, although in law it is merely a different form of acquittal. Where corroboration is no longer a requirement, the case for removing the option of the not proven verdict is all the stronger. I hope that ministers will engage constructively with parliamentary debate in that area. There are other measures coming forward and areas in which the Government is not proposing measures, such as fatal accident inquiries, for which ministers say that they lack the parliamentary time. There are other things that ministers should do for which legislation is not required, such as discovering how the current crisis of drug-related deaths involving methadone has reached this stage and finding out its root causes. There are real issues of substance to be debated, which include Government bills for which there is broad agreement across parties. I call on ministers to build on that agreement in this parliamentary term and not to lose it as they did on a number of justice measures in the previous term.

I confirm what the minister has said: the Aberdeen art gallery and the city garden project were among the issues discussed at that meeting. All the members in the chamber understand that the garden project is one that has deeply divided opinion in the city, but what I think will unite opinion—I welcome the minister’s comments on this—is the city’s bid to be the United Kingdom’s city of culture in 2017. Does the minister encourage people to support that bid? Does she support the bid?

It is appropriate that consideration of the bill at stage 3 should begin with a debate on, among other things, one of the powers that the bill will give to the new national police board—namely, the power to “call on a senior officer to resign or ... retire from office in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness of the Police Service.” That is a sweeping power, and it immediately places a limit in real terms on the operational autonomy of the chief constable. It also reduces his or her responsibility for deputy and assistant chief constables, to whom section 14 also applies. Henceforth, ministers will appoint the members of the board of the Scottish police authority. They will have the power to reappoint them—or not—four years later. Ministers will also have the power to veto the appointment of the chief constable. Now the board, which will be appointed by ministers, will also have the power to get rid of the chief constable, although it will, of course, have to consult ministers first. Those powers would have to be abused only once to bring the whole system into disrepute. If a chief constable had different priorities from the minister and there were board members who were too eager to please, the result could well be the removal of a chief officer whose face no longer fitted. As the chief officer will hold powers over a much wider area than any previous chief officer in Scotland and will be accountable to far fewer people, there must be whatever safeguards the Parliament can devise to protect that chief officer from undue interference. I lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, when the Government envisaged giving the board only the power to require retirement in the interests of efficiency or effectiveness. It has extended that power. Amendment 73 would require simply that the power to call for retirement or resignation should not be delegated to a small group of members of the authority but should be the responsibility of all members acting together. That is a modest change, which recognises that there are risks—or the perception of risk—and seeks to reduce them. We welcome the Government’s amendments in this group, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will think again about his intention not to support amendment 73.

Amendment 36 and my other amendments in the group are designed to give police staff and fire and rescue service staff some certainty that their jobs will not be lost as the result of the contracting out of services after the bill has been passed. Mr MacAskill has been keen to say that no privatisation will take place on his watch, but he has resisted the opportunity to build that assurance into statute. It is fair to say that he has been reluctant to acknowledge the scale of civilian job cuts that have been made in the police service on his watch—1,000 posts have gone and thousands more are at risk. Jobs have gone not because wicked chief constables conspired against their non-warrant-holding employees but because shedding civilian staff is the only way that is readily open to the police service—even under existing conditions—to make the savings that the cabinet secretary demands within the limits that he has set on chief constables’ actions. That can only get worse. Unison has warned that, under the terms in the financial memorandum, 2,000 jobs might go. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has warned that another 800 jobs might be lost because Mr MacAskill has failed to avoid liability for VAT for the new service. Given the financial pressures, the temptation to make savings by contracting out will only grow. Senior managers in the police service are discussing that even now—that was confirmed by the recent conference of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents. There are reports about how the new contractor for prison transport has cut staff terms and conditions to deliver savings to the Government, and there are rumours aplenty that the same fate lies in store for civilians who work for the police in custody suites and call centres. I think that such rumours have been encouraged by Mr MacAskill’s enthusiasm for putting police officers back into running police cells. The amendments in my name would make placing contracts with and securing services from third parties subject to ministerial approval and would allow ministers to exclude by order minor or essential contracts from that general provision. If ministers really are set against contracting out, they can demonstrate that by supporting my amendments. Support for the amendments in Jenny Marra’s name would allow the Scottish Government to turn its commitment to and guidance on supported employment into a statutory requirement for the public services that we are discussing—an example that the rest of the public sector might follow.

Amendment 39 offers ministers the opportunity to improve the transparency of their decision-making process. As we have heard, the Government’s outline business cases were heavily criticised at the time of publication last year. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary appeared to be prepared to at least consider publishing a full business case before the completion of the bill’s parliamentary process, but he then reverted to his stage 1 position, which was that the business case was a matter for the new services. That seems to me to miss the point of the business case, which is surely to answer the question whether the sums add up before committing to proceed with the changes that the Government has in view. I do not know whether the minister will regret that decision on the business case, but I suspect that the new services might regret being launched into their new format without full business cases having been prepared. I, too, think that amendment 39 is commendable because, clearly, a report by the Auditor General on the costs before and after the merger of the police and fire services could only improve transparency. Many questions have been asked about the costs, benefits and savings from the mergers, so it would be a matter of regret if the Government chose not to allow the Auditor General to answer those questions.

This group of amendments goes right to the heart of the bill and to the unfinished business at its heart. A single police force and a single fire and rescue service could have been achieved in a number of different ways, of course. Ministers have chosen to create centralised national services, to take the police and fire services out of the local government family altogether, and to concentrate all power over the new services in the hands of the Scottish Government and boards that are appointed by ministers. Those who believe that civil servants or ministers know best will be rubbing their hands with glee, but those who believe that the best defence of a democratic society, particularly in relation to a service such as the police, lies in a division of powers will worry about how that concentration of powers will work in practice. Not only that, but the Government’s decision to end the tripartite division of power among local authorities, chief constables and St Andrew’s house in favour of a simple centralised power structure has also proved to be singularly ill-advised when it comes to saving money. Amendment 43, in my name, is, word for word, one of the two illustrative amendments that the cabinet secretary offered the Treasury as an incentive to grant the police and fire services exemption from VAT. Mr MacAskill shared them with the Treasury long before he shared them with members of the Justice Committee, for reasons that I understand, but now, when push comes to shove, he has chosen not to lodge them. That is surprising, as enabling local councils to continue to specify extra services or extra officers was meant to be enough to persuade Treasury ministers to treat the new services as if they were local council services, yet it now appears that Mr MacAskill does not want to do that. It is perhaps hardly surprising that Treasury ministers were not convinced. Mr MacAskill’s wizard wheeze represented less than 1 per cent of the total police service budget, as more than 99 per cent was still to come directly from central Scottish Government funds. Surely the whole point of a fig leaf is not to drop it while one is still arguing the case. If Mr MacAskill has indeed dropped his fig leaf, it is difficult to see how his continuing correspondence with Treasury ministers can have a positive effect.

It is a fair question, but the person who ought to have been speaking to the Tories long before the bill was introduced is no one on the Labour benches; it is the minister who is responsible for bringing forward the reform. As we have seen from Bruce Crawford’s intervention, the minister who is responsible clearly failed to do that part of his job in order to secure these savings to the police and fire service budgets. If Scottish ministers genuinely believed that they had a case for exemption from VAT, they might usefully have sat down not only with ministers at Westminster but with COSLA to work out a governance structure that would keep a significant part of police and fire funding within the local government family. It is a curious kind of partnership between local and central Government when local services are taken wholly into the centre and ministers then resist any measures to secure local input to the new national governance structures. Ministers argue that the partnership lies not in who runs the boards but in the new relationship to be struck up between councils and services at a local level. They proclaim that, instead of just a few councillors on joint boards, every councillor in every council will be able to have something to do with police and fire services. However, as things stand, those councillors on joint boards are in charge of regional as well as local strategy, they have responsibility for police and fire budgets, and they appoint the people who lead those services. The current system does not work as well as it should and change is required, but the powers in the bill for the 32 councils simply to draw up local policing and fire and rescue plans fall a long way short of the input that councillors have at present. Under the proposed system, councils will be toothless and powerless, with no recourse if the local commander does not want to listen, no right of access to budgetary information, and no say in who their local commander is to be. Only in Kenny MacAskill’s ideal world of perpetual consensus will the structures in the bill deliver meaningful local accountability, because only the cabinet secretary appears to believe that councillors will be queueing up for the chance to participate in these talking shops. Our amendments in the group propose to give councils a say in the appointment of local commanders and senior officers; to provide for reports on budgetary changes, including those between the status quo and the first year of the new force or service, and on costings and staffing under the local plans; and a statutory right to take local disagreements or concerns to the chief constable or chief fire and rescue officer. They do not overturn chief officers’ responsibility for delivering their services, which sits at the heart of the bill, but they go some way towards righting the balance and I believe that they will be widely welcomed by councillors of all parties. If ministers had also welcomed them, we could have been confident that they understood the need for balance and proper limits on the exercise of centralised control. I move amendment 40.

I am glad that the cabinet secretary has agreed that local authorities should have a role in appointing local commanders and chief officers. I am confident that amendment 41 has broad support in local government, and that it will take us a small step in the right direction. However, I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary will not support a number of the other amendments in group 6. He has said that he will vote for the amendment that he lodged himself, and which he brought to the table to discuss with the Treasury a few weeks ago. That is welcome, although perhaps not surprising. I am afraid that the bad news for Mr MacAskill is that five minutes of grandstanding in the Scottish Parliament at the end of the bill’s process is no substitute for the hard work of negotiating with other Government departments at the appropriate time before introducing legislation that was not only—[Interruption.]

Not only was the legislation not in the manifestos of Scotland’s major parties, but ministers knew before they began that they had not resolved the issues. That is not responsible government, nor is it the right way to obtain agreement. If that is a taste of the type of diplomacy that would be on offer in an independent Scotland, it is no wonder that two thirds of the Scottish people want nothing whatever to do with it. The amendments in group 6 address the key weaknesses in the bill. The police service is not just another service and local government is not just another stakeholder, and the bill will profoundly change the relationship between the two. I was interested to listen to Kevin Stewart deriding the police boards’ accountability for delivery of police services under the current arrangements. He told us of his long service on Grampian joint police board, untroubled by any twinges of concern that he ought to be accountable to anyone for the decisions that he chose to make. That is a disturbing tale, and there is no doubt that there is a need for change.

Perhaps we now have an explanation for one of the mysteries that has troubled me during the bill process. I hear from Scottish National Party councillors that they are concerned about the loss of local accountability and input, but I do not hear that from SNP back benchers. Perhaps they all believe, like Kevin Stewart, that members of police boards elected by the local community are accountable to nobody but themselves. That is a deeply disturbing vision. Mr Stewart and every other member of every police board up and down the country are, of course, accountable to the people in the communities that they serve. That is surely the principle that should underpin the new boards that we are putting in place under the reforms in the bill. There is a case for change. The point has been raised that those who are concerned about local accountability should talk to members of police boards. Not only have members on the Labour benches talked to members of police boards, but the Justice Committee took evidence at stage 2 from members and conveners of police boards. Although they had different views about the bill’s general principles, they were all but unanimous in believing that extra measures were required in order to improve local accountability to communities for the decisions that are taken by those boards. The amendments in group 6 have been lodged on that basis. I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary does not recognise, for example, the reassurance that would be given to a community by there being transparency about the money that is spent on policing in a community today and on the money that will be spent in it after the creation of the single force. That would not take away from the fact of there being a single force, but would make it accountable to the local community. That is the basis on which we have lodged our amendments, and it is on that basis that we will press them. Amendment 40 agreed to. Amendment 41 moved—[Lewis Macdonald].

The amendments are intended to address the issue of the proper reward of chief officers and, in particular, the specific issue that is raised about the conditions of their retirement. The intended salary of the new fire chief was announced recently: in this age of austerity, that individual will be required to get by on a mere £165,000 a year. Of course, the question may be asked who came up with such an imaginative step for the use of taxpayers’ money. Was it a sub-committee of former chief officers, a cabal of aspiring civil servants, or a panel of candidates for the job? Perhaps it was Mr MacAskill’s idea to take the biggest salary that the Government dispenses and simply add a five-figure sum—to reflect the increased scale of the responsibility, of course. We gave the cabinet secretary the opportunity at stage 2 to explain his thinking and the process, but he chose not to take it, so today we raise the related issue of the reappointment of chief officers. Under the bill, chief officers can retire, be paid a lump sum, and then get back on the team to do much the same job, at much the same salary, but with a tidy little sum already salted away. That is good for chief officers, but it is perhaps not the best way to look after public money. The issue is not the fitness or otherwise of retired officers to do the job; for me, that question does not arise. The question is one of equity. If retired teachers can work as supply teachers but are required not to take on a full-time teaching job that would take that job away from a colleague who has chosen to keep working, it is hard to see why the chiefs of the police and fire services should be any different. The amendments are designed simply to ensure that retirement means what it says, and that public servants are treated much the same, whether they are running the new national police and fire services at unprecedented salaries, or leading a local school. It is not about favours; it is about fairness, and the point at which we make the transition to the new national services is surely the point at which to address the anomaly. I move amendment 48.

That is helpful. If amendment 48 is not agreed to, will the cabinet secretary issue guidance to the new services to indicate that such a reappointment should happen only in exceptional circumstances?

It is encouraging to hear the cabinet secretary make that clear statement. However, it would be even more encouraging for the matter to be made clear in the bill by amendment 48. A statutory provision would offer certainty. The cabinet secretary will be aware that there have been concerns about such matters in different parts of Scotland. On that basis, although I take on board the cabinet secretary’s comments, I am inclined to press amendment 48.

The bill is about restructuring the police and fire services, but chapter 16 is designed to meet in Scotland the United Kingdom’s obligations under the optional protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, which was agreed by the United Nations 10 years ago. The objective is described in section 90 as being to establish “a system of regular visits undertaken by independent international and national bodies to places where people are deprived of their liberty”. If that meant all the places in which people are deprived of their liberty, I suspect that we would not now be facing proposals from Mr MacAskill to abolish prison visiting committees, which are well designed to be OPCAT compliant. However, it was made clear at stage 2 that the bill does not affect prisons, and ministers were clear that they did not want it to. Therefore, the amendment, like the bill, relates only to people who are deprived of their liberty in police custody. The bill places firm requirements on the new police service to give custody visitors access to those in cells, including visits without notice, meetings with detainees in private, and access to detention records. It extends even greater rights of access to members of the United Nations sub-committee on prevention of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which was established under OPCAT and whose intended visit can be blocked only “on urgent and compelling grounds of public safety, natural disaster or serious disorder” That is all very welcome, but OPCAT compliance has to go beyond rights of access. Those who carry out the visits must be enabled to become part of the UK’s national preventive mechanism, which is a further safeguard that is required by international obligations and currently includes—in England, but not in Scotland—the Independent Custody Visiting Association and the independent monitoring boards that visit detainees who are held in prison. Putting independent custody visitors on a statutory footing is the first step towards them becoming part of the NPM, but they must also fulfil specific membership criteria in order to be declared OPCAT compliant. The UN guidelines on national preventive mechanisms state that: “The NPM should be identified by an open, transparent and inclusive process which involves a wide range of stakeholders, including civil society. This should also apply to the process for the selection and appointment of members of the NPM, which should be in accordance with published criteria.” The guidelines also state that, once it is established, “The NPM should ensure that it has the capacity to and does engage in a meaningful process of dialogue with the State concerning the implementation of its recommendations” and that “It should also actively seek to follow-up on the implementation of any recommendations which the SPT has made in relation to the country in question, liaising with the SPT when doing so.” The inclusion in the bill of independent custody visitors is an important and useful first step in the right direction, but it will not achieve its purpose of OPCAT compliance unless independent custody visitors become part of the national preventive mechanism and the NPM is able to “engage in a meaningful process of dialogue with the state” and “follow-up on the implementation of any recommendations”. Amendment 50 requires ministers to make a statement to Parliament six months after this part of the bill comes into force on what they have done to further the OPCAT compliance of custody visiting and to move independent custody visitors in the direction of becoming a designated part of the national preventive mechanism. Preparing such a statement will perhaps also assist ministers in thinking about what else they need to do to achieve OPCAT compliance for all “places where people are deprived of their liberty.” I move amendment 50.

I listened carefully to what the cabinet secretary said and I take on board the point about the responsibility of the Scottish police authority in relation to this matter. However, there is a wider responsibility for the Government, whose responsibility is not confined to the area of custody visiting in police cells. That is why I think that it would be a useful development and requirement for ministers to make a report on the matter not only within six months of the implementation of this part of the bill but, indeed, at what I hope would be future regular intervals. I am encouraged to an extent by the cabinet secretary’s support for OPCAT and the process that we have described, but I will press amendment 50 because I believe that the point about the accountability of the Government, as well as that of the police authority that will report to the Government, is important.

Group 14 again brings us to issues that are at the heart of the bill, which are to do with the nature of the boards that will oversee the new services. I welcome the amendments from ministers to increase the size of the boards of both authorities. It is a pity that they saw fit to reject similar amendments that were lodged by Labour and other parties at stage 2, but I accept what the minister said about having reflected on the case that was made and responding accordingly. I am glad that ministers have finally paid heed to the concerns of many people who gave evidence that very small boards could not do the job without co-opting non-members onto their sub-committees. A further point has, sadly, not been conceded, and that is about the future engagement of local government with police and fire services at national level. The minister talked about wanting to avoid overlap and the confusion of lines of accountability, and about wanting to ensure that maximum flexibility will be possible. That all sounds well and good, but all that it means is maximum discretion and minimum lines of accountability, other than to the ministers who will make the appointments. That is why we are disappointed by the response to amendments that have been lodged by Labour and others. Ministers have not seen fit not to support amendments that we debated earlier, on a parliamentary commission to provide increased accountability through MSPs. Consequently, the only way the new service can be accountable to anyone other than ministers is through support for the amendments in group 14. Mr MacAskill talked at stage 2 about reserving seats for local councillors on the founding boards of both services, but he also made it clear that he does not want that to be done on a statutory basis because he believes that councillors will play less and less of a role in running the services in the future. We believe that that approach is fundamentally mistaken. There is a disconnect between making local councils responsible for ensuring that communities have a say in the planning of services at local level and planning to phase out local authority engagement at national level.

What I am bound to comment on is what I have found throughout today’s proceedings: the disappointing response of Scottish National Party members in turning issues of accountability and democracy into sectarian issues of party-political preference. Derek Mackay comes from a local government background, so I would have expected him to sympathise with the argument that local councillors know quite a lot about the needs of their local communities and therefore should be heard at national level, but instead all he wants to talk about is some party-political point scoring from the latest developments in COSLA. I think that Parliament as a whole will regard that as deeply disappointing. Councillors being on the boards of the services is not just about capturing their experience and knowledge of their local communities—important though that is—but would also be helpful in providing a division of powers, which surely is a desirable objective in a democratic society. Roseanna Cunningham was wrong to say that there is no difference between our proposal at stage 2 on councillors having half the seats and our proposal today on their having a third of the seats. Our current proposal recognises the Government’s position and goes halfway to meeting it. It would be pleasing if the Government at some point today showed willingness to come halfway to meeting other parties.

We have not sought geographical representation of every area of Scotland; we have simply sought a requirement on ministers to appoint members who have a knowledge of circumstances across Scotland. Surely that is something so modest that even the minister might choose to support it.

We return yet again to the central debate on the bill, which is how best to secure accountability and transparency in the new services. Amendment 66 deals with the annual report of the Scottish fire and rescue service, which is to be published and laid before Parliament. At present, the bill states that the report should measure the performance of the service against its framework document and strategic plan, but it requires little specific information beyond that. Amendment 66 seeks to impose a duty on the fire and rescue service to report each year on the number of staff in the organisation. That should not cause any particular difficulty either for the new service or for its senior officer, or indeed for ministers. Such information might routinely appear in the annual report in any case. Staffing levels are certainly of interest to members of the Scottish Parliament and to our constituents, and they are not something that any well-run public service would wish to hide. Imposing a statutory requirement simply guarantees that that information will be available. It also means that representatives of fire and rescue service staff, such as the Fire Brigades Union, will be able to see directly the impact on their members of changes in the way that the service is run, both in the long term and from year to year. Many people within and outwith the service will want to know what the Government’s future plans may be. If members are able to support that requirement, they will provide some comfort to those across the public services who fear the risk of contracting out that may follow the bill’s passage. For that reason, I hope that members will support the amendment. I move amendment 66.

As the minister correctly forecast, I am disappointed with her response. I hear what she says, and it is true that an average figure for staffing numbers in the course of a year is only one fairly simple measure. However, a statutory requirement to provide that measure would encourage the fire and rescue service to provide more detailed information on the different roles and the different types of staff involved, which would be useful. The minister is right to say that the general public are more interested in outcomes than inputs. However, if that is code for saying that people want their fires fought and do not care who fights them, the minister is mistaken. People are looking for public services that secure their objectives in an appropriate way that is recognised as such by others in the public services. We are talking about a situation in which the risk of contracting out is very real. It has been discussed, and we have heard about it in relation to the police service in today’s debate. It is reasonable and understandable that people in the fire service want some reassurance. Amendment 66 contains a very modest measure that is designed to enable people to get some reassurance, and I will certainly press it.

Here is a final opportunity for ministers to show that they are willing to take on board amendments from other parties to avoid adverse and, I presume, at least in part unintended consequences of the way in which the bill has been drafted. Police officers understandably value the protection that they enjoy from being required to move from one force area to another. Of course, that protection in its current form will cease to have meaning when the current forces cease to exist. As has been said, ministers have preserved that protection, but not for officers who are promoted, who can be required to move home as part of their new appointment. As John Lamont described, the problem is that the bill is worded in such a way that officers will lose the protection altogether after promotion, as well as at the point of promotion. In other words, the protection from being required to move house will soon be phased out in practice. Perhaps that is what ministers intend. If it is not what they intend, they have two choices: they can reject the amendments and ask police officers to take their word for it that, in practice, the protection will remain other than at the point of promotion; or they can offer real comfort by accepting the amendments, which are modest in scope and which, taken together, have precise and limited effects. We proposed a more sweeping amendment at stage 2, but we have not pursued that, in the hope that ministers might accept Mr Lamont’s more limited proposed changes. It is now up to Mr MacAskill to choose whether to take the same approach as us and accept the amendments or to stick with the original wording in the bill, regardless of its unintended consequences.

Our starting point in this debate has been that we want there to be more efficient and effective public services, and that creating single services for police and fire and rescue could help us to achieve that. Indeed, Labour was arguing for a single police force and a single fire service when Scottish National Party ministers were still making their minds up, because we believed that resources could and should be used to strengthen service delivery rather than to maintain existing management structures. We were also clear about two other requirements of police and fire reform. The first is that public confidence in those services is vital, and that public confidence is based first and foremost on local accountability for local services—that is a strength of the current arrangements, in spite of what we have heard today, and something that should have been at the heart of the bill. The second is that, as we said in our manifesto last year, police officers should not be taken off the front line to cover the duties that should be carried out by police staff. That, too, should have been a guiding principle of police and fire reform. The bill falls short on both counts. It delivers single services, but it does not provide adequate accountability locally or nationally, and it is being delivered at the expense of dedicated civilian staff in the police service in particular. We have debated accountability from a number of angles today. Although we have welcomed some concessions, we have, in the main, been disappointed by the Government’s response—indeed, the tone of some of its rejections have been more disappointing than the rejections themselves. We have proposed that councils should have greater statutory rights in dealing with police and fire services at a local level. Preparing a plan is one thing, but funding and staffing are what give real authority and accountability, and statutory rights for councils to access information on budgets and jobs are still resisted by ministers. We have proposed that councillors should be represented on the new national boards on a statutory and permanent basis, which would maintain a link between local and national strategies and decision making not just for the transitional period, as ministers intend, but over the longer term. Those proposals have also been rejected. We have supported a proposal to have a parliamentary policing commission to improve accountability at a national level. Many members across the parties will be disappointed that that proposal from Graeme Pearson was not welcomed by ministers, especially given that the Government has had some months to consider it but discovered its allegedly insuperable difficulties only in the past few days. Alongside accountability goes transparency. Some small steps have been taken on that today, but there is a long way to go to achieve the appropriate levels of openness in the management of the services. That can only become harder as knowledge and power are concentrated in fewer hands than ever before. Ministers have argued that the policing commission is unnecessary because of the powers available to Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary. However, I discovered only this week that the inspectorate lacks access even to some basic information about how services are currently delivered. It could not tell me, because it does not know, how many police officers and how many civilians are currently employed in police call centres. That is only one example, but it illustrates that there is a real information deficit as we head into the era of single national services. The risk is that that deficit will only get worse. That deficit also highlights our other key concern about the Government’s approach to this process of reform, namely the replacement of civilian staff in backroom jobs by warrant-holding police officers who should be out fighting crime. Even before the last election, the civilianisation of support roles that was taken forward by previous Governments was thrown into reverse. Reform Scotland had to use freedom of information powers to find out that, between 2007 and 2011, one full-time-equivalent police staff member’s job was cut for every new warrant-holding police officer post that was created, and that process has only accelerated since. This is not about chief constables’ drivers, as the ministers might want us to believe, but about a range of support functions, from the highly skilled to the routine, which were previously transferred from police officers to civilian staff but which are now being transferred back. Kenny MacAskill has voiced his approval of using police officers to operate custody suites, and putting cops in call centres is another potential development, but more backroom bobbies is not what the SNP promised at the previous election and it is not what ministers should be doing in delivering the bill. The threat to staff jobs does not come only from their jobs being given to police officers. The Scottish Government confirmed to Unison this week that the purpose of section 26(2)(b) is to allow private contractors to be appointed as police staff. The threat is that the moment the bill is out of the way and it becomes clear that the sums do not add up, contracting out or privatisation can be used to make further savings at the staff’s expense. Of course, the sums will not add up, which is the other fundamental flaw in the Government’s approach to the whole process. Graeme Pearson was offered an explanation just the other day for the Government’s failure to publish a full business case, and we heard it again today. The Government has proceeded to this stage on the basis of outline business cases that are widely recognised as flawed and it seems to confuse a full business case on which decisions should be made with the kind of detailed plans that are needed to implement those decisions thereafter. The Government’s late flurry of special pleading to Treasury ministers is, frankly, embarrassing. The Government has known since 2007 that national bodies such as the Scottish Police Services Authority are liable to pay VAT, but it has done nothing about it. It has known since the start of the bill process that the same would happen with the new services, but it seems to have had no plan B or strategy for seeking a different outcome if Treasury ministers said no. The so-called solution that the Government put to the Treasury was that the Government would require councils to contribute less than 1 per cent of total funding for the police and fire services, which is a proposal so lacking in credibility that the Government did not trouble to lodge it for debate today. If ministers had not been so keen to take control away from councils and to concentrate all powers at the centre, a solution might have been found. Instead, the new services will begin with a new tax liability amounting to some £26 million a year, which is hardly the best possible start. The bill will deliver single services, but it will not deliver the savings, accountability and transparency that it might have done, and it comes at a cost in jobs for civilian staff, particularly in the police service. The challenge for the new services will be to continue to deliver for communities in spite of those fundamental flaws. The challenge for the Government, in contrast with some of what we have heard in the debate today, will be to work with others to address those flaws. If it does not do that, the challenge for the next Government will be to sort them out.

I admit that it was a late bid to speak, Presiding Officer. I simply want to reflect on the cabinet secretary’s comments that his inquiry in relation to this matter was raised following representations from the UK Government. Can he tell us whether, having recast the provision, he has had further discussion with the UK Government?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise that although that is the case, the matter is not one that is typically specified or separated out, and therefore there is at least some merit in the argument that a simpler approach might achieve the same objective in a way that is more comprehensible to the public?

As we have heard, all parties recognise that part 1 of the bill is necessary, but Labour members also wish to acknowledge the views of those legal experts who gave evidence during the bill’s consideration who were concerned about the complexity of the new processes that are to be introduced and who believe, as Mr MacAskill has previously conceded, that further legislation may be needed in future to resolve the same issue. As Graeme Pearson said, the anomaly that exists in the justice system is so serious that the issue must be addressed in a timely fashion. For that reason, although it is possible that more prolonged consideration might produce a different outcome, we will support the bill as it stands, but we are mindful of the warning that it may prove not to be fit for purpose. The Law Society of Scotland said in its submission that part 1 would not give rise to a clear legislative solution, because the “calculation and comparison exercises proposed by the Bill are similar to what has gone before.” Although the bill will resolve the anomaly that was highlighted by the Petch and Foye case, it is unlikely to prove to be a long-term solution. It will provide the short-term fix that is required, but the processes that it puts in place may prove to be more complex, and perhaps even more problematic, than the status quo. However, we agree that the status quo is not an option. An anomaly exists at the heart of the Scottish justice system, which has to be fixed to restore confidence in the fact that offenders are indeed serving the sentences that the courts have imposed on them. John Finnie and Roderick Campbell rightly noted that no amendments were lodged to part 1. We considered and were sympathetic to the Law Society’s approach and its efforts to identify a simpler way of resolving the anomaly. Although, as the cabinet secretary highlighted, ECHR compliance is important, the jury is out on whether the Government’s approach will succeed in improving public confidence in the system. Having considered the alternative approaches, we will support the approach that the Government has favoured, but we think that it is important to keep in mind some of the criticisms. The issue is one of public confidence. As Jenny Marra rightly highlighted, it is not just about lawyers being able to understand the minutiae of the legislation; it is about those who are affected by the justice system being able to understand its impact and its consequences for them and for those who are found guilty of offences against them. Coverage of the Petch and Foye case gave many people the distinct impression that dangerous criminals were to be released earlier than the courts had intended. As has been said, the final decision on release rests with the Parole Board for Scotland. As the cabinet secretary said, a decision to release is made only when the board is satisfied that the offender poses no further threat to the public. The bill will give the courts greater discretion when it comes to calculating indeterminate life sentences, but there are some risks attached to that. The complexity of the directions that are issued to judges on calculating indeterminate life sentences is an issue in itself. John Finnie said that we should not assume that High Court judges will not understand the bill; I do not think that anyone would assume that. The difficulty arises if the legislation is so complex that the public do not understand it. The fact that judges are obliged to go through the process to reach a conclusion runs the risk of reducing public confidence in the process and in the system. Double counting in calculating the length of an indeterminate sentence might be a problem—that point has been highlighted. The seriousness of an offence should be counted once, not twice. If double counting occurred, the risk is that we might end up with a different result. That leads to another risk—that human rights concerns could leave the system open to further challenges and force us to address the issue again, whether or not we wish to do so. As Jenny Marra and Roderick Campbell said, careful monitoring will be needed after the bill is passed. I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s response on monitoring the bill’s operation. The bill will amend one small part of the process to solve one problem. The problem and the solution alike illustrate the need for Scotland’s sentencing system as a whole to be re-examined. James Chalmers of the University of Edinburgh’s school of law has been quoted. In his evidence, he made the point that the bill “serves as powerful evidence of a sentencing system in need of much more far reaching review and reform.” Sentencing has been on the Parliament’s agenda for some time. The Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 allowed for the creation of the Scottish sentencing council, which would have been ideally suited to the circumstances of the case that we have discussed. It is disappointing that ministers have yet to set in train a wider review of sentencing and have yet to act on the option of creating the Scottish sentencing council. The language in part 2 of the bill is more straightforward, although it has caused its fair share of debate and controversy. We have heard views about whether part 2 has been rendered irrelevant by the fact that a newspaper made public the SCCRC’s report on Megrahi and by the subsequent death of Megrahi. However, the bill is in front of us. The circumstances in which part 2 would be called on are difficult—but not impossible—to imagine, although it is certainly difficult to imagine another appeal being abandoned by such a high-profile appellant in a way that attracted such attention and public concern. However, such circumstances might arise so, having come thus far, it is appropriate to proceed to put the measure on the statute book. There is no great problem in making available the information that relates to an investigation, provided that doing so is appropriate and safe. The clarification of the data protection rules has been highlighted. Perhaps that was an unintended positive consequence of the bill. It is important that any such release of information should safeguard individuals and not breach legally enforceable human rights. I was intrigued by John Finnie’s interpretation that the amendments to part 2, which were agreed to by all parties this afternoon, in some way place the UK Government on the same footing as a foreign Government. I invite the cabinet secretary to clarify that the amendments will protect the UK Government’s position in relation to the release of information rather than impinge on its prerogatives, as Mr Finnie might have wished to suggest. If part 2 goes down in legal history, it will do so as a measure that was passed after it was no longer required. Only time will tell whether it will have any future use. By contrast, part 1 might survive on the statute book for only a relatively short time. If the processes that it creates turn out to have made the wheels of justice grind in a way that is more complex, more cumbersome and less transparent, a future Government might decide on a simpler and more direct approach. Better still, the processes that part 1 covers could be addressed as part of a wider review and reform of our whole sentencing system. Such a process should start sooner rather than later. With those caveats, we are content to support the bill.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the situation remains that, if another Government chooses not to give consent, important matters might be withheld?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise that over the past four years £4.5 million has remained in Scotland because those fiscal fines have not been collected? Will he press the Scottish Court Service to use the enforcement powers at its disposal to ensure that those fines are paid?

The cabinet secretary said that the Scottish Government would have preferred a more rapid path to the ending of discards. Indeed, in reply to Claire Baker, he said that we could be a bit more ambitious than was agreed at the council yesterday. What date did the Scottish Government propose for the ending of discards and did that proposal attract any support?

Scotland’s devolved Parliament has had a strong focus on support for victims and witnesses since its beginnings 13 years ago. The Labour-led devolved Government was committed to tackling crime and the causes of crime, starting from the recognition that victims often live in the same communities as perpetrators and that it is just as important to support victims and give witnesses the confidence to come forward as it is to catch and punish the offenders. That was why the first devolved Government launched the Scottish strategy for victims in 2001, which aimed to turn the United Nations Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power into a reality for people in Scotland. That Scottish strategy was designed in co-operation with partner organisations such as local councils and health boards, and voluntary organisations such as Victim Support Scotland. It recognised that most victims and many witnesses were frightened and shocked by their experiences, but typically had few rights in the justice system, which was focused on the guilt or innocence of the accused rather than on the impact of crimes on others. Victims needed much greater support from the justice system and from public bodies, and there was clearly a challenge for voluntary organisations, too. Everyone now recognises that support from the justice system is important right through the weeks and months leading up to court appearances, a time which can be just as traumatic for many victims and witnesses as the immediate aftermath of the crime. The Scottish strategy took a lead in recognising that victims needed practical as well as emotional support; financial assistance; advice about what to expect in court; access to all the information that is needed to understand the justice system and what was happening in their own case; and an opportunity to play a greater role in the justice system. The longer-term aim, as expressed by ministers at that time, was to increase public confidence in both the police and the courts, in order to strengthen the justice system. Ministers recognised that that was never going to be a one-off initiative and that it had to be able to adapt to changes in the justice system and to the demands placed upon partner organisations. As ministers said in 2001, “The strategy thus represents the start of a process, not the end, and it will evolve and develop through time”. That was the intention then, and I hope that today’s debate means that that process of evolution and development can now move forward and that, as the cabinet secretary has said, it will do so with broad, cross-party support. It is important to remember how much of the system we have now has come into being only in the past 10 years, for example through the rolling-out of the witness service to all the sheriff courts across Scotland; the extension of Strathclyde’s witness protection scheme to the whole country; legislation to allow victims to be told when the person who is convicted of a crime against them is due to be released from jail; the introduction of a child witness support system to improve the evidence-giving process by providing separate rooms for prosecution witnesses in courts; and the provision of advice in languages other than English. Those are all significant changes that have been made with broad support, and which were made in the period of that earlier Government. The work that was done then and has been done since has enabled many more people to access the services of organisations such as Victim Support Scotland because of the funding that has been made available. It is worth recalling that the Vulnerable Witnesses (Scotland) Act 2004 and the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 2004 date from only eight years ago and that they achieved many of the things that the strategy originally identified as targets. Indeed, Hugh Henry, who was then the Deputy Minister for Justice, said at the time: “we need to build on the good work that has already taken place, as well as take into account the changes that have happened since 2001.” That is reflected in today’s debate and I hope that that view will be supported by ministers in the present Government. The cabinet secretary rightly pointed out that changes have been made since 2007 that have added further to what was done in the previous few years. For example, there has been an increase in the number of victims who can benefit from the notification scheme that was launched in 2003. However, we must acknowledge the scale, the pace and the focus of reform in the past five years compared with the previous five years. I hope that today’s debate, which has been a long time coming, will enable us to move that agenda forward. Victims and witnesses have remained a top priority for this party in opposition as in government. Our pledges in our most recent manifesto included the creation of a victims fund requiring convicted offenders to pay towards the cost of victim support services; tougher action to tackle domestic abuse, including the extension of Glasgow's successful dedicated domestic abuse court throughout Scotland, as well as more powers for police and courts in response to breached civil protection orders; a further increase in the scope of the victim notification scheme; and a charter of victims’ rights, monitored by a victims commissioner, to ensure that the justice system plays its full part in supporting victims and witnesses. We recognise that, in the consultation paper that the cabinet secretary mentioned, the present Government has taken forward many, although not all, of the proposals we made in 2011 and previously. Of course, we welcome the fact that it has done so, but we believe that there is room for further progress. We would like the Glasgow model of a dedicated court for dealing with domestic violence and abuse to be rolled out beyond our major cities to offer the same level of protection to victims and potential victims throughout Scotland. We would also like the model of a domestic abuse task force that has been developed by Strathclyde Police to be pursued elsewhere in the country. Given the Government’s timetable for establishing a single police force within the next few months, it would be helpful if ministers could today indicate their support for that model of tackling domestic abuse. [Interruption.]

Christine Grahame’s apology is, of course, acknowledged and accepted. I thank her for that helpful intervention, which I am sure will not cost me too much speaking time. We believe that measures of that kind can and should be taken and that we can build on the proposals already included in the consultation document. For example, it is laudable that the consultation document talks about calling on public bodies to “set clear standards of service for victims and witnesses.” That is good, but it will be effective only if mechanisms are put in place to ensure that it happens. That is why Labour proposed that there should be a victims commissioner and a charter of victims’ rights, which were among the few proposals from our manifesto not included in the consultation document. Our approach is to make the protection of victims the responsibility of an independent champion. Unlike other parts of the criminal justice system, their entire focus would be on the rights of victims. We believe that that is the right approach. If ministers will not take our word for it, perhaps they will listen to Peter Morris, whose sister Claire was murdered by her husband, Malcolm Webster, in Aberdeenshire in 1994. Mr Morris has won broad support for his campaign to improve victims’ rights, most famously getting the name of Claire’s killer removed from her tombstone in an Aberdeenshire cemetery. Mr Morris believes there should be a single point of contact for victims and their families from the time a crime is committed to the end of the court proceedings, and I believe that a victims commissioner would meet that requirement. Mr Morris also has strong views about compensation of victims. A victim surcharge to pay towards the cost of supporting victims is a good idea, mirroring as it does Labour’s proposals for a victims fund. However, to make it work, courts must be given the power to enforce payment of the levy and mechanisms must be put in place to ensure that the money that is raised is used to support victims, is not swallowed up in administrative budgets and does not displace money that would otherwise come to victim support organisations from Government. We therefore welcome many of the specific commitments that are in the consultation document, but we believe that more could be done and we look forward to working with ministers and other parties on getting the detail right. However, we are clear that victims should not have to wait another five years for those good ideas to be put into action. That is why we lodged our amendment, which seeks a clear timetable for the introduction of the necessary legislation. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for indicating at the outset that the Government is happy to accept it. We believe that developing support for the victims of crime must be a process, not an event. Just as there is no magic solution to reoffending, so there is no one action that will make things right for those who have been abused, attacked, robbed or violated or who have lost a loved one as a result of crime, or for those forced to witness such crimes. As Peter Morris and thousands of others will testify, early and on-going action is what victims and witnesses need to see, and that is what we call for today. I move amendment S4M-03278.2, to insert at end: “, and calls on the Scottish Government to set a timetable for the introduction of the necessary legislation.”

Will the member take an intervention?

I am grateful to the Presiding Officer and to Mark McDonald. Does Mark McDonald agree that the single point of contact issue might be resolved by a proposal along the lines of the proposal for a victims commissioner that I mentioned in my opening speech?

During the debate, the minister heard calls from Nigel Don, Mark McDonald and Margo MacDonald, as well as from Labour members, for a single point of contact for witnesses in dealing with the justice system. At this juncture, can the minister tell us—

I hope that the minister heard my question. In the light of the issue that was raised by a number of members about a single point of contact, will she tell us the Government’s response to that proposition?

I first spoke in a fisheries debate in the Scottish Parliament in 1999, as did Richard Lochhead and Jamie McGrigor. Then, the common fisheries policy provided the framework for Scotland’s fisheries policy, as it does now, and the Scottish ministers sought to influence the CFP both directly in European Union institutions and indirectly by working with the United Kingdom as the member state, as they do now. The CFP was then, of course, under scrutiny with a view to reform of the way that it worked, as it is now. Perhaps it is a measure of the relative maturing of our devolved institutions that we are moving towards the third iteration of the CFP since the Parliament was established. The current reform process will produce the fifth version of the CFP in 40 years. As the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation said this week, “The Scottish fishing industry is ... entering one of its most important periods in recent memory”. However, the attempt to improve the common fisheries policy is not the first, and I suspect that it will not be the last. The CFP is, of course, only one of the ways in which the European Union seeks to influence economic activity in member states. The European Union has also recently proposed the introduction of its own regulatory regime for health and safety in the offshore energy industry, and the problems with that proposal put the issues with the common fisheries policy in context. The EU’s offshore safety proposal has been condemned by both employers and trade unions in the oil industry not because the European Commission’s objectives are wrong, but because it is wrong in seeking to take over an area of policy that member states are successfully managing. We are world leaders in managing offshore oil and gas extraction in a safe and sensible manner in the North Sea in general and the UK continental shelf in particular, and the EU’s good intentions can only undermine what has been achieved at great cost since Piper Alpha. The parallel with fisheries is clear. Every time that the common fisheries policy has been reformed—in the 1980s, the 1990s and 2002—one of the key drivers has been to limit fishing activity in order to protect fish stocks for the benefit of future generations. That objective will be a key driver of the next reform of the policy, too. It has to be, because overfishing remains a real risk to the future of our fishing communities, and it can be addressed only by adjusting fishing effort to protect the sustainability of fish stocks. The problem with the CFP is not the objective of matching activity to resource; it is the prescriptive approach to the regulations by which that objective is pursued. It is right to seek to manage fish stocks sustainably and to regard that as desirable on a European and, indeed, global basis rather than as a matter only for individual countries, but it is not right simply to lay down the law in Brussels and expect reality to change in order to comply with regulation. The right approach is to engage with member states and devolved jurisdictions on fisheries management and to recruit the fishing industry itself to contribute to securing its own future. That is not always easy. As those of us who represent fishing communities well understand, there are still people in the industry who are instinctively hostile to any limits being imposed on what they can catch. However, more and more fishermen recognise that planning future sustainability is the right thing to do and that catchers as well as the Government and scientists have responsibility for that. That is why it is essential for the European Union to listen to those catchers, to design conservation and sustainability regulations in consultation with the sector, and to devolve responsibility for fisheries management to as local a level as is compatible with wider conservation objectives. That means regional management of fisheries within EU waters, giving member states and devolved Governments within member states the opportunity to develop measures in partnership with the industry to achieve sustainable levels of exploitation and meet wider European objectives in a way that is truly sustainable in economic, social and biological terms. Like the fishing industry itself, Europe is changing. The election of François Hollande has created space within the European Union for genuine debate, not only about the handling of current economic challenges, but about the nature and purpose of the European project itself. That is good news from a Scottish and British point of view. The idea that ever closer integration and sharing of common resources was the only possible direction of travel for the European Union no longer dominates political debate in Brussels or anywhere else. I am also glad that the Scottish Government has moved on from decrying the common fisheries policy to seeking to reform it. The opportunity for a new balance between agreeing objectives centrally and delivering them regionally should not be missed. When the Scottish Parliament debates reform of the common fisheries policy in the 2020s, as it surely will, that is likely to happen in a very different and wider European context from the one that exists today. The challenge for the next few months is to ensure that the reform of the fisheries policy leads wider European reform and delivers a shift away from prescriptive regulation and a one-size-fits-all approach to an appropriate and effective policy. There can be no guarantee that that will happen, but there will never be a better time to try.

5. To ask the First Minister whether members of the existing prison visiting committees will have a role in the statutory monitoring service proposed by the Scottish Government. (S4F-00740)

In relation to Scotland’s international obligations on independent visiting of prisons, I think that that answer means “No.” The answer is disappointing for people who have given their time and effort on prison visiting committees. Does the First Minister really believe that replacing 240 unpaid volunteer members of visiting committees with three former prison governors or other senior people with prison experience as full-time Government inspectors is the right way to respond to the public service commitment of prison visitors, including councillors of all parties? Is it the right way to meet Scotland’s international obligations on independent monitoring of our prisons?

The SNP’s proposition is clear and straightforward, and so is the alternative. We may have different views about the implications of “an independent country” or “a devolved United Kingdom”, but we all understand the choice before us and we all recognise the process by which the Parliament reaches a view. That is as it should be, because democratic decision making requires a process that is agreed by all parties and a choice that is understood by all who vote. If MSPs are entitled to those things in this debate, surely the Scottish people are entitled to an agreed process and a clear choice on Scotland’s future. The Scottish Government proposes to define the process by an act of the Scottish Parliament, although the Scotland Act 1998 provides that the union of the Crowns of Scotland and England is a matter reserved to Westminster, and so is the Parliament of the United Kingdom itself. Everyone accepts that, under current arrangements, those aspects of the constitution are reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom. There are different legal views, though, on whether a referendum on ending the union is also by definition a reserved matter. For politicians, as opposed to lawyers, surely the position is perfectly clear. Section 29(3) of the Scotland Act 1998 says that “the question whether a provision of an Act of the Scottish Parliament relates to a reserved matter is to be determined ... by reference to the purpose of the provision, having regard ... to its effect in all the circumstances.” In other words, if the purpose and the potential effect of introducing a bill to hold a referendum are to bring the union of Scotland with England to an end, the bill must relate to a reserved matter. It could not be enacted here unless the UK Government first modified the list of reserved matters through an order made under section 30 of the 1998 act. Lawyers can argue the pros and cons of purpose and effect in a court of law, but surely no member of the Scottish National Party, in this Parliament or elsewhere, could look their constituents in the eye and deny that the purpose of an independence referendum was to end the union of Scotland with England. If SNP ministers cannot deny that that is their purpose, they cannot reasonably legislate to achieve it without a section 30 order to provide a legal basis on which a referendum can be held.

I am glad that the First Minister raises that issue. He reminded us yesterday that Union Terrace gardens have been at the heart of Scotland’s third city since the days of Queen Victoria. The outgoing SNP-led Administration on Aberdeen City Council held a referendum on proposals for development in the gardens. The gardens referendum was a model of precisely how not to hold a referendum that has important lessons for us all. It was held without the benefit of a legislative framework, as the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 did not apply, and the Electoral Commission had no statutory role. There was no agreement among the major parties on what the rules should be. We cannot afford to have those drawbacks repeated on a national scale. As the First Minister knows, there was no way to “restrict campaigning to those who have formally chosen to participate and abide by the rules”, as the counting officer reported after the event, and no way that the counting officer could limit spending by unregistered bodies.

That brings me directly back to the parallel between the recently held referendum in Aberdeen and the proposed referendum. In the Aberdeen referendum, the franchise was given to some 16 and 17-year-olds who happened to be on the electoral register, but not to others who were not on the register. Sixth-year pupils to whom I spoke could not understand why anyone would think that it was fair to give the vote to some people of their age and not to others. The disturbing thing is that the same proposition is in the SNP’s consultation and no one has yet offered those young people an explanation.

Earlier this week and again today, Alex Salmond asserted that Labour councillors in Aberdeen should give more weight to the gardens referendum than to their democratic mandate from the local electorate. That view is profoundly wrong, because local elections are held on a statutory basis under agreed rules with enforceable spending limits, while local referendums are not. That is why today’s Press and Journal reports the view of Mr Salmond’s old friend Professor Matt Qvortrup that “Labour’s council election victory this month trumped the referendum result”.

The Aberdeen experience emphasises the need for Scotland’s next referendum to be held on a sound statutory basis. Ministers must not repeat the mistakes that were made in the gardens referendum. It is the Scottish people’s democratic right to decide Scotland’s future through a process that is supported by all major parties, with rules agreed in advance, and a single unambiguous question.

If the result is to command respect, the process must do so, too.

Will Mr McDonald give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the Deputy First Minister accept that my point was that everyone recognises that there is a mandate to hold a referendum, but the critical issue is that it is done on an agreed and understood legal basis so that the result will be accepted, whatever the outcome?

Does the minister agree that it is for Aberdeen City Council to determine how best to improve public buildings and community-owned assets in the city? If so, will he have an early meeting with Aberdeen City Council in that spirit to offer support from the Scottish Government for the improvement of the city and the public realm in Aberdeen?

It is a week since we debated the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill and it completed stage 1 of its passage through Parliament. We in the Labour Party supported the general principles of the bill, but the debate was disappointing in some respects. Labour members and others expressed concerns about the on-going process of reducing police staff numbers that would result from the bill, and it was disappointing that those concerns were not shared by members of the Government back benches. Humza Yousaf claimed that: “the myth that ... police officers will be taken away from patrolling the streets to fill out paperwork all day in a back office was firmly knocked on its head.”—[Official Report, 10 May 2012; c 8799.] Roderick Campbell noted that Strathclyde Police has a lower proportion of civilian staff and appeared to imply that the problem is that other forces have too many civilian staff in the first place. Even more concerning, however, was the ministers’ approach, which is reflected in their amendment to my motion. Last week, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice applauded a decision by Lothian and Borders Police to get rid of civilian custody support officers by putting police constables back into stations to look after custody suites, on the basis that a junior police officer costs less and offers flexibility. In responding to the debate, the minister did not address the concerns that had been raised about the impact of reducing civilian posts in the police service. It might be that Ms Cunningham meant to respond to that, but ran out of time do so; I acknowledge that it is not always possible to respond to every point that is made during a debate. However, we in the Labour Party made it very clear that our concern about civilian posts and about police officers being diverted to do civilian jobs was critical to our view of the bill as a whole. Labour entered the last election with a manifesto commitment to support a single force, but we also had a manifesto commitment to oppose diversion of police officers to civilian jobs. It is not, for us, just one more non-bill issue that was raised while debating the bill; it is fundamental to how we get the most effective police service, just as much with a single service in the future as with the existing forces and agencies of the recent past. I want to say why I think that it is wrong to suggest that the problem is that there are too many civilian staff in some forces. The process of civilianisation of police roles was carried out over a period of years with broad political support. The ratio of staff to officers varies from force to force, as was pointed out during last week’s debate, but for most of its first term in office, the Scottish National Party seemed to share the general view that there being more, rather than fewer, civilian posts tends to provide a better service to communities and better value for money for the taxpayer. Civilianisation was seen as being better for policing, better for communities and better for the police service itself. For example, the policy was lauded for increasing diversity by improving recruitment and retention from among groups that have traditionally been underrepresented in the police service, including women and people from ethnic minority backgrounds. The process was piloted by forces in England and Wales, and in Scotland, with reports of savings in money and in police time for forces ranging from the Metropolitan Police in London to Dyfed-Powys Police in rural Wales. As recently as April 2008, Kenny MacAskill was providing Central Scotland Police with extra funding to deploy civilian staff to help with routine enquiries in Falkirk in the expectation that doing so would free up 10 per cent of front-line police officers to go and do things that only a police officer could do. Of course, not every initiative to civilianise police posts was an unqualified success. Besides tasks that require the power of arrest, other police tasks are so closely related to the work of an officer that it makes most sense for them to be done by police officers. However, until relatively recently, the direction of travel was to see what more and what else could be done by civilian staff; it was not to find plausible explanations for taking police officers away from policing duties to get them to look after suspects who are already in custody. Last week, the cabinet secretary conceded that, ultimately, his support for a single police force is down to financial pressures and the need to mitigate the impact of budget cuts, so that must be what lies behind his U-turn on civilian staff in the police service, who were once a desirable commodity but are now an expendable luxury. The savings that have undoubtedly been made from extending the roles of civilian staff have been trumped by the £100 million of costs that ministers have promised will be cut as a result of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. The desirable objective of modernised mixed teams of officers and staff has disappeared in the face of the political imperative of delivering very large savings in a very short time without cutting police officer numbers, and without any effective steps being taken to avoid handing over an additional £22 million in the form of unrecoverable VAT. We know that job cuts are already under way. Full-time equivalent police staff numbers passed the 7,000 mark on the way up in 2005, peaked at 7,862 in 2010 and passed the 7,000 mark again on the way down in the final quarter of last year. The Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland currently estimates that a total of 1,000 posts have been lost since the change in direction of Government policy, which agrees with the results of Unison’s survey of its members who are employed by Scottish police forces in February of this year. The risk is that things will only get worse under the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill. ACPOS reckons that the only way to meet the savings in the outline business case for a single Scottish police force is to shed civilian jobs. At least 2,054 will have to go by the time of the next Scottish Parliament election, and most of the rest of the civilian staff will have reduced terms and conditions. If they were to resist reductions in terms and conditions, ACPOS believes that some 2,400 posts would be lost and, if ministers make no progress on the VAT issue, it estimates that some 3,200 jobs would have to go. Those are not small numbers and they will not be accounted for by the reduction in the number of posts that directly support the eight chief constables, as Mr MacAskill appeared to imply would be the case last week. This is not simply about ending unnecessary duplication or trimming at the edges; it represents a fundamental recasting of how the police service is delivered. As Unison has said, it takes us back to the policing model that existed before civilianisation began. Other staff unions are also concerned.

It is not a question of whether or not I think ministers should direct chief constables; the cabinet secretary has said that he will direct the chief constable of the new force on how many police officers he should have. He cannot do that without, by implication, directing the chief constable on how much of his budget should be spent on civilian staff. In other words, the cabinet secretary has made a political decision to tell the police force, when it becomes a single service, what the balance between police officers and police staff should be. For him to suggest that we are departing from the principle that the police should have operational independence simply beggars belief and is not credible, given the decisions that he has made. In my part of Scotland, Unite the Union represents traffic wardens in Moray, in Aberdeenshire and at Aberdeen airport who are employed by Grampian Police and who work with other service providers. They have raised their concerns with me directly because they, too, fear that they are about to lose their jobs. It is not only trade unions that have concerns. In its submission to the Justice Committee, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland said: “The scale and phasing of police staff voluntary redundancies, if it can be achieved, carries a risk that police officers will be drawn into non police roles.” The Scottish Police Services Authority said that the service has achieved “a healthy and efficient balance of police officer and staff roles” over recent years, but that there is “a significant danger that this balance and inherent efficiency will be degraded under current constraints.”

Thank you, Presiding Officer. That is certainly ACPOS’s intention in its approach to the process, but it would not have told the Justice Committee that there is a risk of failure to achieve that unless it believed that the risk exists. We have heard the same from the SPSA and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, which represents the local authority employers. They warn that cops will have to take up the slack. That is the risk. Such a prospect does not seem sensible at all; indeed, it is not sensible, but it is not too late for the Government to think again, which is why we have brought the motion before Parliament to ask ministers to examine properly what is happening in individual forces and to report back to members. Unison has collected, through its members, plenty of evidence not only of the loss of posts, but of police officers doing civilian jobs. Members will hear from my colleagues on that this morning. If all sides are to understand and recognise the seriousness of the threat, Government should take on the responsibility for auditing and assessing the impact at the front line. A proper audit of cuts that have already been made or that are planned would sit well with the Justice Committee’s call for local councils to be given details of current police expenditure in their areas so that they can track changes in resources and funding after the creation of the single police force. Ministers are asking that a good deal of power over the police service be concentrated in their hands. If they want to keep public trust in the creation of a single police service, they must deliver transparency in return. That is what we are asking them to do today. If ministers want to retain trust and confidence in the process, they should accept our proposal and allow Parliament to know the full facts about the process that is under way. I move, That the Parliament recognises the key role played by civilian staff in Scotland’s police forces in helping to protect communities; believes that the role they play is essential to ensuring that police officers can perform their main role of keeping Scotland’s communities safe; shares the growing concern that cuts to civilian posts are taking police officers off the front line to perform tasks better suited to civilian staff; notes that the number of civilian staff is now at its lowest level across Scotland since 2005 and believes that such cuts are detrimental to the ability of the police service to protect the public, and in the interests of the future of policing in Scotland, calls on the Scottish Government to undertake an independent audit of cuts implemented or planned to civilian posts and report the outcome to the Parliament.

Will the cabinet secretary nonetheless acknowledge that his current approach to civilian staff taking on roles that were formerly done by police officers is different from the approach that he took when he first took office?

What percentage cut will be made to the police budget as a result of the plans?

Will the member give way?

Of course we are not, by any means, calling for any change in police numbers. We simply ask that when the Government is presiding over a reduction in police staff, it tells us which posts are going and which roles are no longer being done by civilian staff.

Does the member therefore agree that in order to achieve that clarity and certainty about the impact of the changes, it would make a major contribution if ministers were to do an audit and report on it to Parliament, as Labour has called for today?

I, too, am amused, but by the cabinet secretary’s interpretation of the debate. If he read the motion, he would see that we are not asking for a major increase in budget. We are simply asking the Government to assess which posts have been and are about to be lost and to report on that to Parliament. That will not require much additional resource; it requires only some political will.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions ministers have had with NHS Grampian regarding waiting times. (S4O-01011)

I understand from comments reported in The Sunday Times that concerns about social unavailability codes were raised with NHS Grampian as long ago as 2009. Did ministers consider making those concerns known to the public? If so, what action did they take?

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing this debate and on succeeding in making Scotland’s story in the mid-17th century a focus for debate in the modern Scottish Parliament. Christine Grahame emphasised that Scots should be aware of our own history, and that history has much to teach us about our relationships with other countries in these islands and beyond. That is all very true, but from Christine Grahame’s point of view, Montrose’s meteoric career is perhaps, more than anything else, a cautionary tale. Scotland’s story in the 1630s is fundamentally a tale of chronic disunity and political failure, featuring among other things religious civil war, political and personal betrayal, clan warfare, the sack of Aberdeen and other towns by Montrose’s armies, the slaughter of Gaelic-speaking women and children on a Borders battlefield in the name of reformed religion, and, as Christine Grahame said, politicians who could lose their lives and their family’s livelihoods if they chose to vote the wrong way on the big issues of the day. Montrose was one such politician. In some ways, he was more principled than many of his contemporaries, but he was nonetheless a man who stood first on one side and then on the other and who paid the ultimate price for failing to square the circle of a deeply divided kingdom. His reputation was built up after his death for much the same political reasons as he was pilloried while he was alive. Despite Christine Grahame’s good intentions of raising awareness, her motion and, to a degree, her speech underplay the single most important fact about the Marquis of Montrose, which is that he fought and triumphed and finally died in the name of his king, Charles Stuart—“that man of blood”, as he was described by his enemies—who was one of the most determined absolute monarchs in modern Scottish or English history and who faced his executioner rather than countenance any sharing of sovereignty between a king and his subjects. It is little wonder that some members of the Tory party of today who know their Scottish history have signed the motion.

Indeed. Montrose was not above a bit of political spin himself. His military reputation was built on battles won, mainly in the north and mainly by Gaelic-speaking clansmen led by Alasdair MacCholla Ciotach ’ic Gilleaspic Fiacal, Alasdair Macdonald of Colonsay, the pioneer of the Highland charge and the scourge of clan Campbell. Montrose did not hesitate to claim the credit for those triumphs or to present Alasdair Macdonald as his deputy rather than his equal, but he was not so quick to take responsibility when things went wrong. To be fair, most of the blame for that lies more with Montrose’s hagiographers rather than with the man himself, but it is an important point. Christine Grahame’s motion talks of the “relevance to the current constitutional debate in Scotland” of Montrose’s life and times. He was alternately a reluctant covenanter and a moderate royalist, whose aim was to restore Charles Stuart to power in Scotland, England and Ireland and to convince his king to govern by consent. His best efforts were not enough to save Scotland from the civil wars that simultaneously engulfed all three kingdoms in the 1640s. There was only one winner in those wars, and the upshot was that Scotland was forced into an incorporating union or commonwealth imposed by the English Parliament and the English republican army, a much less equal union than that which was negotiated two generations later. By all means, let us mark the anniversary of Montrose’s birth, but let us also remember all the ordinary people who suffered and died on both sides because Scotland’s political leadership in his time failed to resolve their differences peacefully and failed to put the people first.

I appreciate the cabinet secretary’s generosity in taking an intervention. What does he mean by a new role at national level for local authorities? How will that be an improvement on the current situation?

Labour’s approach to the general principles of the bill starts from our manifesto commitments last year. We said that we wanted to see “a single police force for Scotland, with delegated authority and local accountability mechanisms,” and “a single fire and rescue service”. We said that we believed that single services could improve performance, increase efficiencies and “free up resources for the front line”. We also said that there should be “no cuts to police on the beat,” that police jobs and police numbers should be protected, and that “police officers should not be taken off the front line to cover the duties that should be carried out by police staff." The committees that considered the bill raised a range of concerns—as we heard so eloquently from Jenny Marra—about what extra resources have been secured for front-line services under the bill, whether there are adequate mechanisms for local and national accountability, and what the impact of civilian staff redundancies will be. We share many of those concerns. One aspect of this is the Government’s failure to find a way of maintaining the eligibility of services to recover value added tax, which is estimated to cost £22 million a year for the police service alone. The cabinet secretary said that he is still exploring how that can be addressed with ministers in the UK Government, but the views of Treasury ministers have already been made clear. They have been categorical not only in stating that a national police force is ineligible for recovery of VAT but in making clear that Scottish ministers have known that from the outset, because the relevant statute provides recovery only for services that are funded by local rather than central Government.

I am pleased that the convener of the Justice Committee has made that point. I asked the cabinet secretary on 27 March whether he had considered whether there was any way of keeping single services within the local government family in order to limit their tax liability, as suggested by stakeholders such as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and Unison. Indeed, Christine Grahame will know that point (b) in paragraph 32 of the Justice Committee’s report asks precisely the same question. Unfortunately, Kenny MacAskill’s reply to me on 27 March was that, “Although we have given consideration to the suggestion that you mention, it still lacks clarity.” —[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 March 2012; c 1229.] The responsibility for fleshing out the suggestion clearly lies with the Scottish Government, as it introduced the bill. If the Government did not do so in advance of stage 1, I hope that it will do so in advance of stage 2. I struggled to find a response to paragraph 32(b) in the Scottish Government’s response to the Justice Committee’s report.

The precise statute under which VAT recovery is available to police and fire services relates not just to local delivery but to local funding. As the Justice Committee convener suggested, that is the nub of the question, and ministers have yet to answer that question. Christine Grahame rose— I am delighted to take a further intervention from Ms Grahame.

I am grateful to the Presiding Officer for that constructive and enlightened approach on this occasion. I am of course willing to bat the question back to Ms Grahame’s party and Government, because this is not something that ministers have had to think about only since they were re-elected in May 2011. As Mr MacAskill pointed out to me in committee when I asked a question on this matter, the Scottish Police Services Authority has been paying VAT since the Scottish National Party was first elected in May 2007. If Mr MacAskill and his colleagues have not found a way to persuade Treasury ministers to take a different approach to VAT on the SPSA over the past five years, it stretches credulity to think that they can intervene with Treasury ministers and persuade them to change their minds at this late stage. Clearly, there is a fundamental flaw in the way in which the Scottish Government has introduced the bill. The Government argued in the outline business cases and the policy memorandum that single services offer greater savings than regional services. That is one of the main reasons—not the only one—for providing a single service in place of a number of regional services. However, the savings of around £20 million each year are cancelled out by the VAT liability. In judging what is the best model, ministers appear to have said that, on the one hand, they will go for the single service because it saves £20 million but, on the other, they will proceed with a bill without having solved the VAT issue even though it will cost £20 million. That is why witness after witness questioned how significant savings could be made, not just to pay the VAT, but to achieve the other economies that the cabinet secretary has promised, and which he said today have driven the Government’s approach to the bill, while maintaining police numbers as he has also pledged to do. The savings must come from somewhere. The fear is that cuts to civilian staff posts will put the delivery of front-line services at risk. As we have heard from Jenny Marra, more than 900 posts have already gone and some 2,000 more posts are under threat. Dave Watson of Unison told the Justice Committee that one result of that will be that police officers will be paid “at great cost, to do jobs that they are not qualified to do.” —[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 1015.] In its response to the Justice Committee yesterday, the Scottish Government replied to those concerns by implying that the only civilian posts under threat are administrative support posts in areas such as human resources and finance, where jobs will no longer be needed once the eight services are merged into one service. However, that is not what witnesses told the committee, and it is certainly not what trade unions representing police staff told me. Indeed, Mr MacAskill defended the approach taken in Lothian and Borders to replace police custody support staff with police officers at significantly higher rates of pay on the basis that a police officer could do something else when there was nobody to guard in the cells of the police station. That logic points in the direction warned of by Unison: reversing the civilianisation of roles that do not require a police officer, and taking the police service back to the 1970s and a less effective, less efficient and less professional era.

My concern is not with that specific decision—I highlighted the issue because the cabinet secretary chose to highlight it—but with the logic of the decision. If the view is taken that jobs that are carried out by civilian staff could just as well be done by police officers in their spare time, the risk is run that police officers cease to police. That is the fundamental risk that Unison and others have rightly highlighted. The consequence of such an approach is that, although the number of police officers stays the same, more and more are employed doing jobs that do not require the powers of a constable. Maintaining levels of policing in our communities is not only about maintaining the headline number of officers; it is about whether officers are employed in policing. A constable who is employed in custody support in place of a civilian worker—whatever the relative rates of pay—is clearly not doing that policing job. Such changes are not cost or risk free. For example, John Duffy of the Fire Brigades Union argued that redundancy costs in the fire and rescue service could be as much as twice the amount that is indicated in the outline business case. Part of the reason for the Government's failure to bring forward a full business case no doubt relates to the timescale that it has imposed on the process, which was a source of concern for many witnesses who gave oral or written evidence. In other words, the problems that are identified in the outline business case have not been solved, and the cabinet secretary said yesterday that the problems will not be addressed until the new services are in place. I am glad that the cabinet secretary has accepted the wisdom of the committee’s findings on the early appointment of chief officers, but it would not be too hard to find examples of ministerial replies where autumn does not end until nearly Christmas, and summer appears to go on all year. It would therefore be useful if the minister could, when winding up, indicate not just the season but the calendar month in which the appointments are expected to take effect. The Government’s concession appears to indicate that the initial timetable was inadequate The question remains—I speak from experience, as I am sure the minister appreciates—whether simply appointing the chief officers earlier will go far enough to ensure a smooth and efficient transition from eight police and fire services to one police and one fire service. Major changes of that kind require time to work through. For example the transition in local government in the mid-1990s involved shadow councils and a transitional year, but that has not been ministers’ approach in this case. Ministers accept that the transformation in structures and culture in these services cannot all be accomplished before 1 April 2013. They now accept the need for chief officers to be in place early. I invite them to consider carefully whether, even at this stage in proceedings, a more phased approach, following the appointment of the chief officers, might produce a more effective delivery of the targets that ministers have set. The bill endorses the general principle of local accountability but, like the committees, we are not sure that ministers have yet got that right. It is disappointing that they have rejected the suggestion of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee on the development of strategies for public engagement in local services, and it is even more disappointing that the Government has rejected the Justice Committee’s suggestion that local councils should be given a statutory right to specific information about the level of resources provided in each council area at the point of amalgamation of services. Given the concerns that are felt in many communities about the effects of centralising services, that seems a modest proposal, which the Government’s commitment to transparency in this process should have allowed it to welcome. It is a matter to which we are bound to return at stage 2. This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to transform vital public services. In supporting the general principles of the bill at stage 1, we believe that ministers have more to do if they are to secure the prize of greater efficiency and better services. They should recognise the vital role that is played by civilian staff, stop the drift of police officers into civilian roles and address the issues of local accountability and democratic deficit in control of these services. I look forward to hearing ministers respond to some of those points this morning and to having the opportunity to improve the bill at stage 2.

The member will recognise that other witnesses suggested other things. Does he agree that some civilian roles are carried out by specialists and that although police officers are simply not qualified for them, they are beginning to be asked to do them?

The debate has been useful in highlighting the broad support for the bill’s general principles and in demonstrating the wide range of concerns that still need to be fully addressed. Graeme Pearson correctly stressed that the move from local to national police and fire services is important because it is a fundamental change in their character and not simply a modernising reform of the kind that might happen every 30 or 40 years. Therefore, it is all the more important that the Parliament and the Government get the detail of the change right. Because the changes are profoundly significant, ministers need to think carefully—even at this stage—about the process and timing of change. They have conceded that, as was the view of many who gave evidence at stage 1, the establishment of single services on 1 April 2013 will not of itself create fully integrated, fully operational and fully effective services. There will be a transitional process—the question is simply about the point at which powers should be vested entirely in single national services rather than in the existing services. David McLetchie was right to question why we have reached the end of stage 1 with only outline business cases, which have been subjected to significant criticism and which propose levels of savings that, as some have said, might not be achieved. The VAT issue was not resolved before the bill was introduced. The fear is that the failure to resolve it will cancel out some of the savings that are meant to be made. Christine Grahame and John Finnie asked how the VAT issue could have been resolved. Of course, they were both signatories to the Justice Committee’s report, which called on ministers to look at giving local authorities the capacity to contribute to police and fire budgets. On that basis, I commend to them a range of evidence on that question from witnesses at stage 1. Unison, which represents many of the civilian staff who will be affected, and COSLA, which represents local authorities and is the current third party in the tripartite arrangements, have made the case for structuring single services within the local government family. Jim Gallagher, a former head of the Justice Department, gave a similar view in his written evidence. Of course, to do that might dilute the historic change to which Graeme Pearson rightly referred, and ministers might reasonably argue that part of their purpose is to break the link with local government at the national level, but that is not what ministers have said and, as I understand it, not what they intend. Kenny MacAskill has been clear that the authority boards for each service should include elected members from local government and, during stage 1, a number of people have argued that more councillors should be involved at that level. It is not clear to me why ministers appear not to have worked through options for maintaining local government participation at the national level in the funding of the services, which might have addressed the VAT issue that ministers have not been able to resolve thus far. Given the fact that the price of failing to resolve it might be more than £20 million a year, it will be disappointing if ministers or members of their party say that it is for others to flesh out how that should be done. The Government is in its second term of office; surely fleshing out solutions to such problems is properly a matter for ministers. The other reason for not turning away lightly from the input of local government to single services is the issue of accountability, which has been raised by a number of members. It was highlighted by Graeme Pearson, by Jenny Marra on behalf of the committee, and by other members from all parties. The power of ministers to appoint, direct and require removal, in the interests of efficiency, concentrates unprecedented authority over policing in the hands of central Government. As Roderick Campbell said, it is essential that the commitment of elected politicians to human rights, transparency and accountability is anchored in statute and underpinned by the bill so that single services are provided without an undue concentration of power at the centre. A number of speakers emphasised the Justice Committee’s recommendations on local accountability, which I support. The case for allowing local authorities, which are being encouraged to take a direct role in the preparation of local policing and fire plans, to know what resources are available to the police and fire services in their area seems eminently sensible. I do not really understand why the Government has not accepted that recommendation in full. No doubt the minister will comment on that during her closing speech. Graeme Pearson was right to say that this is not just about what resources are available on 1 April next year. I suspect that local authorities will be quite interested in taking on the responsibility to lay out in front of joint boards what resource was available to them at the beginning of the process as well as what will be available at the end of it. Graeme Pearson also made a clear case for a parliamentary commission, and I was interested to hear some of the responses to that suggestion. Christine Grahame thought that there might not be time to do it properly, and Humza Yousaf suggested that we might not be able to afford it in such financially tough times. Perhaps those reservations strengthen the case for ministers to think carefully about the phasing of the change. I also dispute the suggestion that scrutiny should be limited by additional cost. If the Scottish Parliament can rightly support scrutiny of the Scotland Bill and of other UK legislation, and support commissions in other fields—all of which are appropriate—surely it can support the best available arrangements for scrutiny of a single national police force, which otherwise will be entirely under ministerial control. I was interested to note that Roseanna Cunningham seemed to assure Alison McInnes that no fire stations would be closed as a result of the bill. I have no doubt that that is a commitment to which she will be held. If the minister wants to intervene on that point, she is very welcome to do so, or she could comment on it at the end of the debate. It would be in no one’s interests if the commitment that she gave was less than clear to all concerned. I am also interested to hear the minister’s views on Christine Grahame’s comments about the wider rescue functions of the fire and rescue service, and on the Fire Brigade Union’s views on defining those functions in statute. Ministers, along with many members, met the FBU yesterday.

I absolutely accept Christine Grahame’s point of fact and the reasons that lie behind it. I am simply asking for ministers’ response to the FBU’s position and their explanation as to why they have chosen not to go down that road. What they have to say might well be along the lines that Christine Grahame has indicated, but I will be very interested to hear it. Finally, I turn to an issue that a number of members have denied is the single biggest problem with the current process: the loss of civilian staff from the police service in particular and its inevitable consequence—police officers doing civilian jobs. It is not adequate simply to argue that, just because chief constables have given an assurance that that is not happening, it is not happening. Such evidence must be subjected to greater scrutiny. When trade unions that represent staff and others tell us that the problems are real, we have to take what they say seriously not because we want to protect the positions of the civilian staff—not the warranted officers or firefighters—who do a fantastic job in those services but because we do not want the Scottish Government’s pledge to maintain police numbers to result in more back-room bobbies rather than police officers out on the beat. I am keen to hear the minister’s comments on those critical issues and look forward to stage 2 and further debate on many of the issues that we have discussed.

Does the minister not accept that the ability of Parliament to properly scrutinise the legislation would be greater if the Government produced full business cases before the conclusion of the legislative process?

Will the member give way?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government will take in response to the independent report published following the Ryan Yates case in Aberdeen. (S4F-00664)

I echo the First Minister’s sentiments regarding the victims and the witnesses of that horrific attempted crime. Is he aware that the separate funding stream for intensive support and monitoring of the most serious offenders on release is now no longer available to councils that face exceptional costs, which can run to six-figure sums? Is he aware that such funding was not available to Aberdeen City Council in this case, simply because Ryan Yates had served his full sentence and was therefore not subject to any licence conditions on his release? Does the First Minister agree that those issues need to be addressed urgently to maximise public protection and ensure that such incidents never happen again?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will provide additional funding to community projects to reduce reoffending. (S4F-00632)

Does the First Minister acknowledge the concerns of providers such as Laurie Russell of the Wise Group, who said at the weekend that the system was broken, when it came to providing meaningful support for efforts to reduce reoffending? If the system is broken, it needs fixing, so when will the First Minister’s Government publish the detail of its plans for resourcing such initiatives in future?

The cabinet secretary said that he intends to give a formal response by the summer. Will he be a little more specific about the timetable for that formal response, and will he indicate today which of the recommendations the Government supports?

For our part, we welcome the recommendations made by the Angiolini commission and, like the Government, we acknowledge the hard work and insights provided by Dame Elish Angiolini and her colleagues in taking the report forward. Staff who work with women offenders do the best job that they can in difficult circumstances, but I do not think that anyone in the chamber will be surprised that the commission has found so many opportunities to make improvements and changes to what is a troubled system. Laurie Russell, the chief executive of the Wise Group, said at the weekend that he believed that the criminal justice system was broken when it came to supporting initiatives to reduce reoffending. He leads one of the agencies that work to support male and female prisoners to get back into the community and out of the cycle of reoffending. He knows from his agency’s direct experience what is wrong with the system. What Laurie Russell says of the system as a whole is particularly true of the way that our society deals with women who break the law: even more female offenders go to prison on remand; even more of them go to jail but do not have access to meaningful rehabilitation programmes while they are there; and even more get stuck in a cycle of offending and reoffending when effective intervention could help them to build better lives. Kenny MacAskill said today, as he did last week, that the Scottish Government welcomes the thrust and vision of the commission’s findings. Building on that, we now need timely and decisive actions from ministers to address the various challenges that are identified in the report. Many of those problems will take time to resolve, but we look to ministers to come up with a timetable for the introduction of changes and reforms not only to Cornton Vale—important though those are—but to the way that the justice system as a whole deals with women offenders. The report highlights some successful examples of local projects, such as the 218 centre in Glasgow—for which my colleague Dr Richard Simpson deserves particular credit—and the willow project in Edinburgh and, of course, successful units within prisons, such as the community integration unit at HM Prison Aberdeen, which I visited recently and which I am sure that the cabinet secretary has also visited. Building on such best practice can make a real difference to the lives of women who find themselves unnecessarily trapped in the justice system. However, to delay action for months or years when many lives will have been damaged already by the failings of the current system is surely not an option. It would fail those offenders who want to change the circumstances in which they live and to improve their life chances and those of their children. Kenny MacAskill mentioned short sentences but, despite the scrapping of sentences of less than three months and claims that crime on Scotland’s streets is falling year on year, the female prison population continues to grow. Many of the women who are behind bars are the offenders whom the abolition of very short sentences was supposed to benefit. As the commission affirms, only a small proportion of women in prison are hardened or violent criminals or a danger to their communities. Most are more of a danger to themselves. They are exposed to drugs and to the negative influence and bullying of high-risk offenders with whom they are in prison. They are often mentally unwell and, at Cornton Vale, they are likely to be detained in highly inadequate conditions. The commission recommends smaller local units like those at Aberdeen prison and elsewhere. Such units will give women offenders the best possible chance of turning their lives around on release—as long as the Government backs its praise for the commission’s report with action to implement it. Changes are also needed to cut down the unacceptably high number of women prisoners who spend their time on remand. As Kenny MacAskill highlighted, many of those women are not thereafter sentenced to imprisonment, so the logic of their being remanded in prison is clearly exposed as inadequate. There are already several schemes that could be used not only to reduce overcrowding at Cornton Vale but to provide counselling and drug therapy to women on remand while they await trial. In many cases, that would make more sense . The flagship proposal in the report is to replace Cornton Vale with a new facility for offenders whose crimes warrant custodial sentences, but it is equally important that the Government properly explore all the options when it comes to finding long-term solutions for low-risk offenders. If it does that, it will have support from the Labour Party. Such women certainly need to be punished for their crimes, but they also need support and help to be successfully reintegrated into the community, to deal with their mental health or drugs issues, to find a home and a job, and to look after their children. Those are the best ways to assist those women and to prevent the cycle of offending and reoffending from continuing. The cabinet secretary told us a few moments ago that he would make a formal response to the commission’s report before June. I am sure that he will acknowledge that the report gives the Scottish Government a six-month deadline. That means a progress report—an opportunity for ministers to report to the Parliament on what progress they have made on the recommendations that are detailed in the report—by October. I am sure that, in setting June as the month by which a formal response will be made, Mr MacAskill is aware of the recommendation in the report that he come back to Parliament in October to tell us what progress he has made. In Mr MacAskill’s response to my intervention, he made it clear that he supported the recommendations as a whole with, perhaps, as I think he suggested, a need for a little tweaking around the edges. Other issues are priorities—which recommendations the Government will seek to implement first—what the milestones of progress will be and what resources ministers will deploy in developing new projects and schemes for dealing with female offenders. Of course, the reality is that this is not the first opportunity that this Scottish Government has been given to do something to improve conditions for women offenders in the justice system—to be fair, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice acknowledged that in his speech. For example, back in January 2010, HM chief inspector highlighted in a report the mother and baby unit at Cornton Vale, with a recommendation that a new unit should be constructed and a family visitor centre built. The lack of progress was highlighted in the chief inspector’s follow-up report in February 2011 and in his latest follow-up report, which was published yesterday. Brigadier Hugh Monro’s comments on his latest findings at Cornton Vale could not have been clearer. He says that Elish Angiolini is absolutely right that the existing prison is unfit for purpose and should be replaced, but that waiting for a new jail to be built is not acceptable and that, until a new jail is in place, improvements to the fabric of the existing prison at Cornton Vale will have to continue to be made. That is the view of the chief inspector of prisons and I hope that that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and ministers will support it. I am sorry to say that there has been a lack of investment at Aberdeen prison since a decision on closure was made; I hope that the same will not happen at Cornton Vale. Kenny MacAskill told the Justice Committee in the autumn that the Scottish Government did not have the money to pay for a new prison to replace Cornton Vale. I acknowledge that today he recognised that the report changes the environment in which decisions have to be made, but I hope that, in the meantime, he will affirm his commitment to maintaining conditions as far as he can at the prison until such time as he comes forward with a plan for a replacement prison. The commission’s report criticises measures and actions taken by the Scottish Government in a number of other areas, for example around the electronic monitoring scheme and bail supervision orders. Those are examples of good initiatives that have been endorsed by the Government but which have not been fully followed through. We look for a different approach in the Government’s response to the report. We seek a clearly defined timescale, measurable targets and action to ensure that women are given the support that they need to escape from the cycle of crime and prison. Hard work has been done by the commission. It is now the turn of the Scottish Government to do hard work in preparing a response and setting out a measurable timescale. If it does that and comes up with a set of proposals that are measurable and resourced, it will have our broad support.

I, too, congratulate Richard Baker on this debate on UCAN. I am delighted to have the opportunity to echo his praise of the excellent work that UCAN is doing to raise funds for groundbreaking new medical facilities at Aberdeen royal infirmary. That fundraising is progressing well, but the charity will need continued support if patients in Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland are to have access to the best possible surgical treatment for prostate, bowel and bladder cancer. As Richard Baker said, UCAN has worked to provide not only advanced treatment options, but support and counselling to patients and relatives after diagnosis. It is to their credit that the staff at UCAN—and those who support the charity, as has been said—never rest on their laurels. They constantly seek new ways to improve cancer patients’ lives. The campaign to raise funds for technologically advanced robotic equipment is simply the latest in a series of ambitious targets, all of which have been met. As the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care in 2006, I had the pleasure of contributing to an early initiative that dovetailed with the launch of UCAN—the installation of positron emission tomography imaging equipment to improve cancer diagnosis and treatment at the ARI. In 2008, I was delighted to lodge a motion to congratulate UCAN on a successful application for grant funding of more than £500,000 from the Big Lottery Fund, which allowed the charity to develop its vital support facilities for patients and their families, which we have heard about this evening. I hope and trust that I will soon welcome the news that UCAN has reached its latest fundraising target and that cancer patients in the north-east will be able to benefit from the latest surgical techniques, which are aimed at improving not only their chances of survival but—importantly—their post-operative quality of life. As we have heard, the possibilities for the equipment—the first of its kind in Scotland—extend even beyond treating cancer, as robot-assisted surgery could be used in cardiac, gynaecological and paediatric procedures. UCAN’s success in its campaign would not only be great news for cancer patients and their families, but would add to the reputation of Aberdeen royal infirmary as an innovative and enterprising teaching hospital that is willing to embrace new technologies in an effort to save more lives. Long may that continue. As all of us—particularly those from the north-east—recognise, remaining close to homes and families while undergoing treatment is important for cancer patients in Aberdeen and the north-east. People will of course travel to hospitals in Edinburgh and Glasgow for treatment and procedures if they must, but that is physically demanding and emotionally difficult for all concerned. UCAN’s efforts to improve the facilities that are available in the north-east are to be commended for the wider benefits that they bring. I have no doubt that, through the hard work of the charity and its supporters, and the generosity of people in the north-east—to which Kevin Stewart referred—UCAN will again succeed in reaching its fundraising target. The hard work of charities such as UCAN is a powerful weapon in the fight against many of Scotland’s health problems. I hope that the minister agrees that the efforts of such charities need to be matched by investment from the Government, as with the PET imagers six years ago. A successful fundraising campaign will save lives not just in Aberdeen and the north-east but across the whole country. Anything that can be done to help to tackle Scotland’s poor record on cancer should be a priority for us all.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive when the decision was taken to relocate post-production staff in the forensic services. (S4O-00883)

Thank you, Presiding Officer—my card is now in the slot. Does the cabinet secretary understand why such imposed changes have only further demoralised staff at the forensic laboratory in Aberdeen, given the events that have affected them in the past five years? Will he give a personal assurance that he will reject any proposal that comes to him to close the Aberdeen forensic laboratory in this parliamentary session, whether as part of the creation of a single police force or in any other context?

I am interested in the cabinet secretary’s view on whether a less complex approach could have been taken had the bill been a bit more ambitious in scope. In other words, had there been more fundamental changes to the sentencing structures, it might have been possible to avoid an opaque proposal in part 1 of the bill.

The bill is not one of those pieces of legislation that attract outright opposition, but it is one of those that beg the question how else they might have been structured or what might have been done instead. There are few instances in the 13 years of this Parliament in which a stage 1 report has begun by noting that the purpose of the legislation has been overtaken by events even before the committee has met to agree its report. Those few instances have arisen where the legislation has been introduced on an emergency basis, typically because a court of law has interpreted statute in a new way that renders change in the law urgent and unavoidable. This is not such a case. Part 1 responds to a specific judgment, in Petch and Foye, that invites statutory clarification, but that is not the same as those previous pieces of legislation that were introduced on an emergency basis, in which haste was really required. As we have heard, part 2 responds to one specific case in which the legal position has not changed in any fundamental way since the release of the convicted offender, on compassionate grounds, in August 2009, but in which the inadequate statutory provision has been exposed over time. As the convener of the Justice Committee noted, parts 1 and 2 deal with quite different matters. That is reflected in the bill’s cumbersome title, to which Graeme Pearson referred. Given that one part responds to a High Court judgment from March 2011 and the other part follows the decision in the Megrahi case in August 2009, it is hard to identify any compelling reason why the two matters have had to be addressed in the same piece of legislation. Although the bill is not emergency legislation, as Jenny Marra and Malcolm Chisholm noted there has been no pre-legislative consultation other than with the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission on part 2. Perhaps if some of those who gave evidence to the Justice Committee had been formally consulted first, some of their criticisms might have been pre-empted. Mr MacAskill has said today that he would welcome an alternative approach. Perhaps such an approach might have been easier to develop if consultation had happened before the bill was introduced. The verdict of most expert witnesses on part 1 seems to be, at best, “not proven”. The Government’s intentions are laudable, but its solutions are not. Graeme Pearson argued that the measure should not provide just a short-term fix to a new interpretation that was reached by a majority of judges in one particular case. More needs to be done to make the whole sentencing process less opaque and more transparent and accessible for those affected. As Mary Fee said, that opportunity appears to have been missed. If so, that is a matter of regret. Nonetheless, there may still be opportunities at future stages of the bill to address that challenge. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will indicate in closing whether there will be Government amendments at later stages to begin to provide a more rational structure to sentencing policy as a whole, or whether he will seek to discuss alternative schemes and approaches over coming weeks and months. Given that part 1 is all about sentencing and touches on determinate and indeterminate sentences and other matters of that kind, ministers might have seen fit to do something more decisive about the whole area of early release from prison even if they did not go to the extent of seeking to meet their manifesto commitment, as David McLetchie suggested they could have done. A wider bill to address sentencing in general might have had more value than a short-term fix to Petch and Foye alone, and it would have made more sense than the current uneasy combination of two quite separate measures. I look forward to hearing more about the Government’s future intentions in those areas. It was perhaps predictable that the statement of reasons on Megrahi’s grounds for appeal would be published, and it was published online a few days before the stage 1 report was agreed by the Justice Committee. When the Sunday Herald made the decision to publish the statement in full, it simply stepped into the vacuum that had been left by ministers. The Justice Committee’s report describes publication as a hugely significant development given the policy intentions behind part 2 of the bill, and it certainly is. In effect, the newspaper’s decision to publish and the Crown’s intimation that it would not prosecute rendered part 2 redundant in relation to its main objective, as Christine Grahame said. We have heard that part 2 is drafted in general terms and may still be relied on in future cases. That is true at least in theory, although Christine Grahame and other members have raised doubts about whether it would be robust enough for that. Because of that theoretical position, we will support the general principles of part 2 today. However, devising provision for a past case and then making it available for possible future cases is surely not how good law is made. I would be interested to know whether the minister intends to lodge any amendments affecting the substance of part 2 to reflect the changes in circumstances. Megrahi’s is not an obscure case that has been hauled into the limelight by its implications for human rights or for judicial procedures. It relates to the gravest crime that has ever been tried by a Scottish court, for which one man has been convicted, and part 2 would not be before us today if Megrahi had pursued his appeal. It appears that he did not pursue his appeal, in part, because Mr MacAskill repeatedly reminded him that he would not qualify for release under a prisoner transfer agreement as long as he had an appeal pending. However, Mr MacAskill does not appear to have explained to him that the same requirement did not apply to the option of release on compassionate grounds. That is unfortunate, as the abandoned appeal allows the inference to be drawn that the conviction was unsafe in the first place.

I am sure that the legal distinction was drawn to his attention. However, I am also sure that anyone facing a lengthy prison sentence who meets a Government minister who explains that one circumstance requires him to drop his appeal but does not address the other circumstance might draw his own inference from that. Perhaps ministers will also reflect on why they decided that the bill was necessary but left it to the current parliamentary session to introduce the measure instead of acting more quickly. We have heard, for example, that the data protection grounds claim for caution on the part of ministers did not impede publication when the disclosure of information was in the interests of justice. It is clear that ministers could have laid an order at any time after the previous order was found wanting at the end of 2009. Had they done so, the commission might have been able to publish its statement of reasons at its own hand many months ago. A change in the law ahead of publication would have avoided the Parliament being reduced to the status of a rubber-stamp for decisions that have already been made in the offices of editors and publishers here and elsewhere. We, on this side of the chamber, have always favoured openness and transparency in relation to the decisions that were taken in the Megrahi case. That is why we support the general principles of both part 1 and part 2—not in the belief that the Government has got it right, but recognising that it has tried. We invite ministers to try a bit harder when the bill gets to stage 2.

The cabinet secretary will recall that the Civil Contingencies Act 2004 defines areas for civil contingency preparation in terms of the existing forces. Further to his initial answer around working with partners, will the cabinet secretary indicate to Parliament today how he envisages that being structured in the future, given the police and fire service reform?

As has been said, an effective justice system must protect communities, support victims and seek to rehabilitate offenders. That means that those who have been imprisoned should be supported to change their behaviour, when they are willing to do so, so that when they come out of prison they can lead better lives and no longer pose a threat to the communities in which they live. That is the focus of the debate, which we welcome. The question is whether new models of support can help to deliver real change in levels of reoffending and how their success in changing behaviours can be measured. There is cross-party support for exploring the potential of social impact bonds, for example—there was a commitment on that in our manifesto and in other manifestos for last year’s elections—even if it is too early to come to firm conclusions about the longer-term impact of that approach. However, it is important to put new models into the context of what we already know about what makes for the effective rehabilitation of offenders. We know, for example, that prisoners’ ability to access their families can help to reduce reoffending by giving purpose and focus to prisoners’ lives. That is why we believe that local prisons are important and why, for example, we opposed the Scottish Government’s plans to close Aberdeen prison and replace it with HMP Grampian, an hour’s bus journey away in Peterhead. If families can help with the rehabilitation of offenders, those families will need support as they deal with a wide range of emotional and practical pressures, quite apart from the challenge of keeping in touch with the imprisoned person. That is why organisations that work with prisoners’ families, such as Families Outside, have an important role to play. Whatever new models are developed must recognise and support the good work that is already being done that indirectly supports the rehabilitation of offenders as well as the work that is directly engaged in that task. We have prison education services in place that can and should make a difference to prisoners’ lives. The basis on which those services are provided in a number of prisons in the east of Scotland has changed recently, and concerns have been raised about the range and quality of education that will be available to prisoners in future. I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on how the standards of prison education services are to be assessed and maintained both under the current arrangements and under any new models for providing rehabilitation. Working and learning should not be incidental to periods of imprisonment; they should define everyday life in Scotland’s prisons. It is in the classroom and the workroom that prisoners can learn the skills that they need to make real and meaningful changes to their lives. That is why it is disappointing that, even in our most modern and well-resourced jails, too many prisoners are not able to engage regularly in constructive activities. Repeat offenders on shorter sentences—the very people who should be given the chance to change their ways before they go back into our communities—often have no access to work programmes. It is worth saying that people are sent to jail by sheriffs rather than put on community service orders for a reason, and the challenge of rehabilitation applies whatever the length of the sentence. Too many people come out of our jails with a drugs habit that they did not have when they went in. That is also a challenge for the system. In that context, it is all the more important that ministers should think again about their proposals to scrap prison visiting committees. Plenty of ex-offenders will confirm that prison visitors were the mentors—the cabinet secretary referred to mentors—who helped to set them on the path to a life without crime. We need more, not less, independent scrutiny in our prison system, particularly if new models of support for rehabilitation are to deliver better outcomes for local communities rather than simply lower costs for the Government. The evidence on new models is limited to date, but it is generally positive. The pilot project that uses social impact bonds to fund rehabilitation at HMP Peterborough was originally authorised by Labour ministers, and it has been running since September 2010. By definition, it is too early to measure the effectiveness of that approach in terms of the frequency or rates of reoffending. The model has succeeded in drawing in non-Government finance to support rehabilitation, but there are still issues to be resolved around the measurement of outcomes and avoiding very complex contractual arrangements. Those issues can be resolved, and we support further work on how to deliver new models of support for the rehabilitation of offenders. It is critical that the whole range of Government policies on prisons supports rehabilitation, and we will continue to press ministers to ensure that they pursue the right range of policies for the benefit of those in prison and in the interests of the wider community.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister recall that the project sponsors held their own consultation on the matter two years ago? That produced a vote of 55 per cent against the project going forward to 45 per cent for. The sponsors said at that time that such an important decision could not possibly be taken based on such a small majority.

Will the member give way?

When Sir Ian Wood launched his proposals for Union Terrace gardens in November 2008, he said that he would proceed only if the project had strong support from the people of Aberdeen. In the past three years, the project has rather divided opinion in the city, and the consensus that Ian Wood hoped for at the outset has not been achieved. Throughout the process, Sir Ian has been as courteous as he is generous, but that does not absolve SNP or Tory councillors from their responsibility to make decisions on the city’s future if they are elected to office. Nor does holding a referendum allow councillors to shrug off responsibility, especially when the poll is not based on agreement among all the parties that are represented on the city council. Democracy is about the vote itself, but it also requires consent across parties, effective limits on campaign spending, and properly tested safeguards against fraud. None of those things was in place for last week’s ballot. Many thousands of glossy leaflets went through people’s doors from organisations that had not registered to take part in the campaign. It is also a matter of record that the majority of those who voted by post said no to the city garden scheme. Ministers are planning their own referendum and it is surely in all our interests that the conduct of that vote should be fair, its legal basis should be clear, and its result should be beyond challenge. The Electoral Commission has raised concerns about, for example, how 16 and 17-year-olds might be given the vote. Crawford Langley said at the count in Aberdeen last week that most 17-year-olds and some 16-year-olds could vote, but clearly some 17-year-olds and most 16-year-olds could not. That is what can happen if there is no agreement on process, and that is also a lesson for the Scottish Government. The referendum was the third time that public opinion had been canvassed, but the first time that the project achieved any kind of majority. Far from showing strong support, the result confirmed what we knew from the consultation and from every opinion poll that the local press had carried out: public opinion in the city is divided, so the buck stops with those who are elected to the council to take decisions.

I am quite happy if councillors choose to base their decision in part on the referendum, but they cannot base it on that alone. If SNP councillors lead Aberdeen City Council after 3 May, presumably we can expect them to seek consent in the way that we have heard, but they would be failing in their duty if they judged that the scheme would not work and gave it the go-ahead anyway. That is why I believe that a Labour-led council would not seek consent to borrow for the scheme as it stands. The weakness of the business case is fundamental, as is the lack of any proposal for meeting future revenue costs. The risk that the council’s consultants and Audit Scotland identified—that there will be millions of pounds of unpaid debt at the end of the process—is still there. The city council does not have sufficient financial strength to take that risk. Of course, another scheme might be a different story. If ministers were prepared to let the council keep business rates income to fund essential infrastructure projects in the city, a Labour-led council would have no difficulty in identifying projects to support economic development. The difference is that those projects would have the support of the vast majority of people in Aberdeen and would allow the city to move forward together.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the minister accept that, given the efforts that were made at the outset to build a consensus in favour of change and given the concerns that we have heard from his own benches about how the debate became polarised, holding a referendum in that format accentuated the polarisation and that, far from building a consensus, it means that, whatever the result, it is one that half the population of Aberdeen did not want?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects work to begin on the Aberdeen western peripheral route and the A90/A96 Haudagain junction. (S4O-00766)

Does the minister acknowledge that work on the Haudagain could begin immediately, and that any further delay in its commencement would be a matter of great regret? It is now some years since the work was approved. Will the minister give us a commitment today—given his recent announcement of funding for design work on the Haudagain—to take the work forward this year, regardless of any change to the schedule for the AWPR?

Mr Salmond and Mr MacAskill have told us often, since the event, that the release of Mr al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds was not dependent on the withdrawal of his appeal. Can the First Minister tell us today whether they ever made that clear to Mr al-Megrahi and, if so, when?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement and welcome his decision to come to the chamber and make a statement on the matter today. We are here because of the connections between decisions that were made in August 2009 first by Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and then by the cabinet secretary. Mr al-Megrahi’s decision was to withdraw his appeal against his conviction for the worst mass murder in Scottish legal history. Mr MacAskill’s decision was to let that man go on the grounds that he had only a few months to live. We are here today because the man whom Mr MacAskill released on those grounds has now asserted, two and a half years later, that he dropped his appeal because the cabinet secretary used a third party to encourage him to do so. The cabinet secretary confirmed that he met that third party—Mr al-Obeidi, a minister in Colonel Gaddafi’s Government—and has drawn our attention to the minutes of the meeting and those of the meeting that he had with Mr Megrahi in Greenock prison. Those minutes make interesting reading because, at both meetings, time and again, Mr MacAskill and his officials stressed that release under the prisoner transfer agreement could proceed only if Mr Megrahi dropped his appeal. It appears from the minutes that Mr MacAskill did not, at any time, make the point that he made today and has made repeatedly over the past two years, namely that his decision to release Mr Megrahi had nothing to do with the prisoner transfer agreement—or that compassionate release would not require Mr Megrahi to drop his appeal. [Interruption.] Those are the words of the minutes of the meetings. When Mr Salmond suggests from a sedentary position that that is a misrepresentation, is he telling us that the minutes are not a full and accurate record of the meetings that were held? If they are a full and accurate record, I would like to hear the cabinet secretary’s comments. Does he now accept that his conversations with Mr al-Megrahi and Mr al-Obeidi left both men with the very clear impression that withdrawing the appeal was the prudent thing to do? Does he now regret either of those meetings or the way in which he handled them?

There has been a great deal of agreement in the debate and some good contributions from around the chamber, not least the case study that we were offered from Graeme Pearson’s latest visit to Barlinnie. The speeches have shown that there is a broad consensus on the issue. Our amendment emphasises the need for strategic leadership from Government and for action to be taken across all agencies to tackle both human trafficking and its consequences for victims. Many members around the chamber have reflected that emphasis. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments on statutory aggravation. He was more cautious on the consolidation of the existing law. He will know, of course, that the EHRC’s recent report found that the current statutory provision is piecemeal and inconsistent. It has grown through legislation passed in the Scottish Parliament and at Westminster over the last 20 years, rather than being founded on a thorough consideration of what is needed in law to deal with the whole problem. Yet the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, which Gil Paterson mentioned, starts from a very specific definition of what human trafficking means. In short, it is the recruiting and transporting of people, using coercion, for the purposes of exploitation, whether in a domestic situation, in conventional employment or in prostitution. That is where our law on these matters should start, too. There is a strong argument for a consolidating bill that brings together all the existing provision, provides a single clear definition of trafficking and a definition of what constitutes unlawful exploitation in this context. Trafficking and its consequences are, of course, not only a matter for the criminal justice system. A cross-cutting approach will be required in order to make a real impact. That implies the introduction of a bill that addresses the range of issues, deals specifically with the victims of this very specific set of offences and puts measures in place to require agencies to share information and work together. EU directive 2011/36, on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims, which the UK Government accepted in principle last July, now needs to be fully implemented in practice. Mandatory prison sentences, for example, may apply in Scotland for trafficking into prostitution but not for trafficking in general. That is something that the EU directive requires and I would welcome the minister’s comments on that when she closes the debate. The directive offers protection to the victims of trafficking from prosecution for offences carried out under duress. Fiscals in Scotland follow that approach, but the problem is that they must rely on the UK Border Agency’s determination of whether a person is a victim of trafficking. As we heard from Graeme Pearson, Christina McKelvie and other members, that is also an issue, as the UKBA has responsibility for managing the flow of immigration. If the UKBA fails to identify someone who is referred to it as a victim of trafficking, that person cannot access relevant services or protection and may quickly find their immigration status becoming the number 1 issue, which it should not be. Therefore, it may make sense for fiscals to make their own informed judgment of whether someone is a victim of trafficking, to have more local input into determining who is and is not a victim of trafficking and to consider whether there should be a right of appeal against a negative decision. All those things could be addressed by a Scottish referral mechanism of some kind, and we would welcome ministers’ comments on that. There is also a significant intelligence gap in what the police know about the activities of the criminal gangs that run the human trafficking. That is part of the reason why there have been few prosecutions of traffickers in Scotland, as is recognised in Gordon Meldrum’s report, about which we heard earlier. Asset recovery powers have not been widely used to date, and many police officers would say that they are not adequately trained in how to recognise and deal with trafficking. I would be interested in the ministers’ response to those observations, whether they acknowledge those enforcement issues and what they intend to do about them. It may also be time to revisit the restricted power of arrest that is available to enforcement agencies such as the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, which is required to obtain a warrant in Scotland but not England. Those agencies often have only one chance to detain a suspected trafficker before he flees to a country where his assets cannot be touched and that chance should not be lost. Again, I would be interested in the Government’s views on that. Enforcement is part of the picture, but the other is support for victims. One option might be a dedicated support unit for trafficked victims. I would be interested to hear the Scottish Government’s views on that. Such a unit could help to identify victims of trafficking and could provide some advocacy for them in their dealings with the UK Border Agency and other bodies. We know that the trafficking of children for domestic servitude can be an opportunistic crime—that has been referred to in the debate—and I look forward to Aileen Campbell’s suggestions for what should be done to tackle that in particular. The recommendations have received support across the parties, but there is no doubt that some of them would cost money. It is for ministers to indicate which of those possible measures they will support and, where it is necessary to do so, with what extra resource they will support them. In light of the evidence from police witnesses to the Justice Committee yesterday about the potential loss of 1,100 support staff in year 1 of the new policing structures, I would be particularly interested to hear whether the spirit of consensus will extend to supporting investment in training and additional intelligence for the proposed police service of Scotland or whether some of the expertise that has already been built up will be put at risk when 1,100 volunteers for redundancy are sought from among civilian police staff. I welcome the broad consensus in the debate. The real test of that will come when the planned summit—the date of which must, as Annabel Goldie said, be set soon—makes recommendations that have financial implications for the Government, which it surely will. I hope that ministers are able to respond positively at that stage too. I support the amendment in my name and the amendment from the Conservatives.

Does the minister concede that some of the guidance that is in place is out of date, given the changes that have taken place over the past three years, and that there would be merit in looking at it again and bringing it up to date?

Justice seen is justice done. As Iain Gray and, indeed, Charles Dickens have recognised, it is seen best when it is done locally. The wholesale closure of local courts would be bad news for people who are affected by crime. As has been said, some victims and witnesses already face considerable journeys to have their voices heard, but that is no argument for saying that making that happen to others would be an improvement. Often, witnesses and victims already face considerable difficulties. Fewer than half the respondents to the Scottish crime and justice survey in 2010-11 felt confident that the system provided good services for witnesses, and fewer still were confident that the services for victims were of a good standard. Simply closing court buildings does not, although one or two members have implied that it does, solve those problems. Answers are particularly needed about travel provisions for vulnerable witnesses and for those for whom travel can be challenging. Evidence can be given by video or television link. Currently, that happens between one court building and another. If some court buildings cease to operate, the facilities in them will cease to be available. It would be socially unjust if access to justice were denied to those in our communities who are unable to travel or find that difficult.

I agree with the principle of shared services; we also need to maintain and recognise the principle of local access to justice. We must recognise that, for some of the reasons that a number of members have given, separating people who are attending a court from others who are doing other duties or business is often necessary and good. The effects of crime are felt more widely than simply by the victim; the communities in which the victims live feel the effects, too. That is another argument for why communities should in principle be at the heart of our justice system. Like the court in Haddington, the court in Stonehaven, in my area, appears to be at risk because it is not far enough away from the nearest major city. My constituents in Stonehaven know that having access to local justice is in itself a good thing—it is part of what they expect from living in that town. That is why they opposed closure when it was mooted not so long ago and why I am certain that they will oppose it again. They value the sense of local justice that would be lost if the local court closed. My constituents in Aberdeen also know that the closure of Stonehaven’s court would simply add to the courtroom congestion and the delays that they experience in Aberdeen’s major busy city court, in the same way as Haddington’s court and Edinburgh’s court relate to each other. Courts are important to the people who work in them. I would be interested to hear how the minister will address the number of people who might lose their jobs as a consequence of court closures and to hear what adjustments will be made for the people who work in courts. The issue of justices of the peace was raised by Iain Gray. JPs have to sit at least 12 times a year in order to continue to sit as justices. They do that on a voluntary basis. The issue of how many of those justices will be able to continue to do that if their local court closes must be borne in mind. There are wider implications that need to be addressed. The report suggests a course of action that I believe is bad for victims, witnesses and communities. I hope that ministers will tell us today that they will think carefully before acting on any of the closure proposals that might come forward.

Will the minister give way?

Given the importance of independent oversight of the new police service from the outset, and given what the cabinet secretary said about his aspirations for the appointment of a new chief constable, what does he have in mind as regards the appointment of the police investigations and review commissioner? What timetable does he think is practicable for that?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Scottish Court Service. (S4O-00676)

The cabinet secretary has made it clear that proposals to close courts in Scotland would be subject to approval by the Parliament. Will he tell members what assessment he will make of the impact of a proposed closure before he makes a decision on whether to bring such a proposal to the Parliament? In particular, can he say whether he will publish an assessment of the additional costs of transporting frail and vulnerable witnesses or the additional costs of delays to court proceedings elsewhere?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I very much welcome today’s debate and the cross-party approach that has been taken by both Annabel Goldie and Patrick Harvie and which will attract very widespread support across this Parliament and beyond. Equally, concern is widespread about Kenny MacAskill’s announcement in December that he favoured the abolition of visiting committees. That decision, which I hope he will genuinely review, appeared, as Annabel Goldie pointed out, to pay heed only to the views of Scottish Prison Service senior management and not to the views of the many others who responded to last year’s consultation. For example, Alec Spencer, the convener of the Scottish Consortium of Crime and Criminal Justice, which comprises many outside bodies with knowledge and experience of the prison service, spoke for many this week when he said: “the system is in need of modernisation. But that is a different proposition to their abolition ... Visiting committees” need “to be made effective and relevant to the current Criminal Justice landscape.”

Quite the contrary. I would put forward Aberdeen prison visiting committee as a model of exactly the kind of independent local voice that will speak out on behalf of those serving time in prison. Indeed, on Tuesday, Councillor Jim Kiddie, the convener of Aberdeen prison visiting committee, told the Evening Express: “There are SNP councillors on prison visiting committees who are extremely dismayed at the Justice Secretary's decision.” Of course, Mr Kiddie is an SNP councillor and member of Aberdeen City Council administration. I am sure that his concerns are shared by many in all parties who give time and effort to support prison visiting committees. Annabel Goldie mentioned the SHRC, which, although it “welcomes” the cabinet secretary’s proposal to create “a new advocacy service for prisons ... considers that this should run alongside the human rights protections that are currently provided by prison visiting committees.” Moreover, the cabinet secretary did not answer at all Malcolm Chisholm’s point on the Government seeking to strengthen statutory protection for those in custody in police cells while weakening the position of those who provide such protection to people in prison.

That is indeed one of their many significant strengths. Indeed, it is worth emphasising that the members of visiting committees are local volunteers, often local elected representatives, who are unpaid and give freely of their time and effort. The cabinet secretary and Mr Finnie referred to the low number of people who take matters up with visiting committees. I am sure that they both, and indeed members across the chamber, know ex-offenders who will vouch for the difference that prison visitors make to their ability to deal with and change their offending behaviour.

I heard Mr Halpin. There are now two people who support Kenny MacAskill’s position. That is clearly a lot better than one, but Mr MacAskill must listen to all the other voices and all the other people with knowledge and interest in the area, including members of his party in local government and, I suspect, on the back benches. If the timetable is to consult on his proposals in the spring, will the cabinet secretary not merely meet the statutory requirement and the letter of the law, but consider the spirit of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010, under which he seeks to take the action that he proposes? Its spirit is to challenge costly and inefficient delivery of public services. Will he recognise that the service that prison visiting committees deliver is neither costly nor inefficient but is successful because it takes the best possible advantage of the enthusiasm and commitment of prison visiting committee members? Before he seeks to pursue the abolition agenda, will he please take those concerns away and think again?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the cabinet secretary has said that he wants to hold a consultation, debate and discussion with all interested parties, will he confirm for the benefit of local authorities that he anticipates that they will follow the usual procedures by replacing or renewing the membership of prison visiting committees following the local government elections in May?

Does the First Minister acknowledge that the referendum that approved a Scottish Parliament within the United Kingdom in 1997 did so on the basis of a detailed and specific devolution scheme, which was put in place within a few short months of the election of the Labour Government? Why does he believe that the Parliament is incapable of considering the responses to his consultation and passing the referendum bill, which has been published today in draft, for a further 18 months? Why does he believe that the Scottish people are incapable of having an informed vote for a further year? Will he reconsider the timetable or, at the very least, respond to the question that he has already been asked this afternoon and tell us specifically the date on which he intends the referendum to be held?

Johann Lamont said that the process of devolution has been the most radical and significant development in the relationship between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom in the past 300 years. If Scotland remains in the union, it has the potential for yet more radical change in future, as a number of members said. First, we need to establish whether it is the will of the Scottish people to remain in or to leave the British union. That decision is one for the Scottish people to make, but a decision to leave the union would be very different from the choices that we have made to date about devolving power within the union. Membership of the British union does not define who we are, any more than membership of the European Union is ever likely to do. However, it has a significant influence, not just on our cultural identity but on our scope for economic activity, on our citizenship and on the choices and opportunities that are available to our children. We have enjoyed a relationship with our neighbours of a kind that other European nations are still striving to achieve. We have fiscal union and a single market that underpins what was the largest free-trade area of its day when it was established. We have monetary union and a single currency that is one of the most successful currencies in history. We have political union, which—let us not forget—ended centuries of wasteful warfare of neighbour against neighbour and freed up Scotland and England to go on to play a hugely influential role in the making of the modern world. We were right to modernise that union. Labour delivered devolution within months of winning a clear mandate to do so in 1997, but we did so in partnership with other parties and with civic Scotland.

I am sure that Mr Neil, with his extensive memory of these things, will recall that the Labour Government that sought to deliver devolution in 1978 was a minority Government. It had the same defence or excuse as Alex Salmond has had for the past four years, but Alex Salmond no longer has that defence or excuse, and Labour, with a clear—

Within months of achieving a clear parliamentary majority and a clear mandate, Labour delivered devolution. We did so because it was the settled will of the Scottish people and because that will was expressed through our partnership with other parties and with civic Scotland in the Scottish Constitutional Convention. Alex Neil’s critique of these matters is wrong. We set about modernising the British union as part of a wider modernisation of the governance of Britain and as part of a redefinition of the relationship of Scotland to the rest of the UK. Devolution is a process, not an event. Independence, on the other hand, is not part of that process. To leave the United Kingdom is a decision that we as a nation are free to make, but it is not a choice about how best to modernise the union. It is a decision to end it. Therefore, Alex Salmond’s amendment, which “affirms that constitutional change is a process”, conflates two very different things. The SNP manifesto last year said nothing about a process of change. It said: “We will ... bring forward our Referendum Bill in this next Parliament. A yes vote will mean Scotland becomes an independent nation”. That is clear and unequivocal. It is the basis on which the SNP claims a mandate today, which it asks the rest of us to acknowledge. While we acknowledge it on that basis, the process of change to which other parties are committed is a process of change of and within the United Kingdom. That process will cease altogether if the SNP succeeds in winning majority support for Scotland to leave the UK. Separation or independence is a direct negative to further devolution of reserved powers or any other adjustment to the devolution settlement. A yes vote for what the SNP wants is a no vote for devolution of any kind—maximum, minimum or the status quo—and so the further development of devolution requires, first of all, a clear decision in the promised referendum. That is especially true for any changes that would strengthen or maximise devolution. Federal states, for example, devolve substantial powers to their constituent parts, while retaining sovereignty at the centre, but that model works on the basis of a stable constitutional settlement, in which the constituent parts recognise the sovereignty of the federal Government and renounce the right to leave the union in exchange for extensive powers of internal self-government. There is an argument that says that Scotland within the union should acquire greater fiscal autonomy, and a different argument that says that there should be federal self-government within a fiscal union. I agree with those who say that we should have that debate, but it can go forward in a meaningful way only if and when the Scottish people have first come to a clear decision to remain within the UK, which is why there needs to be agreement on the question to be asked. The SNP was elected on a clear commitment that “A yes vote will mean Scotland becomes an independent nation”. The corollary of that is that a no vote means that it will not. Today the SNP could take the same approach to those choices as Labour took when we won a decisive election victory 14 years ago. The SNP could use its mandate to work with other parties and with civic Scotland to agree how best to address the decision on leaving the union to ensure that the Scottish people are presented with a clear choice. I urge the SNP to do that and to support the Labour motion. A failure to rise to the occasion would be a disappointment for all the people who voted for the SNP last year.

Will the member give way?

Indeed. Does Mark McDonald not therefore accept the opportunity offered by the Labour motion to sit down with civic Scotland and discuss exactly those points?

Mr Swinney will recognise that it was open to the Government to lodge an amendment that left in the Labour motion’s call for cross-party talks and talks with “all quarters of civic Scotland”. Why did the Government choose to lodge an amendment that removed that part as well as other parts of the Labour motion?

When it is in the interests of justice to reopen such cases, that is clearly the right thing to do, but it requires time and effort to do it properly. What resource has been made available to the Crown Office to examine any new evidence? Can the First Minister reassure potential new witnesses that such evidence will be considered fully and investigated properly?

5. To ask the First Minister what impact the proposed court closures will have on local access to justice. (S4F-00376)

That is a very interesting response. The First Minister will be aware of comments reported from within the justice system this week that the visible local delivery of access to justice is vital for local communities, witnesses and victims of crime and would be threatened if such court closures happened. As a pre-Christmas present to people living in rural Scotland and indeed in small towns such as Stonehaven and Haddington, will he give us an assurance today that local access to justice will be protected and that those communities will not face the threat of court closures, not just now but any time next year or in the course of this session of Parliament?

I am interested in the cabinet secretary’s explanation of his conditional commitment to the abolition of automatic early release. Has he estimated the costs of meeting the criteria and has provision been made in his department’s budget and other departmental budgets to meet those costs during the current spending review period?

Does the minister plan to publish details of that resource-to-capital transfer? If so, when?

I took careful note of the figures and examples that Mr Neil quoted. Will he confirm that he has told us that capital spending by the Scottish Government at its own hand is down from around £3.5 billion to, according to his numbers—and including the resource-to-capital transfer—something in the order of £3.25 billion?

I thank Alex Neil for his best wishes. He clearly knows more about bookies’ odds than I do, but fortunately the decision is up to neither the bookies nor Alex Neil. [Interruption.]

When we debated infrastructure and capital investment in June, I called on Alex Neil to publish an update of the infrastructure investment plan. He promised that he would, and I welcome the fact that he has now done so. In September, I asked Mr Neil again about his plan and whether it would include comprehensive information on the whole-life costs of capital projects and their impact on future revenue budgets, as Audit Scotland had said that it should. Mr Neil’s answer was carefully worded. He said that he would “include in the plan as much information as it is possible to provide at the time.”—[Official Report, 15 September 2011; c 1787.] He was wise to be cautious then, but he has not been quite so careful in these past few days. He proclaimed last week that the plan was a £60 billion “mega-plan” for future investment, but even the most cursory examination shows that it is nothing of the sort. It appears to be mysteriously unrelated to other proposed long-term plans that are also the responsibility of the Scottish Government, and of this ministerial team in particular. The plan declares support for high-speed rail links between Scotland and London, with Scottish Government support for the £8 billion or £9 billion of investment that is required in new rail infrastructure in Scotland itself, albeit not until 2025. At the same time, “Rail 2014”, which was published just a few short weeks ago, proposes to stop existing cross-border services at Edinburgh, which would end existing direct services to London from Aberdeen, Dundee and Inverness.

It is an interesting proposition that a document with the photographs, signatures and names of the two ministers who are before us today is not their responsibility. I will quote from the ministerial foreword to the document, which states: “We believe that we can achieve a distinctly Scottish railway”. That presumably means not having trains that serve Scotland’s cities under franchises that are awarded by Westminster ministers. Indeed, it is striking that the ministers who are with us today have both attached themselves to “Rail 2014”. Presumably, by the time that the document was published the First Minister had not yet told them that his Government was so efficient that it needed only one transport minister. If they had been in the chamber yesterday, they would have heard Mr Salmond say precisely that. Mr Neil and Mr Brown will also want to be aware that, as we speak, rail unions and rail customer groups are out campaigning at stations around Scotland calling for these proposals, among others, to be rejected. The same ministers who are proposing “a distinctly Scottish railway” during their term of office are quite happy to promise that a future Government will fund a multi-billion pound high-speed link to London in 2025. Another document that ministers should have read is the rail industry’s initial industry plan, which was published in September and which lays out the key choices and options facing Scottish ministers in specifying the future outputs of the railway and the levels of funding required for the control period 2014 to 2019. Ministers have not yet responded to the initial industry plan, which perhaps they might have done first. However, what is remarkable is that the plan they have published in their own names seems to make very little reference to the plan that has been brought to their attention already by the industry. The Aberdeen to Inverness railway line is a route that I know well—it is the route by which I went to school for five years. The industry proposes an hourly service and a journey time between Aberdeen and Inverness of two hours or less, with new stations at Dalcross and Kintore, at a total cost of up to £202 million. However, ministers propose a phased programme over the period 2015 onwards, but with a price tag not of up to £202 million, but in the range of £250 million to £500 million. The major improvements proposed by the industry have not yet been approved by ministers, yet here they are proposing to spend more than twice as much apparently on the same scheme for the same line. On the Highland main line, the industry proposes an hourly service and a two-hour journey time between Inverness and Perth at a cost of £37 million to 2019. Ministers propose spending up to £600 million to 2025. Even if it wanted to, the rail industry might find it hard to spend that sum on that line over that period of time. In the circumstances, it is no wonder that ministers have not included a credible funding proposal in their plan. We call on them to do so today because so many of the numbers in the infrastructure investment plan seem to bear no relation to other proposals that are on the table. Yesterday, the Parliament’s financial scrutiny unit added up all the capital projects in the plan to see whether they really did come to £60 billion over 20 years. They did not. The total capital value of all the projects in the plan turns out to be between £25 billion and £31 billion—barely half the sum that the cabinet secretary wanted to claim credit for in announcing his £60 billion mega-plan last week. The figure of up to £31 billion includes precisely the items that I quoted merely as examples—the £300 million on the Aberdeen to Inverness route and the £500 million on the Inverness to Perth route—over and above the major investments that have been proposed by the rail industry itself and which still await ministerial approval. The Centre for Public Policy for Regions offers an explanation: perhaps half the money in the plan is not new investment at all, but simply routine maintenance spending that would have to be done whether or not there was a long-term investment plan. The Scottish Government appears to have offered the financial scrutiny unit a more imaginative explanation for its figure of £60 billion. The overall capital funding available in the three years of the current spending review period is, as Mr Neil stated again this afternoon, said to be £12 billion, including a large sum of private money. That number has then apparently been multiplied by five. It appears that this is how the Government plans for Scotland’s capital investment from 2012 to 2030: it estimates what it might spend and what others might spend on its behalf in the first three years, and then it multiplies by five. That is a very peculiar approach to economics. Perhaps it is independence economics—it is not unlike the Government’s approach to working out the value of future oil revenues—but even apart from the apparent innumeracy, that is surely no way to run a country’s budget. Perhaps the truth is that the numbers have simply been made up and the whole £60 billion mega-plan is simply a mega-con—an exercise in mega-fantasy along the lines of “think of a big number and then double it.” Within the plan there is also little evidence of prioritisation—other than, of course, through what is not in the plan. There is, for example, absolutely nothing in the plan about investing in housing for social rent. There are lots of different private finance initiatives, some of which the Scottish National Party inherited, such as the non-profit-distributing model, and some of which it describes as innovative or pioneering, such as the national housing trust, to which Mr Neil referred, which involves the Scottish Government underwriting local authority borrowing to build homes for mid-market rent, which will eventually be paid for by selling the homes to the tenants. There is nothing wrong with that, but there is nothing in the plan that will build homes for social rent, which is why Mr Neil received a letter last week from a range of stakeholders representing housing providers, builders, housing professionals and construction workers calling for him to act to make social housing a Government priority. I hope that he will listen to them. Another innovative funding approach that has been mentioned is tax increment financing, whereby councils invest by borrowing money that they then repay from the increased business rates that their development creates. Mr Neil mentioned six projects. One of the projects that he has encouraged to go forward is in my home city of Aberdeen, where the council would like to borrow £70 million but has told ministers that the development would generate additional rates income of only £200,000 a year. It will be interesting to see how that can be justified in terms of innovative funding and what confidence it can give in the Government’s stewardship of public finances going forward.

I shall indeed. Simply publishing a wish list of projects that it would be nice to have, with no indication of priorities, no clear timetables or detailed plans for many of them and no credible funding statement is not the way forward. That is why we are calling on ministers to accept that the document is at best work in progress, to prepare a detailed funding package to support the list of projects and to bring the plan back to the Parliament in the new year. I move amendment S4M-01584.3, to leave out from second “notes” to end and insert: “welcomes the publication of an updated infrastructure investment plan (IIP), but regrets the hiatus in commissioning new schools and hospitals in the last parliamentary session, the delay or abandonment of major infrastructure projects included in the previous IIP and the Scottish Government’s decision to cut the funding of new social housing in half in the next two years, all of which will lead to further loss of jobs, skills and capacity in the construction sector; believes that the aspiration to lay out long-term strategic objectives is undermined by the lack of prioritisation of projects, the absence of clear links to other proposed long-term plans and the failure to provide a credible funding plan, and calls on the Scottish Government to publish details of anticipated investment and maintenance costs on an annual basis and to make a statement early in 2012.”

I am curious to understand the member’s reference to a legacy of the previous Labour and Liberal Democrat Government. Does she accept that the main source of difficulty for the Aberdeen western peripheral route has been the inquiry process that was followed by the SNP Government when Stewart Stevenson was the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister recall that his predecessor admitted that he had spoiled Christmas for quite a few officials in 2009 in order to meet a commitment to make a decision on the Beauly to Denny line before the end of that year? Given that Mr Mather rejected recommendations to withhold consent for two sections of the line but required the undergrounding of some 16km of existing line, does Mr Ewing believe that he can justify two years’ further delay in reaching this decision by his very modest requirement for the undergrounding of a further 7km of existing cable?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that, in fact, the potential for Scottish coastguards to play a major role in maritime safety around the whole British coast is a strong argument for maintaining the integration of the service and ensuring that the best service is provided for seafarers, wherever they are?

This is a timely debate, for two reasons: first, because of the ministerial statement in the House of Commons on Tuesday on the outcome of the consultation on the future of the coastguard service, and secondly because of the publication this morning of the report by the air accidents investigation branch into the crash of the Bond Super Puma helicopter on its way back to Aberdeen from the Miller platform on 1 April 2009, which cost the lives of everyone on board. Both of those relate directly to the responsibilities of the UK Department for Transport for the safety of vessels, aircraft and offshore installations around the British coast. The debate is also timely in that it comes so soon after our debate last week on oil and gas. In that debate, Labour argued that health, safety and environmental standards should have the highest priority in the next phase of offshore energy development. That message is particularly relevant today. The AAIB report is clear that warning signs of imminent technical failure were not recognised in time. Today, we call for urgent action in line with the report’s recommendations, while also recognising the efforts that the industry, trade unions and regulators have made over the past two years to improve the safety of people who travel to and from work offshore. The coastguard proposals that were announced on Tuesday are part of a package of budget cuts that the Maritime and Coastguard Agency has been instructed to make as part of the current UK spending review. The agency has been told to save £20 million of its £97 million programme budget by 2015. That is a big slice by any standards, with only £2 million to be achieved from efficiencies, and much of the impact of the service cuts will be felt in Scotland. Some £10 million of savings are supposed to come from ending the contract for emergency towing vessels. Two of the four vessels under contract are based in Scottish waters, in the Western Isles and northern isles, and the cost of one of the others is shared with the Government of France, so the majority of the saving will be at the expense of services in Scotland. More than £7 million of savings are meant to come from the coastguard modernisation process, which concluded on Tuesday. Two of the nine maritime rescue co-ordination centres that are scheduled for closure are in Scotland, in the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde, and they are intended to be the first to close, not at some dim and distant point in the future, but within 18 months. The balance of the planned savings are to come from withdrawing support from the maritime incident response group. Three of the 15 fire brigades that will thereby cease to receive MCA funding for firefighting at sea are Scottish, namely Strathclyde Fire and Rescue, Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service and Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service. Those are all serious steps to take. As has been said, the first two emergency towing vessels were introduced following Lord Donaldson’s report into the Braer tanker disaster in Shetland in 1994, and the number was increased to four following a further review in 2000. The contract cost of £10 million to £12 million a year pales into insignificance compared with the cost of a single incident that the tugs might otherwise have prevented; cleaning up the Braer oil spill, for instance, cost some £100 million at 1990s prices. Conservative and Liberal Democrat ministers would like someone else to help to pay for that contract, which is understandable, but as the House of Commons Transport Committee said in June: “The Government is the guarantor of last resort for the protection of our marine and shoreline environment, and for the lives of those in peril on our seas.” Ending the contract might be a reasonable way to save money if an equally effective alternative were to be put in place, but without such an alternative, it is simply reckless to go back to the situation as it was before the Braer oil spill. Modernisation of the coastguard service, on the other hand, is a good idea. Indeed, it was Labour ministers who first asked what might be done to make the service more effective and efficient. The service still pays its staff less than their skills deserve and it lacks the sophisticated communication network that it needs. Putting that right would have required significant restructuring under any Government. The problem is that the review agenda has moved from effectiveness and efficiency to simple cash savings of millions of pounds a year. That means that some bad decisions have been made. The first draft plan contained some good ideas and some bad ideas, as did the first revision of the plan earlier this year. Closing the Stornoway or Shetland centres was always a bad idea, and the suggestion that any coastguard station in the north of Scotland might operate only in daylight hours was, to be frank, ludicrous. However, the idea of co-ordinating the whole coastguard network from two maritime operations centres at either end of the island of Great Britain was good. Having only one such centre would risk the whole operation being jeopardised by a single failure. A second centre in Aberdeen makes a lot of sense, given the key role of the station there in supporting the offshore oil and gas industry for the whole country.

The proposal to co-ordinate British maritime rescue from Scotland has certainly been dropped. Conservative ministers have decided instead to use two locations in the south of England—one will be the main MOC and the other will be the back-up. What an opportunity has been missed to demonstrate a union dividend—the benefit to Scotland of addressing a need that all the UK’s nations share. According to a question-and-answer document that the Department for Transport issued on Tuesday, saving money was the motive for missing that opportunity. It said: “Why ... Dover rather than Aberdeen? ... Dover was already planned to have a slightly higher level of manning ... because of its responsibilities for managing the Channel Traffic Management Separation Scheme and this makes it a cheaper option”. That is absurd, especially as Aberdeen is responsible for liaison with the offshore oil and gas industry, which is entirely comparable with Dover’s responsibility for the English Channel, and it also has “a slightly higher level” of staffing as a consequence. Tory ministers who claim marginal savings while concentrating what is left of public services on marginal Tory seats in the south of England do a disservice to Scottish seafarers and to the idea of a single coastal safety framework for the whole of Great Britain. It is as if they have learned nothing from previous Tory Governments’ mistakes in the 1980s and 1990s. A rethink is a priority. Why Aberdeen and not Dover? It is because the network would be more secure from system failure from whatever cause and more capable of dealing with major incidents if it had hubs at either end of this island rather than two just a few miles apart, and because the coastguard is there to serve Scotland, too. Closure of the Forth and Clyde stations is not inevitable and the case for saying that they must go has been made for no reason other than cutting costs and their being in the wrong part of Britain. There are concerns about those closures and about the closure of Liverpool coastguard centre, which is responsible for both shores of the Solway Firth. UK ministers say that they have done a risk assessment of their proposals as a whole. They also need to assess the impact of their proposals on individual coastal areas and to drop closure plans if the assessment finds that they are unsafe. We reject the proposal to close the Clyde and Forth stations. The MCA is looking to save money by pulling out of the maritime incident response group, which was set up in 2006 to support fire brigades in training and equipping firefighters for fighting fires and dealing with chemical hazards at sea. It is bizarre that, in this case, the MCA commissioned an independent risk assessment last year, which found that there was room to make savings but that closing down the MIRG would be a false economy. However, that is precisely what might happen. Lothian and Borders Fire and Rescue Service has pulled out, while Strathclyde Fire and Rescue and the Highlands and Islands Fire and Rescue Service are maintaining capability at their own expense to the end of this financial year. The Fire Brigades Union believes that the expertise and infrastructure that have been built up for offshore firefighting could be lost altogether unless a commitment is made to maintain an offshore capability as part of the proposed new Scottish fire and rescue service. A clear responsibility is on Scottish ministers, from whom I hope we will hear a positive response this morning. Will they legislate to give the new Scottish service powers and duties for firefighting at sea, as the FBU suggests, and give firefighters the resources to do the job, or will they allow the Westminster Government to get its way and the existing capability to wither away? Likewise, I am interested to hear what the Scottish Government will do to ensure that emergency towing vessels continue to operate in Scottish waters, despite UK ministers’ recklessness. Will the Scottish Government join us in calling for a rethink on locating the maritime operations centre and its back-up centre in the south of England, and for urgent action to implement the AAIB’s recommendations on helicopter safety? If Scottish ministers address the issues on which they can take action to secure and protect the safety of seafarers and Scotland’s coastline, they will make a positive contribution rather than simply condemn others’ failures. I would welcome a response from the minister on all those matters at the end of the debate. I move amendment S4M-01408.3, to insert at end: “and the rest of the UK coastline; regrets that the modernisation plan for the coastguards has prioritised cost over other considerations, including the decision to have both the national Maritime Operations Centre and the standby Maritime Operations Centre on the south coast of England rather than to have one of these in Scotland; calls for urgent action to improve helicopter safety at sea following the crash of the Super Puma helicopter on 1 April 2009; recognises the importance of coastguard co-ordination in responding to emergencies in the offshore energy industries, and calls on the UK Government to carry out an individual assessment of the impact of the closure of individual coastguard stations, such as Forth and Clyde, and to reconsider how best to ensure maritime safety for the whole UK coastline.”

Would the member offer any other explanation for the decision to locate the back-up maritime operation centre at Dover, rather than Aberdeen?

Does Mr Scott acknowledge that I said in my opening speech that Labour ministers commissioned the review in the first place to address the terms and conditions of skilled coastguard staff? That was the right thing to do. The question now is what decisions we should make in implementing the review’s recommendations.

Will the member accept that, although he is absolutely right to say that the two specialists will remain in post, the decision not to upgrade Aberdeen to a maritime operations centre means that the chances are that the response to a major emergency in the North Sea will have to be co-ordinated from the only maritime operations centre in the country, on the south coast of England?

Will Mr Johnstone confirm that the proposals that began the process were published on 16 December 2010 and that they were proposals from Conservative ministers?

Does the minister agree with Maureen Watt that the most appropriate place for a standby maritime operations centre for the entire UK coastline is Aberdeen rather than Dover?

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister might intend to mention this matter in his conclusion. I remind him of the question that I asked during my speech about whether the Scottish fire service will take responsibility for firefighting at sea.

Does the minister share the view of previous transport ministers of all parties, both at Westminster and at Holyrood, that the east coast main line does not stop at Edinburgh?

Will the member take an intervention?

The Scottish Conservatives might have changed their leader and reshuffled their front-bench team, but there is no evidence this morning of any profound change in their approach to housing policy. That might, of course, suit Alex Johnstone very well. He is on familiar ground, although he seems uncharacteristically shy about engaging in debate today. Perhaps that will change. It might even suit his new leader, who, sadly, has just left the chamber, if her priority is to emphasise old certainties rather than new departures. It is a shame for those in housing need, however, because they want the focus to be not on the right-to-buy arguments of the 1980s and 1990s but on today’s need for social housing. The Tory motion highlights the record low levels of house building that are an issue in the public and private sectors and in both the owner-occupied and rented sectors. The failure of such a well-established and respected business in the construction sector as A C Yule and Son Ltd in the north-east shows an economy in serious trouble, as yesterday’s unemployment figures confirmed, and shows both the breadth and the depth of the crisis facing Scotland’s construction industry. Responsibility for that lies in part at Westminster and in part with the SNP Government, not just for its plans to cut support for building new affordable homes but for the complete hiatus in the commissioning of new public sector buildings of every type between 2007 and 2010. It would therefore have been useful if the Conservatives had chosen to seek a debate on what the Scottish Government should do now, which is not to get rid of existing social housing, but to find ways of building more. However, as Mr Johnstone has chosen to prioritise selling ahead of building, it falls to Labour to highlight the real issues that the housing sector faces. The SNP will claim that all is well—we have heard that from Keith Brown—but the reasons for its unwillingness to address directly some of the issues remain hard to fathom. The minister’s amendment mentions the Scottish Government’s “commitment to build 30,000 affordable homes during this parliamentary session”. His problem is that that was not in his party’s election manifesto only a few months ago. The commitment that the SNP made in that manifesto was “to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year.” Mr Brown knows as well as anybody that a target for a total of affordable homes is very different from a target for a total of homes for social rent. That is why his amendment talks of investing “in all types of houses to meet the demands and needs of the population.” We are happy to support investing in all types of houses. In government, Labour was as keen as anybody to encourage mid-market rents and rent-to-buy schemes to support those on middling incomes to obtain housing at an affordable price, but mid-market and shared ownership or shared equity are not the same as social renting, and they are not what the SNP promised when it sought election in May. This is the third time that we have offered ministers an opportunity to explain in the chamber why there is a difference between their commitment in the election campaign and their commitment in government. Labour members have asked the same question in committee, but Mr Brown and Mr Neil have so far refused to tell us why they do not intend to implement the SNP’s manifesto promise. As I said in our previous debate, I am glad that Mr Brown has now conceded that 20,000 of the 30,000 new affordable homes will be for social rent. That is a distinct improvement on his previous refusal to say anything at all on the subject, but it is a little surprising that the 20,000 homes for social rent do not feature in the Government’s amendment and that they have not featured in the debate so far. Let us hope that Mr Brown is not having second thoughts about that commitment as well. Our amendment is positive about the SNP’s positive commitment in its manifesto and we have offered it another chance to tell us what it will do or if it will do what is needed to make that happen.

It is a shame that the minister rose to his feet to respond to my challenge to tell us what he is doing about his manifesto commitment and did not mention it. He did not tell us anything at all. If the SNP does not take the chance to address that matter, attention is bound to focus on the changes in housing policy that it has made, and particularly on the spectacular cuts that it has made in Government funding for new affordable homes. The Tories have called a debate on the right subject, but they have highlighted the wrong issues. The SNP has talked about what it plans now, but not about what it promised in May. If it wants to, it can move that debate on; all that it has to do is follow our suggestion. I move amendment S4M-01346.3, to leave out from “notes” to end and insert: “welcomes the SNP’s manifesto commitment ‘to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year’, and calls on the Scottish Government to bring forward plans to implement this promise and to make a statement to the Parliament at the earliest opportunity.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Boosting jobs and training in the construction industry, providing good-quality houses for sale and for rent, preventing homelessness, tackling fuel poverty, challenging antisocial behaviour, cutting carbon emissions and growing the Scottish economy are all objectives of a Scottish housing policy that I suspect every party in this chamber would say it supports. The Tories alone say that the key to achieving those objectives is to extend the right to buy and to sell more houses in the social rented sector into the private sector in order to create capital receipts to pay for new homes. As we have heard, nobody else believes that. The key to affordable housing is not, in fact, to sell off the housing that we have, but for there to be Government investment. The need for social provision of housing comes from market failure, on which only Government can intervene on a sufficient scale to resolve it. That is not to say that Government needs to act alone. Innovative funding mechanisms and new kinds of public-private partnership can help lever in additional funds and get more houses built. If they do so, we will welcome it. To sell more rented homes into the owner-occupied sector is not the best way to find the funds. If there is a debate on the right to buy it should be on whether we need to do more to limit the loss of homes from the social rented sector rather than on how to remove the limits that already exist. Whatever the leveraging opportunities, it is still for Government to take a lead if market failure in housing is to be addressed. That is why we are so concerned by the cuts that the Scottish National Party has already made in the funding of affordable homes. As the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations noted in its evidence on the draft budget and spending review: “The overall amount of funding available for new investment ... has been cut by over 30% in 2011-12 and subsidy levels were cut by around 48%. This has become unsustainable.”

I am addressing a decision by the Scottish Government to reduce the housing budget radically when it should be looking at what it can do—we have heard some suggestions this morning—to increase the level of support. It is no coincidence that the benchmark level of subsidy per house has gone down at the same time as the overall level of funding has gone down. Over the spending review, Alex Neil proposes to cut the total funding for the housing budget by half. Those proposals have come from ministers and ministers are responsible for them. They are also responsible for the fact that the number of new houses started by housing associations fell from some 6,500 in 2009-10 to barely 4,500 in 2010-11—a cut of nearly 30 per cent—with worse to come. It is little wonder that ministers want to stop being judged by the achievement of targets for the approval of new homes and instead to start counting completions, because that will allow them to count for a second time homes that were begun before they started their current funding squeeze. Those are the real issues for the funding of housing policy in Scotland, and the challenge is how to find the funds to enable building of houses. However, in order to deny the fact that they are making cuts, ministers are setting targets and providing subsidies in such a way that the outcomes will be more homes for mid-market rent or sale, and fewer homes for rent at a level that people on low incomes can afford. Rather than extend the right to buy, we should protect the right to rent; in that way, we really could lift people out of poverty, build more homes and grow the economy. The real housing challenge for the Government is to invest more, not less, and to concentrate support on those who need it most by honouring the promises that it made in its election manifesto.

Will the member give way?

I offer the minister a further opportunity to address the point that I thought he was going to address when he intervened during my speech, which concerns the SNP’s manifesto commitment to build 6,000 social rented housing units a year. Does he have any intention of fulfilling that promise?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive whether life extensions for landfill sites are compatible with its zero waste policy. (S4O-00380)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of issues around the Stoneyhill landfill site in Peterhead, where the operator has applied for a life extension, and does he believe that such an application fits with the prospectus that he has just set out? Does he also acknowledge the possibility that applications for such extensions are being made because there has not been enough progress in introducing alternative forms of waste disposal?

North Sea oil and gas have now been with us for a working lifetime. Other members, like me, will know people who have retired from the industry, having joined it straight from school or college—a whole working lifetime ago—as well as others who have reached retirement age but chosen not to stop. The industry will potentially be with us for another working lifetime to come. Young people who are completing their formal education today can join the industry and expect the UK continental shelf still to be an active oil province when they are approaching the end of their career. The new Clair Ridge field west of Shetland might not be due for decommissioning until as late as 2055. The industry defines working lifetimes for generations of working people; indeed, it has defined the political and economic context in the UK and in Scotland for probably the whole working lifetime of all members currently in this Parliament.

To be frank, what I regret is that after the minister’s constructive opening—and invitation for us to have a consensual and constructive debate—Maureen Watt has dug up what I can only assume to be a very obscure reference somewhere in an Official Report from the second session of Parliament. I recommend that she refer back to the first session of Parliament, when the Scottish Parliament met in Aberdeen and debated oil and gas. We had a debate similar to the one that I hope we will have this afternoon, with parties around the chamber recognising our common interest in getting the maximum economic and employment benefit from that vital industry. Sometimes, the oil industry is debated in the wrong way, as though it were a cash cow and the oil produced itself, meaning that all we have to worry about is which Government gets the money, how much it is worth and what will happen when it is gone. The reality is that the energy and the revenues will be maximised only if the policy framework is right, and I welcome much of what the minister has said about that this afternoon. The industry is also about the people who work in it. We must keep them safe at work and give them the skills that they need. The defining moment in the history of North Sea oil came on 6 July 1988—the day on which the Piper Alpha platform went on fire 120 miles off the Aberdeenshire coast. The disaster cost 167 lives. My friend, Bob Ballantyne, who was an electrician working on the platform on that day, escaped from the inferno by lying on his back in the burning sea, hoping that the current would carry him in the right direction. Some people who survived never really recovered from the trauma; others, like Bob Ballantyne, dedicated themselves to campaigning for a change in the culture of the oil and gas industry—a change that would put safety first. Critical to that, in their view, was that workers should have their own safety representatives offshore and access to trade union representation. In that campaign, the labour and trade union movement worked alongside the Piper Alpha families and survivors and made a difference. Thanks also to the recommendations of Lord Cullen following his Piper Alpha inquiry, offshore safety for the past 20 years has been the responsibility of the Health and Safety Executive rather than the Government department that is responsible for maximising production. Offshore workers now elect safety representatives to speak up on safety issues on their installation, with the backing of their unions. The industry itself supports Step Change in Safety, a pan-industry body that seeks to address health and safety issues as they arise and to put safety at the centre of the agenda offshore. Indeed, only last week, more than 70 safety representatives came together from companies across the UK continental shelf under the auspices of Step Change in Safety to address current issues in the industry. Oil & Gas UK, the employers association, will affirm that the workforce are the people who are best placed to drive down the number of accidents and improve safety, and the majority of offshore workers are now covered by trade union agreements for contractors and construction, catering, drilling and other sectors. So, the industry today is a far cry from the industry in the days before the Piper Alpha disaster, when there often seemed to be a wild-west mentality about the North Sea frontier, and a cavalier disregard for the first principles of safe working. In those days, trade union activists were liable to be told that they were not required again. We are living in a different world and should thank those who made the effort to make that happen. Nevertheless, that change does not mean that there is room for complacency about health and safety or about environmental integrity in the offshore workforce. Offshore oil and gas production remains a major hazard industry that is subject to strict regulation on and off the platform. The unions remain concerned to ensure that nobody cuts corners on safety because of commercial pressures on contractors, and that workers do not find themselves unfairly penalised when lost-time incidents affect production offshore. In recent years, even the journey to and from work has proved to be particularly hazardous. For example, 16 lives were lost when a Super Puma helicopter crashed a few miles from the beach in 2009. Following that catastrophe, urgent work was undertaken on helicopter safety, which has produced important changes in that area, too. Although the hazards still exist, the culture of the industry is very different from how it was in the early days, and that is why I believe the industry can have a productive future. Such incidents should remind us of the human cost of North Sea oil. The sector is not simply a source of ready money for shareholders or, indeed, for Governments. We should not forget that offshore in northern waters is one of the world’s most hazardous workplaces and that the men and women who work there regularly brave conditions that most of us will rarely, if ever, experience. It is equally important that we are not complacent about skills for the offshore industries, in relation to which our amendment highlights two areas: the oil and gas industry skills development body, OPITO, and the Scottish further education college sector. OPITO is at the centre of identifying the skills needs of the oil and gas sector, offshore and onshore. It estimates that about 15,000 new people will be required over the next five years in the oil and gas sector alone, even without taking into account the growing demand for skilled labour for offshore renewable energy. To find those people, the sector looks to the Scottish Government and its agencies, among others, to ensure that they are delivering the skills mix that employers want. That means engagement with the post-16 education reform agenda. It means working to ensure that curriculum for excellence has enough oil and gas content to provide meaningful support for pupils who could go on to work in the sector. That also means ensuring that training in relevant skills in further education colleges does not fall victim to what are clearly going to be significant cuts in the funding of further education as a whole. We know from the spending review that there is to be a 13 per cent cut in cash terms in funding of further education. If we add to that the impact of inflation, there is no doubt that there will be real impacts on either the quantity or the quality of further education provision, or on both. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council is currently examining the way in which it supports units of learning in further education. Broadly speaking, students of engineering, such as those who are training as oil industry technicians, attract twice as much support as social science students in further education. That is for the very good reason that engineering students are expensive to teach, requiring smaller numbers per teacher and more equipment per class. This year, Aberdeen College, if I may use it as an example, is training a total of 89 full-time students, either on OPITO schemes or on Engineering Construction Industry Training Board schemes, and it is vital that the Scottish funding council do nothing to undermine that approach. Colleges must continue to be funded by the Government so that they can deliver the quality of training and the number of students that the industry needs. In turn, the industry must ensure that it is supporting skills providers by paying enough to meet training and employment costs. There are important areas where the Scottish Government as well as the UK Government can act to enable the oil and gas industry to continue to produce energy, create skilled jobs and grow the economy. As I mentioned in response to an earlier intervention, Labour led an oil and gas debate in the first session of Parliament, when we were in government. I spoke from the front bench in that debate. I was vice-chair of the oil and gas industry body PILOT for a number of years and worked to ensure that Scotland's devolved Government was engaged and made a difference in respect of the issues that affect the industry and the people in it. We acknowledge the work of the present Scottish Government in continuing to build on that work and to stay engaged. We welcome the fact that oil industry trade unions and employers are involved in the Scottish Government’s advisory group on oil and gas, as well as—at UK level—in PILOT. There are, of course, other issues in the debate about the future of the sector on which we have views that differ sharply from those of the SNP. However, where we agree on the economic and policy priorities that are necessary in order for the industry to flourish, we will be able to work together; I hope that we will see that spirit prevail in the chamber this afternoon. I move amendment S4M-1349.3, to insert at end: “; recognises that health, safety and environmental standards must continue to have the highest priority in the next phase of North Sea exploration and production and in the development of a wider energy mix, including carbon capture and storage and offshore renewables; believes that trades unions as well as employers and regulators have key roles to play in maintaining these standards; acknowledges that the demand for skilled labour from both the oil and gas sector and offshore renewables will increase as the technical challenges become greater; believes that the Scottish Government should support the efforts of the offshore energy industries and of the oil and gas skills academy, OPITO, to recruit, train and retain skilled workers, and, in particular, calls for further education funding to be maintained in order to allow Scottish colleges to meet future demand for skilled labour both onshore and offshore.”

Does the minister recognise that more than 100,000 people already travel each way between Scotland and Norway each year, principally via Aberdeen airport, but also via the new route between Glasgow and Stavanger that began in September? Will he now accept that it was a mistake for his Government not to replace the route development fund in 2007? If so, will he take steps to put that right so that we can have even more direct connections between Scotland and our Scandinavian neighbours in the years to come?

Initiatives of the type that Angus MacDonald has raised are welcome. However, the cabinet secretary will recognise that the level 4 figures that the Government has just revealed show that the Government’s own investment in social and affordable housing will fall from £268 million this year to £125 million next year. Will he confirm that that represents a cut of more than 50 per cent in cash terms alone in the affordable housing supply line in the Scottish Government’s budget? What does he intend to do to make up for that?

For clarity, will the minister confirm that ScotRail and Network Rail are implementing those measures at their hand and that they do not involve, for example, any changes to the franchise conditions or formal negotiations between them and the Scottish Government?

The images of last winter remain vivid for many people throughout Scotland: long queues of cars frozen on the M8, lorries jackknifed across major roads and commuters waiting on railway platforms, unsure whether they would be able to travel. Some members will know from experience that there were days when it was not possible to travel between our major cities and when thousands of people simply could not make the journey to work. Those were graphic images, and the disruption hit people in their pockets and cost the Scottish economy many millions of pounds. The debate is about keeping people and goods moving and supporting the economy, but it goes wider than that. It must be about people, too—about the effects on vulnerable people of the kind of disruption that we saw last year, and about what can be done to reduce the risk of that disruption happening again. Tackling fuel poverty is critical, as the minister acknowledged, and that is a wider debate that will continue. Last winter, we called for a broader approach to preparations for severe weather, so that those who have caring responsibilities are involved in making plans, as well as those who have a remit for clearing the snow. We welcome the fact that, this year, the Scottish Government has taken steps to involve the national health service, social care providers and the voluntary sector in planning for winter weather. The publication of the report of the winter weather review group last week was, therefore, a positive step, because it pulls together several strands of winter resilience planning and covers a broad range of services and sectors. I am glad that the motion implicitly acknowledges that the report is not the finished article. Preparedness is a process, rather than an event, and the report offers a framework, rather than a completed plan. The various contributions to the report, such as the additional briefings that we have had from the likes of the British Red Cross and ScotRail, indicate that the issue of preparedness is being taken seriously, but the report as a whole reads more like a compilation than a strategy, because it tells us what local government would like ministers to discuss, rather than telling us in detail what has been agreed. It is a good starting point, but I hope that we hear from ministers an update on that report in the not-too-distant future. I have no doubt that ministers are keen to improve winter planning, as the motion states, but a tough winter will not test good intentions or the seriousness of preparations; it will test how effective the joining up of strategies is and how well those strategies are delivered in practice. That is why we have lodged an amendment today: the responsibilities of Government do not stop once plans are in place, nor are they confined to the areas for which ministers are directly accountable. I would like to highlight a couple of issues to do with the kind of interventions that have been supported by the winter weather review group report. There has, rightly, been an emphasis on what individuals and communities can do to help themselves, and on what people can do to help others in their communities. An aspect of that to which the report refers, which relates specifically to the Borders, is the resilient communities initiative of Scottish Borders Council. That initiative is focused on communities that are liable to be particularly hard hit by adverse winter weather. In those areas, the community council is a sensible unit within which to organise an initiative; it can clearly play an important role in liaising between statutory authorities, such as the local authority and emergency services, on the one hand and local volunteers on the other. That approach could usefully be rolled out across the country to other communities if it is successful. It is certainly in line with the aspiration that central Government and local government should encourage the wider public to build community and personal resilience through effective pre-winter planning. It is important, however, to ensure that community councils and local volunteers know what they are letting themselves in for so that they can be confident that they understand the risks that are involved. It is one thing to identify individuals in a community who might need extra support in the event of severe weather conditions and to notify those who are responsible, but a higher level of commitment is involved if community councils or individuals undertake to provide those services themselves. Delivery of hot food, for example, carries greater risks than delivery of warm blankets, and clearing snow mechanically with a vehicle is a different proposition to taking a shovel to a neighbour’s path. There are also particular issues with dispensing medication.

I am familiar with such areas, too. Of course, the community council is not the only possible vehicle for delivering such an initiative. Whether that is done by a community council or another community organisation, it is important that they have the benefit of training, which is something with which local government can help. I was keen to make an additional point about insurance and understanding and dealing with risk. In the Scottish Borders, community councils might well be covered by insurance policies that the local authority has in place, but not all local authority insurance policies are the same and not all community councils or community organisations have bought into suitable insurance plans. We welcome the initiatives that are being taken in the Borders, but it is critical that local volunteers are not seen as a cheap and easy option or as a substitute for those who have the skills and training to do the job. There is a role for ministers in ensuring that where communities rely on local volunteers, those people have access to the right training and advice about risk and insurance. There should be a role for the Association of Scottish Community Councils to support community councils and, through them, local volunteers in those matters. It is a pity that ministers have not seen fit to provide the association with the level of resource that it would need to undertake that role. Perhaps Mr Brown will say in summing up what ministers will do to assist local organisations of all kinds in providing the expertise and training that their members will need to assume those responsibilities. A second related issue, which the report mentions in passing, is the work that farmers do in rural communities on the same basis on which people do voluntary work in other communities in dealing with adverse winter conditions. For example, councils might hire farmers or other contractors to clear local roads. Indeed, the winter weather review group report tells us that steps have been taken to explore how Transport Scotland could call on farmers to assist with snow clearing on trunk roads, too. That, of course, may prove to be necessary if we have a repeat of last year’s winter conditions. It has been drawn to my attention that local authorities remunerate such work at different rates and remuneration is clearly a significant issue for people who undertake such contracts. Also, insurance for work on public highways involves costs to those who do that work. As Transport Scotland is exploring the possibility of using contractors on the trunk road network, perhaps this is the time for ministers to give their view on how local authorities should work with private and voluntary support to clear the roads for which they are responsible. Keith Brown may wish to refer to that later. There are any number of specific issues and I imagine that many of them will be raised in the debate. There is a common theme across all of them, whether they are to do with transport, infrastructure or support for vulnerable and isolated individuals: citizens look to local and central Government to help them to get through difficult times, and ministers have a key role in co-ordinating the efforts of the agencies for which they are responsible and those of others who have a role to play.

I am sure that Kevin Stewart listened closely to my earlier remarks on support for local volunteers to do precisely that kind of work. That is why I look to ministers to provide the necessary support to community councils and other community groups in order to make it easy for people to take on that responsibility and to complement the work of the statutory authorities. As I hardly need to say in the context of Keith Brown’s portfolio, the buck stops with ministers. That might sometimes seem to be a little unfair. A number of years ago, when I was in the role that Mr Brown now has, I was asked why the transport minister had permitted the planting of trees next to railway lines. I had to tell the interviewer that that decision had been made some time before my period in office. Mr Brown, too, will no doubt be asked difficult questions over the course of this winter and, if things go wrong, there is little merit in blaming somebody else. The buck stops with ministers, but the best defence against the unexpected is to put in place every reasonable measure in advance and to be open and honest about the risks that may arise. If ministers take that approach, we will support it. I move amendment S4M-01123.1, to insert at end: “, and believes that the Scottish Government has a role to play in co-ordinating local efforts to cope with winter weather, including support for community councils, and in identifying vulnerable people and ensuring that they receive adequate support.”

I welcome the assurance that the minister has given. Does he accept that there is also a role for a national approach to community councils, which would best be articulated through the Association of Scottish Community Councils? If so, does he think that the Scottish Government can provide further support on winter resilience in that context?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am grateful that the cabinet secretary has finally taken an intervention. I am interested in the claims that he makes. Perhaps he can tell us how the budget for fuel poverty at the end of the spending review will compare with the budget last year.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. Your generosity is, as always, much appreciated. When John Swinney introduced the draft budget and spending review a couple of weeks ago, he made much of the merits of what he chose to call “preventative spending”. Indeed, a casual listener might even have formed the impression that he had thought it up all by himself. Spend to save has, of course, been a shared objective of successive Governments and how best to do it is right at the centre of this debate. The Scottish Federation of Housing Associations gave a very detailed response to the Finance Committee’s call for views on the draft budget and spending review in which it spells out what I think are the key points. The submission states: “Investing now in affordable housing, housing support, community regeneration and energy efficiency can save money in other budgets such as health, social care, education, justice and climate change.” Not many members would disagree with that, nor would many dispute the economic benefits and the jobs created by house building or the redoubled importance of houses built for rent at a time when levels of house building in the private sector have collapsed to a 30-year low. Ministers have said that they agree with all that yet, two weeks ago, in the budget and spending review, we saw affordable housing take one of the biggest hits of any area of Scottish Government expenditure. Like-for-like figures in table 13.10 of the spending review document show the overall funding for housing and regeneration fall from nearly £390 million this year to only £265 million in 2013-14—as Malcolm Chisholm said, a cut of some 30 per cent. Within that, the budget line for housing supply is cut from £268.5 million to £133.5 million over the same period, which is a 50 per cent reduction in what ministers see fit to invest under that heading.

If John Mason is suggesting that the Government cuts the Forth road bridge in order to fund housing, perhaps he needs to take that up with his own front bench. That is not my proposition today, but I am very interested in his suggestion. We are also told in the spending review document that there is additional funding for housing supply in the local government budget. This year, that funding is worth £100 million, but the numbers for future years are to be confirmed. We have not yet heard from ministers what those figures will be but, when we do, I suspect that they will confirm that that on-going funding under the local government heading will come in at less than £100 million a year. In fact, the minister himself has used a figure of £250 million over three years. When he sums up, perhaps the cabinet secretary can explain precisely what that number will be. In any event, it will not make up for the loss of £400 million from the housing supply line of the housing and regeneration budget over the next three years. That goes to the heart of our debate. New mechanisms to fund house building for mid-market rent or rent to purchase cannot make up for cuts of hundreds of millions of pounds in the mainstream budget for building social rented homes at the very time that such investment is needed most. Some councils have chosen to explore the national housing trust route. Others, such as West Lothian Council, which is led by the SNP, have chosen not to do so. A range of housing providers have bid for project finance from the investment and innovation fund and have clearly worked hard to secure funding of any kind to take schemes forward, but those schemes do not get the Government off the hook of having to set a realistic budget for the sector as a whole. There is another hook that ministers have got themselves on to, which they still show no signs of getting themselves off. Earlier, Keith Brown was invited to offer an explanation but chose not to do so. When the SNP sought re-election in May, it made a highly specific manifesto commitment, which ministers have spent the past five months simply failing to acknowledge. I will quote from page 17 of the SNP manifesto, a copy of which I have with me, if ministers need to see it for themselves. Next to an image of Alex Salmond and Alex Neil, it says: “Overall, our aim is to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year.” That could hardly be clearer, but I have tried in vain to get ministers to confirm that commitment or to explain why they will not do so. In a written reply, Keith Brown told me that ministers “have not set an overall target for council/housing association homes for social rent”,—[Official Report, Written Answers, 29 June 2011; S4W-00866.] yet that is exactly what they did in their manifesto. After our debate before the summer recess, I wrote to the minister and offered him the opportunity to say why the party manifesto said one thing and his ministerial replies another. Back came another response that again said that there were targets for affordable homes in general—as Keith Brown said earlier—but which made no reference to targets for social rented homes in particular. Instead, Mr Brown referred me to Mr Neil’s evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, so naturally I made haste to find out what Mr Neil had said.

I could have phoned Mr Neil and I suspect that, if I had, I might have got a more direct answer than we have had so far in parliamentary debates. Perhaps that is a piece of advice that I should follow if he does not respond, but I hope that he will take the opportunity at the end of the debate, in a public communication, finally to answer the questions that have been put to ministers. In his evidence to the committee, in response to a question from Malcolm Chisholm, Mr Neil said: “We had two numerical commitments on housing in the manifesto.” That was true, but he went on to say: “One was that over the five-year period we would build 5,000 new council houses ... The second was that we would build over 6,000 affordable homes each year”.—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 29 June 2011; c 31.] No, it was not. The commitment in the manifesto was “to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year.” That is a different thing, and both Mr Neil and Mr Brown know the difference. Maybe ministers are tired of avoiding that simple question—phone a friend might be the way to get out of that quandary. I am as keen as anyone to move the debate on. All that it would take is for ministers to tell us why their manifesto says one thing and their spending plans say another.

That intervention goes to the nub of the argument. It is one thing to say, “We are providing funding to build new houses,” but, if the provision of that funding shifts the balance away from houses that people on low incomes can afford to houses at mid-market rent, it will not achieve the objective that the SNP set out in its manifesto. Nevertheless, I am happy to welcome the progress that has been made. As we have heard this morning, Mr Brown has moved on from the position he outlined in his 30 June letter to me, in which he refused to set a social rented housing target. On 22 September, the day after a spending review that was heavily criticised for its cuts to housing, he finally promised at a housing conference that “at least two-thirds of these homes”— the 30,000 affordable homes planned for the next five years— “will be for social rent”. That is good. It means that there will be at least 20,000 social rented homes. It is a big step forward from the lack of a social rented target that had been made apparent only a few weeks before and represents a clear acceptance from the minister that affordable homes are not the same as houses for social rent. However, there is still some way to go. I guess that, tiresome though it may be, we will have to keep on reminding the SNP of its election promise. If we have succeeded in persuading ministers to increase their social housing ambitions from having no specific target at the end of June to having a target of 20,000 social rented homes at the end of September, we might even get them to endorse their manifesto in time for Christmas. Of course, it will not be impossible for ministers to do so. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, they have to address the balance between different types of affordable housing in their current plans. They also have to listen to the views of those who are willing and able to build houses that are genuinely affordable for people on low incomes and ensure that there is adequate funding support to allow those developments to happen. Mr Neil and Mr Brown might need to have a word with Mr Swinney about his pledge of £500 million for preventative spending and explain to him just how preventative spending on new social housing can be. They might want to ask him about the consequentials from spending elsewhere that might be available to the Scottish Government and which were not accounted for in the spending review announcement of 21 September. Finally, they might want to explore the scope for adjusting Government priorities as the budget bill makes its way through Parliament in the months ahead. If they do not do so, the Scottish Government’s ability to deliver against any of its targets will remain uncertain as long as the available funding falls so far short of what is required. That is not just an Opposition view; it is also the view of the housing sector. According to the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, “The most serious issue facing housing associations and co-operatives is that the overall budget for housing supply is falling steeply” and an “austere grant rate” of £40,000 per unit for housing associations “will not fund affordable rented housing, while keeping rents genuinely affordable to low income households”. In other words, housing associations can build with that level of subsidy—indeed, we have seen as much—but only by borrowing larger sums per house, which will in turn require rental incomes that will price the poorest families out of the sector. Shelter has also asked why the sector is apparently being punished for being willing and able to deliver homes at reduced levels of subsidy. If delivering more output for less input were indeed valued by ministers, one might have expected an increase rather than a cut.

It is a fair question. Indeed, I put it to ministers. If they are listening to the housing sector, they know themselves—[Interruption.] Publishing a manifesto and then winning an election based on it will have certain consequences, one of which is the need to make decisions. If the ministers in front of us want to stand up for the housing sector, they have to explain to their colleagues why investment in housing is the best way forward for the economy and low-income families. There is no buy-in from the sector to the Government’s claim that it is doing all that it can in straitened circumstances to support Scotland’s social housing. Like the builders, the housing providers believe that this budget represents a missed opportunity for housing and many people will hope that ministers will indeed think again. I move amendment S4M-01022.3, to leave out from “, in light” to end and insert: “that strengthened investment in social rented housing will benefit those in greatest need and will also stimulate economic activity and create jobs; notes the SNP’s manifesto commitment in the 2011 election campaign “to build over 6000 new socially-rented houses each year” and its failure to endorse that target while in government; regrets the lack of clarity about the Scottish Government’s future funding plans for new low-cost and mid-market housing in the Spending Review, and calls on the Scottish Government to address urgently the question of how it will enable sufficient new social rented houses to be built.”

I welcome the fact that the SNP agrees with Labour on the iniquity of some of the changes that the Westminster Government is making, which will affect housing benefit and people in social rented housing. Does the member think that this is the right time to put pressure on our housing associations’ reserves by reducing the level of subsidy for affordable housing, or is that the wrong response to what is happening at Westminster?

Jamie Hepburn mentioned that the funding was high in the previous session of the Parliament. Does he accept that the consequence of the announcements that have been made over the past two weeks is a cut of something in the order of £1 billion over this session?

It is generous of Jamie Hepburn to give way again. Does he accept that the criticism comes from the housing associations?

I am always entertained to hear the minister rediscover in every housing debate statistics from previous terms of previous Governments. Of course, his responsibility is for his term in government and particularly, in this debate, for the plans that he has laid before us. Why does he plan to spend £1 billion less on affordable housing in this session than was spent in the previous session?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. I congratulate David Sigsworth on his appointment as the new chair of the fuel poverty forum and Norman Kerr on his appointment as its vice chair. Mr Neil will recall the commitment and hard work of the previous chair of the fuel poverty forum, the Rev Graham Blount. Does he also recall the reasons for Mr Blount’s resignation earlier this year? Does he accept that an advisory group can fulfil its remit to advise only if it is fully informed of the thinking and policy intentions of ministers? Has he offered Professor Sigsworth the assurance that his predecessor sought, that ministers will take the advice of the fuel poverty forum in advance of making decisions rather than tell it about those decisions only after the event? If so, it would be good for ministers to start as they mean to go on. I welcome Mr Neil’s announcement that he is to restore—at least in part—the funding to tackle fuel poverty that was cut in the current year, although greater transparency would be welcome. He mentioned that he has found an additional £5 million for the current year and said that £65 million will be allocated in the next two years and slightly more than that in the year following. Will he confirm that those welcome increases will still not return the funding to its position in 2010-11? Will he discuss that further with colleagues in the months that are ahead?

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what support it provides to community councils. (S4O-00209)

I am sure the minister understands that the reason why the ASCC has decided to cease to operate is the failure of the Government to provide adequate funding for it to carry out its role of increasing the profile and capacity of Scotland’s community councils. Will she reconsider her decision or, alternatively, meet me and the ASCC to discuss the Government’s alternative proposals to allow the job of raising the profile and capacity of community councils to be taken forward?

3. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government plans to impose a cap on the costs of the Borders railway project. (S4F-00149)

Does the First Minister understand the concerns arising from reports this week of mounting costs and mounting delays in this non-profit-distributing project? If he does, and given his Government’s choice of that funding method, will he explain what else he will do—if he is not pursuing a cap—if the sole remaining bidder seeks to further increase the price of completing the project?

Does the minister recognise that there are concerns in some parts of the country, not about the universal home insulation scheme per se, but about the ability of smaller local businesses that have expertise in the area to compete with large contractors in securing those contracts?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. We welcome the debate on a low-carbon economy and the opportunity to address some of the issues that arise in seeking a low-carbon future for Scotland. The minister talked about how the transition to a low-carbon economy can support sustainable economic growth. We agree that it can, but we also recognise that the achievement of both economic and environmental benefits at the same time is not inevitable and that every reduction in carbon dependence will not necessarily contribute to an increase in economic growth. Labour’s concern in the debate is how to achieve a win-win outcome of more job creation and fewer carbon emissions, which will require Government not just to proclaim the potential benefits, although that is important, but to identify the barriers to progress and the actions that are required to overcome them. Scotland is fortunate in this respect: we have academic and scientific strengths not just in energy engineering and technologies, but in the wider challenge of understanding climate change and what has to be done to slow it down and mitigate its effects. For example, the Royal Society of Edinburgh produced a major report during the last parliamentary session that informed the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s inquiry into Scotland’s energy future, which in turn influenced the development of Scottish Government policy. This year, the RSE has published a detailed report “Facing up to climate change: breaking the barriers to a low-carbon Scotland”, which again highlights many of the practical issues that we need to address if we are to turn rhetoric into reality. The report stated that its “single most important finding is that change is held back by the lack of coherence and integration of policy at different levels of governance.” That conclusion should dispel any complacency on the part of ministers who aspire to give a lead in delivering precisely that coherence and integration of policy that the inquiry found to be lacking. All the route maps in the world will fail to deliver if the destination is not clearly agreed in the first place. That said, we acknowledge and support efforts to increase coherence across different levels of Government, and we encourage ministers to continue to build on those efforts. Labour led the first Scottish Government to develop a green jobs strategy some six years ago and established the policy framework that has seen wind power, in particular, and other new forms of technology become a large and growing part of Scotland’s energy mix. We are proud of our record in Government and we will support initiatives that build on our approach. In this year’s election, we called for a green new deal to support the installation of low-carbon energy sources, such as solar panels, in up to 10,000 homes. We argued that that would create jobs and training opportunities as well as carbon savings and cost benefits to consumers. We welcome the fact that the Scottish Government has taken forward action in that area to allow local councils and housing associations to take advantage of feed-in tariffs, and it has established a team to plan for further actions that will qualify for support under the renewable heat incentive. We would like ministers to go further in all those areas to allow the greatest possible benefit to social housing providers and tenants from the available forms of support and to spread the good practice of local councils that are already acting to support low-carbon energy initiatives. We would like action to support the retrofitting of energy efficiency measures in Scotland’s homes as a way of tackling fuel poverty and cutting carbon emissions, but it is also important that every opportunity is taken to improve the energy efficiency of new housing stock, in both the owner-occupied and rented sectors. One of the most disappointing aspects of yesterday’s budget and spending review, which Rhoda Grant highlighted a few minutes ago, is the decision to cut funding for new affordable housing supply by 50 per cent over the next two years, from £268 million to £133 million. That squeeze on housing providers can only set back the achievement of our low-carbon objectives. The Royal Society of Edinburgh expressed concern in its report about insulation standards already being squeezed as money has got tighter over the last 12 months. Those budget cuts will only make the situation worse. District heating and combined heat and power schemes can save energy that is currently being produced and wasted. The savings, in both carbon and cost, can be substantial, as the experience of the Aberdeen Heat and Power Company has shown. In this year’s election, Labour argued for more such schemes, and we know that the costs of district heating schemes can be cut by more than half if they are provided as part of a new development rather than retrofitted. This is another area in which we believe that Government can do more. Investment in new housing should be accompanied by investment in the transition to a low-carbon economy. To be fair, the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s critique is not of failings at any one level of Government, so much as of failure to join up the policies and actions of public authorities at different levels. The current electricity market reform proposals are a case in point. The United Kingdom Government’s proposals for a carbon floor price for coal are potentially in conflict with the development of carbon capture and storage as part of Scotland’s transition to a low-carbon economy. UK Ministers would no doubt argue that raising the carbon price of coal sharply will incentivise new technologies. However, there are significant risks that pricing coal out of the market will actually prevent the development of CCS for coal-burning power stations and that the supply of electricity from conventional power stations will be reduced sharply before other technologies are ready to fill the gap.

No, I do not accept that there has been a failure of policy on carbon capture and storage. I do not yet make that accusation against the current UK Government, but I highlight the risk that it runs with the carbon floor price if it is not very careful. We have always argued that it is wrong for Government at this stage in the development of new technologies to rule out any low-carbon source of energy supply. We have made that criticism of the Scottish Government’s approach and we are equally entitled to raise that concern about the UK Government’s approach. I hope that the Scottish ministers will join us in seeking answers to the questions that must be put to UK ministers about the impact of the carbon floor price on carbon capture and storage. The RSE made recommendations, which are supported by others, on the infrastructure and management of the electricity grid in Scotland. The RSE states that the optimal exploitation of renewables in Scotland chimes with the priorities of the European Union, the UK Government, the Scottish Government and National Grid, but that there is a need for a coherent and agreed plan. We support that, but we also believe that the Scottish Government has primary responsibility for enabling the upgrade of the grid within Scotland, not least the Beauly to Denny line. Far too much time has already been lost in providing that critical piece of infrastructure. The export grids that ministers are fond of highlighting require the Beauly to Denny line to be in place first, and the Scottish Government therefore has a responsibility for that. There are also issues around the joining up of policy in Scotland. I again refer to the RSE report, which highlighted concerns about the balance of transport policy. For example, the report praised the policy of concessionary bus fares for improving travel options, reducing car journeys and supporting rural bus services, but it expressed worries about whether the national rail priority of cutting intercity times was in conflict with the commuter needs of the main city regions. The report suggested that there is a need for clearer leadership and greater consistency in those and other areas, where other public bodies may be in the front line but the Scottish Government could clearly have a role to play. All of those issues are part of the low-carbon debate. Although energy and waste are important, a low-carbon Scotland will be achieved only if there is a joining-up of policy across Government and between different levels of government. We believe that a lot has been done in Scotland since devolution, but there is a lot still to do. We need action to deliver against commitments and targets that all parties can support, and in that spirit I move amendment S4M-00902.3, to leave out from “acknowledges” to end and insert: “recognises also that delivery of that objective will require effective implementation of a range of policies by government at every level, and believes that these should include retrofitting of domestic energy efficiency measures, more resources to tackle fuel poverty and limit price impacts on consumers, as well as action on grid infrastructure, support for a diverse energy mix and measures to give local communities a stake in the future low-carbon economy.”

7. To ask the Scottish Executive on what date it expects to publish an updated infrastructure investment plan. (S4O-00150)

Of course, the autumn is a wide category, but I look forward to seeing the plan. When I called for the publication of an updated plan in June, I reminded ministers of the recommendations of Audit Scotland. Will the new plan provide comprehensive information on the whole-life costs of capital projects and their impact on future revenue budgets, as Audit Scotland said that it should?

If, as the First Minister has said, changes in the tax regime for oil and gas are so important that they require a statutory consultation period, does the same principle apply to other fiscal changes? If so, does the First Minister now regret the hasty abolition of transitional relief on non-domestic rates?

All parties share the commitment to a low-carbon economy, and it is something that the Scottish Government endorsed prior to the recent election. Can the cabinet secretary tell us how its inclusion in the strategy document changes the Scottish Government’s emphasis on, or support for, that objective?

As we have just heard, there is broad agreement over the essential components that should be in the Scottish Government’s economic strategy. Every Scottish Government in the past 12 years has put sustainable economic growth at the centre of policy; in fact, much of this strategy would have sat comfortably in the smart, successful Scotland framework that was published a few years ago. Perhaps that is why Mr Swinney supported so many of that strategy’s features when he was in Opposition. Now, as then, the fundamental challenges to Scotland’s devolved Government are to identify and support the economy’s key growth sector, to invest in improving transport links and digital connectivity, and to free people from social disadvantage and poverty of opportunity to ensure that the whole of Scotland can benefit from sustainable economic growth. As a result, the day-to-day debate is perhaps less about what and more about how and, in particular, whether ministers are using all the powers at their disposal to achieve their objectives and whether they are setting the right priorities in the decisions that they make. That has been the focus of this debate—as, indeed, it has often been on economic policy—although, as Jackson Carlaw made clear, other issues arose, such as whether the current digital connectivity policy matches those of previous Governments. We recognise that the wider context in which decisions are being made is tougher than it was 10 years ago. Global economic recovery is not yet safe from the risk of retrenchment here and elsewhere and we acknowledge that the Scottish Government is working within a difficult environment as it seeks not only efficiency and effectiveness in public spending, but ways of investing to grow the economy. We will support measures that we believe will help towards those ends. For example, we agree that investment in infrastructure is more important now than ever and that Scottish Government borrowing powers can help to take forward such investment. However, we believe that more can be done to facilitate increased investment of that kind, which is why we have proposed that ministers consult on the setting up of an infrastructure bank. I hope that ministers will respond positively to that proposal, and that they will seek others’ views on it, as we have suggested. Indeed, under its economic strategy, the Scottish Government is committed to “seeking new opportunities for innovative funding arrangements and opportunities to leverage in new private sector investment.” Last week, the First Minister said that there was a “wall of private sector capital”—[Official Report, 7 September 2011; c 1371.] waiting for opportunities to invest in Scotland. Our proposal for an infrastructure bank will allow both of those propositions to be tested. If ministers are willing to take the idea forward and investors are indeed waiting for the right signal, the sooner there is a Scottish infrastructure bank, the sooner that “wall” of potential investment will be released. As Richard Baker said, state-owned financial institutions with a remit to promote private investment already exist elsewhere and offer models for what such a bank could do. If it works in Germany and California, we should not fight shy of exploring a similar model in Scotland. Tavish Scott mentioned last week’s Offshore Europe exhibition, when 50,000 people from around the globe converged on Aberdeen to do business in the oil and gas industries. Some of that business included decisions on multibillion-pound investments in the UK sector of the North Sea, which will bring huge benefits to business and jobs across Scotland. Some £6 billion was invested last year alone. Those investors look to government at every level to give a lead on infrastructure and if ministers give such a lead, more private sector investment will follow. The recently published “CBI/KPMG infrastructure survey 2011” confirmed that “Over 80% of firms report that the quality of energy and transport infrastructure has a significant impact on their future investment decisions”. I hope that that recognition is reflected in the update of the infrastructure investment plan, not least in what it says about the transport projects that are of greatest importance to our energy industries. An infrastructure bank is an idea that we believe can make a difference to achieving many of the targets that are set out in the economic strategy—not just those on infrastructure. It is another new and positive idea from Scottish Labour. Rhoda Grant followed Richard Baker in welcoming the Government’s implementation of other Labour initiatives but, sadly, Mark McDonald seemed to doubt that Labour should take credit for our record of promoting modern apprenticeships at every opportunity in the last parliamentary session. John Park was too modest in reminding us of his proposed member’s bill of three years ago. If ministers had taken that bill on board at the time, we would have addressed the critical issues of youth unemployment and training, which Anne McTaggart and others have highlighted, that bit sooner. Stuart McMillan is clearly keen on enterprise areas but, as he acknowledged, they have been tried before. In fact, as the Institute for Public Policy Research pointed out yesterday, enterprise zones were part of the same recipe for economic growth as were cutting corporation tax rates and deregulating large parts of the economy in the 1980s. That is undoubtedly why Alex Johnstone is so keen on that approach, but it is not one that brought about the benefits that were promised.

Margaret McDougall reminded us that enterprise zones could provide a short-term boost to one struggling locality at the expense of another, but that they did not transform disadvantaged areas in the longer term or lead to sustainable growth across the economy as a whole. Ministers will no doubt want to explain the difference between their vision of enterprise areas and Margaret Thatcher’s vision. If they do so, perhaps they will attract broad support for what they seek to do. The cabinet secretary said that he is keen to send a positive signal on a low-carbon economy. We certainly welcome that, but the development of a low-carbon economy must be about improving the energy efficiency of Scotland’s housing stock and tackling fuel poverty, as well as being about the fabrication of offshore wind towers and turbines, important though that is. It will be vital that Scottish Government measures in housing, renewables and tackling fuel poverty are coherent, work together and work as closely as they can with the initiatives that are taken by the UK Government, and with private sector funds that are secured under the energy company obligation at UK level. Ending fuel poverty in this session of the Scottish Parliament is a social policy objective to which the Scottish Government and other parties have signed up, but it is also an economic opportunity that can be pursued both by use of existing devolved powers and in dialogue with Westminster. That is surely the right approach to designing and delivering a strategy for economic growth in Scotland. We will debate the economics of a separate Scotland whenever ministers choose to introduce their referendum bill, but until then the focus has to be on how to secure economic benefit on the basis of the powers that are available to the Scottish ministers. On that basis, I commend Labour’s amendment as a positive contribution to the debate.

Does the cabinet secretary accept the proposition that an infrastructure bank modelled on the types that we have described today is one that can leverage in not just public sector funding but private sector funding, and that that is clearly an objective that he can share with us?

Has the First Minister seen this week’s reports that the Aberdeen western peripheral route might now not be completed until 2019? If so, will he instruct works to begin immediately on the Haudagain roundabout and at Balmedie without waiting for the bypass’s completion in order to unblock the logjam of projects and boost economic growth?

Does the minister recognise that the housing benefit changes could also weaken the position of tenants dealing with unscrupulous private landlords, who will adjust their rents in line with what the UK Government has indicated? Will he therefore, if necessary, issue further guidance to local authorities about their duties in regard to the inspection of private landlords and ensuring that tenants are getting a fair deal?

Will the member take an intervention?

I was glad to hear the First Minister say that he recognised the importance of housing to Scotland’s economic recovery. I am sure that he also recognises the scale of the challenge, which was confirmed by last week’s housing figures. Last year, the private sector built fewer homes than it has for many years; in fact, it was one of the lowest levels across all sectors since 1945. Moreover, John Mason confirmed just a moment ago the pressure put on many housing associations by the Government’s reductions in the housing action grant per house. I welcomed the SNP’s manifesto commitment “to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year” and listened very carefully to hear whether the First Minister would endorse that very precise and specific commitment. Alas, I listened in vain. However, I was not entirely surprised. When we debated housing in June, I pressed ministers on whether they actually intended to build 6,000 homes for social rent each year or whether what they really meant was a target of 6,000 homes of all types in the public housing and housing association sectors. That distinction matters. A social rent might amount to 60 per cent of a rent on the open commercial market, while a mid-market affordable rent is more likely to amount to 80 per cent. That difference will decide whether a rented home really is affordable to a low-pay household. Mid-market rents, shared equity, shared ownership and the national housing trust all have a role to play and all affordable homes are welcome, but those mechanisms will not deliver social housing for low-income families. I am sorry that Keith Brown left the chamber only a few moments ago because after the debate in June he wrote to me over the summer to say that the SNP’s manifesto commitment had been “clarified”. It seems that what it really meant was affordable housing in general, not homes for social rent. The phrase “affordable housing” was also used in today’s statement on the programme for government. However, it is not what the SNP told people in May and I think that now is the best time for ministers to think again about delivering on their commitment. Yesterday, in Aberdeen, I and members from other parties attended the opening day of Offshore Europe 2011, which is one of the most important events in the calendar for Scotland’s economy. Every other year, 50,000 people from across the world come to do business in Europe’s oil capital and tap into the fantastic expertise and experience that have been built up in the North Sea over the past two generations. Indeed, Mr Ewing was present at the business breakfast yesterday morning in Aberdeen and both he and I heard not only about what oil and gas are already doing to grow the economy, pay for public services and create jobs in Scotland and across Britain but about the sheer scale of private sector investment in the North Sea. However, visitors to Offshore Europe also heard about the continuing delay in delivering the public sector investment in infrastructure that Aberdeen and Scotland desperately need. Those visitors will read in today’s evening press about the prospect of disputes over the Aberdeen western peripheral route dragging on to the end of next year and beyond. Alex Salmond spoke about a commitment to modernising Scotland’s infrastructure. When his party took office four years ago, it inherited a timetable for the AWPR of completion by the end of 2011. Having looked at that timetable, his then transport minister told us: “we are looking at the project being completed around the end of 2012.”—[Official Report, 27 June 2007; c 1131.] Well, not any more, and industry leaders from around the world who have travelled to Scotland will read with disbelief—

It is certainly the case that the delays that have affected the project are not down to ministers alone, but it is their responsibility to find ways to deliver on their promises. People coming to Scotland will be astonished that a project that was agreed by a previous Scottish Government as long ago as 2003 may not now be completed until 2019. If ministers want to address the obstacles to delivering on their promises, they might look again urgently at, for example, their decision to delay improvements to the A90 at Balmedie and the Haudagain by tying them to the completion of the AWPR. I hope that they will reconsider that approach. Addressing the obstacles also means doing everything that they are allowed to do to encourage early decisions on matters affecting the progress of projects such as applications for legal aid. We recognise that the Scottish Government faces a capital squeeze, and in order to manage that it needs to look to the Scottish Futures Trust as its preferred model—a public-private partnership model with capped profit distribution, which it intends to use to deliver the AWPR and many other projects. The issue for this Parliament will be whether ministers get the right balance of non-profit distribution, public-private partnership schemes, borrowing money from elsewhere—if they obtain the power to do that, which we hope they do—and direct capital expenditure. The test of getting the balance right will be their ability to deliver on all the projects that they have undertaken to deliver, which means not watering down commitments or rescheduling endlessly to delay things. Finally, the Government said today that it will set out its infrastructure priorities. I hope that, when we see that plan, we will see timetables and budgets as well as the order of priorities for the projects.

I am very grateful to the cabinet secretary for taking an intervention at this stage. The example that he gave is a good one. Will he confirm that, although telecoms may be reserved in the main, there are many respects in which the roll-out of broadband can go together with elements of infrastructure for which the Scottish ministers are responsible and those opportunities should be taken?

I am sure that the traffic was guilty of something, but possibly not “transgressing”. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that the success of the M74 project owes a great deal to the initial support and active contribution of Glasgow City Council?

I congratulate Alex Neil on his appointment as cabinet secretary and on this dedicated parliamentary debate on the new ministerial portfolio of infrastructure and capital investment. If long words and long titles are anything to go by, Mr Neil can look forward to a busy time in his new job. Mr Brown’s job title is a little more self-explanatory. There is no need for a job description to be presented in Mr Brown’s speech in order for us to understand the responsibilities of transport and housing. As we have just heard, the responsibilities of both ministers are wider than that, but the headline issues of housing and transport are a good place to start. Last night, a number of members enjoyed a parliamentary reception that was organised by the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. That is a sector that I know well. My wife, Sandra, is a board member of Langstane Housing Association in Aberdeen and I am a tenant of Dunedin Canmore Housing Association here in Edinburgh. Of course, the central purpose of housing associations and co-operatives is not to provide market-rent properties in our major cities—although I am grateful that they do—but to provide social rented housing for people on modest incomes. That is also the central purpose of local authority housing. Mr Neil and his colleagues were re-elected last month on a manifesto that said: "Overall, our aim is to build over 6000 new socially rented houses each year." That is an ambitious target, so I lodged a number of parliamentary questions to find out how ministers intend to achieve it. Earlier this month, Keith Brown provided the Government's latest estimate of house completions in the current financial year, which fell only a little short of 6,000. If the Government’s target had been to build 6,000 homes available for below-market rent and mid-market rent and for sale through shared equity or shared ownership, the Government might be able to claim that it was on target, or at least close to it. However, the SNP’s pledge in its manifesto was to build each year more than 6,000 new homes in the social rented sector, which does not include—under any definition of social renting as it is understood by housing providers—mid-market rental or rent-to-purchase schemes. It was therefore surprising to receive some more written answers at half past two this afternoon to questions that I had asked about how many affordable homes, and how many homes for social rent, ministers intend to build in each of the next five years. What became apparent from those answers is that a party manifesto pledge of 6,000 social rented homes a year has been transformed into a Government plan for 6,000 affordable homes, which is a much wider category with no guarantee that the main beneficiaries will be those who are on low incomes and for whom social rented housing is the only affordable option. I asked how many homes for social rent would be built, bearing in mind the manifesto commitment. The answer was not 30,000 homes over five years, but that ministers plan “5000 new council houses during this parliament, but have not set an overall target for council/housing association for social rent.” That is not what the SNP manifesto said; 5,000 council houses is a long way short of 30,000 new social rented homes over five years. A few weeks ago, Shelter Scotland described the Government’s housing plans as creating a “black hole” between what it intends and what it has funded. The answers that I have received seem to suggest that Shelter Scotland is right. All housing providers need certainty if they are to plan for the future delivery of new homes. The pot of money that is available to housing associations this year—£20 million in the specified part of the innovation fund, as Mr Neil said—does not allow them to plan ahead at this stage. The cash limit of £40,000 a house means that the associations are not able to focus—

I understand that the overall figure for the fund is £50 million, of which £20 million is assigned for housing associations, £20 million is for councils, and £10 million is for innovation. I also recognise that there are other funding streams. Nonetheless, the way in which the money has been made available to housing providers is such that, in order to propose schemes, they typically need to propose to build not just social rented housing but other mid-market options as well. That therefore reduces the focus on where housing is more urgently required. If the number of bids for funding is three or four times greater than the available funding, that could be presented as a measure of success, but it could also reflect the point that there are unmet opportunities, so the Government needs to think about how it can deliver more of the social rented housing that it wishes to deliver.

Absolutely; that is the kind of model that I would welcome. However, I do not want to see the confusion, that appears to exist, between a commitment to social rented housing and a commitment to affordable housing that encompasses far more types of tenure and levels of rent. That is at least an ambiguity in the Government’s position, compared with the SNP’s position as it was presented at the election, so we need that ambiguity to be resolved. The Scottish Futures Trust featured in Mr Neil’s opening remarks, and it offers a vehicle for delivering new projects. We recognise that NPD, like other public-private partnerships, can be an efficient way of procuring projects, as long as those projects are properly procured and well managed, so it is important that we can have confidence in that. It is also the case that those projects will require to be paid back over 30 years, so a £2.5 billion commitment on NPD projects in this term implies an annual revenue cost of perhaps £250 million into the 2040s. That is clearly significant and it raises issues about how certain ministers can be about the delivery of such projects. I want to put a couple of issues on the table so that ministers can respond to them when they close the debate. NPD is planned for Borders rail, and we have seen three bidders for that project become one. I am interested in those bidders’ intentions and their certainty that they can deliver on that project. NPD is also the preferred funding model for the Aberdeen western peripheral route which, as ministers know, is mired in legal action. I would like the ministers to indicate whether that legal action has had any impact on the level of interest among potential private sector funding partners, and whether they will consider unbundling the other north-east transport projects that are currently bundled with the WPR.

We support the proposition that there needs to be more affordable housing. We want a clearer focus on houses that people on the lowest incomes can afford. We would finally like to see an update of the infrastructure investment plan so that all Scotland can engage with forward priorities.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister confirm, while he echoes the commitment to grow the wider affordable sector, that the manifesto on which his party was recently re-elected specifically states: “our aim is to build over 6,000 new socially-rented houses each year”? Is he telling us today that that is not now the Government’s intention?

Does the First Minister recognise the further concern in the oil and gas industry regarding the chancellor’s proposals to tax helicopter journeys to and from work in the North Sea on the same basis as journeys by luxury business jets? Does he support the representations that were made this week on the matter by business and local government in the north-east? If he agrees with those representations, what action will he take to support them?

I congratulate Mark McDonald on securing a members’ business debate so early and on such an important subject. Rightly, he highlights the impact of the unexpected tax rise on confidence in the oil and gas sector, which is critical. Neither I nor the Labour Party is opposed to windfall taxes. Labour was elected in 1997 on a manifesto pledge to impose a windfall tax on the privatised utilities to pay for the new deal for long-term young unemployed people. That was to the benefit of many thousands of young people. The companies in question did not like paying more, but they had plenty of warning, the extra revenue paid for essential Government action and the measure was introduced only because millions of voters agreed that that was the right thing to do. A decision five years ago to increase the supplementary charge on offshore profits was in a different category. I was vice-chair of the industry-Government task force—Pilot—at that time and heard the sector’s concerns at first hand. Its central complaint then was not about the cost of the increased charge but about the fact that it did not see it coming. After that, UK Labour energy ministers and Treasury ministers worked hard to ensure that lessons were learned, that Pilot’s views were taken on board across Government and that there were no more surprises. That job was done and trust had been restored by the time Labour left office last year. Earlier today, we were reminded that the present Chancellor of the Exchequer was a strident critic of the tax increase five years ago. His actions now contradict what he said then and undo all the good work that has been done to improve relations between the Government and industry ever since. It will take a long time to restore investor confidence in the present British Government. We know that from experience and from what we hear every time we talk to people in the industry, as we did last night at the cross-party group on oil and gas. The Treasury needs first to look again at the offshore tax regime as a whole. Iain Gray welcomed the publication of options for reform by the Scottish Government last Friday. Any one of those options would improve the investment prospects of a significant number of marginal fields. It would also be helpful for the UK Government to take off the table proposals for reform of air passenger duty, which as drafted would treat the helicopters that take men and women to work in the North Sea the same as it would treat luxury private planes. If the chancellor had made that journey to work a few times, I am certain that he would understand the difference. Earlier today, the First Minister confirmed his understanding that currently the proposals are being “reinterpreted”. That is welcome, as long as it means that they are to be dropped. The consultation on the proposals closes tomorrow. An early announcement by the UK Government of its conclusions, throwing out the proposals, would be welcome. UK ministers might also think about another point that was made this week in a submission on air passenger duty from Aberdeen airport and from business organisations and local authorities in the north-east. They argue that the region has no realistic alternative to air travel to connect to Heathrow and London, and that that should be recognised in a local rate of APD. Alex Salmond and the Scottish Government argue for devolution of air passenger duty. If UK ministers want to resist that argument and to recognise the special place of north-east Scotland in the wider British economy, a local rate of APD might commend itself and offer a small but significant step towards regaining the trust of the oil industry. After all, this debate is all about trust; it is about trust, investor confidence and jobs. I hope that the message that is coming from the Parliament tonight will be heard loud and clear by those who make the relevant decisions.

The debate has produced broad consensus in spite of the Conservative front bench’s best efforts. Mr Swinney argued for increased borrowing powers to support economic recovery and enhance Scotland’s infrastructure, and Labour believes that those objectives are more than ever of the first importance in this session of the Scottish Parliament. We, too, take the view that the proposals for borrowing powers in the Scotland Bill can be improved upon, as Wendy Alexander and Peter Peacock argued in the Scotland Bill Committee earlier this year and as Labour colleagues argued in the Scottish Affairs Committee in the House of Commons. For those reasons, we welcome Mr Swinney’s approach in the debate and we will continue to work with ministers for as long as economic growth and public investment are the drivers of Scottish Government policy on borrowing powers. We are not naive in so doing. We understand that increased borrowing powers can also contribute to the SNP’s wider political purpose in creating an edifice of devolved powers that look as much as possible like the attributes of a quasi-sovereign state. That is an entirely predictable purpose for a nationalist party, but it is not a purpose that we share. Labour’s approach to further devolved powers will be to distinguish between Scottish Government demands that support economic growth and those that support only political independence. We make that distinction not to highlight a difference between us, but to show that increased borrowing powers command broad support across the spectrum of political opinion in Scotland. We believe that progress is best made on the basis of agreement and that Scottish borrowing powers should go forward in the context of the United Kingdom’s overall public sector borrowing requirement. We debated the economic recovery last week and I was a little bit surprised that the new Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment did not take part in that debate. We are debating capital borrowing today and the Government’s motion explicitly raises the importance of enhancing Scotland’s infrastructure, so I hoped that Alex Neil might be involved in this debate, as undue reticence is not a fault for which he is famous. Perhaps he will get his chance before too long. I hope that he does, because I suspect that we would agree that investment in infrastructure is a critical part of what needs to be done to promote Scotland’s economic recovery. There are plenty challenges to be faced in achieving levels of investment in line with Scottish Government commitments and we have heard about a number of those challenges in the past few days. The SNP manifesto committed to an extra 6,000 affordable homes a year and it was widely acknowledged that that would be good for jobs, communities and tackling poverty. However, last week, Shelter Scotland highlighted its concern that current provision is not enough to meet that target and that it might fund no more than 1,550 new affordable homes. Even on the basis of the lower grant per house that ministers brought in last year, that would be a capital shortfall of £120 million annually. This week, the Water Industry Commission for Scotland report highlighted that the current Scottish Government budget does not include £140 million in capital finance from the Scottish ministers to Scottish Water as might be expected in the context of the five-year investment plan for Scottish Water. As we have heard, there are different ways of addressing that shortfall other than through greater Government finance for the remaining years of the investment period, but the SNP has promised to retain Scottish Water in public ownership, so its future funding requirements will have to be addressed. Concerns were raised in the chamber yesterday about the proposed new Edinburgh children’s hospital. None of our Lothian colleagues appears to share the concerns about how the project is to be implemented. The minister who responded to yesterday’s debate said that the Scottish Government remains committed to delivering the project, but did not spell out how, and there is no doubt that meeting that commitment will also present a challenge. Borrowing powers can help to meet all those challenges, not to mention funding the larger transport infrastructure projects such as the new Forth crossing and the Aberdeen bypass. I heard Alex Neil this week—on the radio rather than in the chamber—confirming plans to start work on the M8 improvements in the course of next year. That was a welcome commitment, but it will also have to be paid for. It would be helpful if the cabinet secretary was able to describe the relationship that he anticipates there being between increased borrowing powers and the approach to the funding of future infrastructure projects by the Scottish Futures Trust. The choice that one or two members presented between projects funded from borrowing and those funded through revenue budgets by either the SFT or PPP could be a false choice. It is about using those approaches together to deliver the infrastructure that we require. Whether they are funded from borrowing or from PPP, and whether that PPP is conventional or capped by the NPD method, those projects need to be paid for and they will involve payments from revenue budgets for years to come. It is important for us to understand the Government’s view of the relationship between such funding and borrowing powers. We support the previous Scotland Bill Committee’s approach to capital borrowing powers and to the ability of the Scottish ministers to borrow to fund current expenditure. We also welcome the Scottish Government’s proposition that there should be a principles-based approach to capital borrowing, because borrowing should not be limited in an arbitrary way, nor should it be open ended. Our amendment supports a link between limits on capital borrowing and the capacity of the Scottish Government to finance debt prudently from devolved tax revenue, and I hope that that will also be generally agreed. We also want a balance between prudence and flexibility in short-term borrowing and, again, we support the general approach of the previous Scotland Bill Committee. I hope that the new Scotland Bill committee that is to be established will be able to build on the strength of the recommendations of its predecessor and I believe that there is broad agreement across all parties on many of the points that the previous committee raised in its report. Of course, we welcome indications of an accelerated timetable for access to capital borrowing powers and we agree that access to the bond market would add to the ability of the Scottish ministers to manage their capital budget without needing to add further to the UK national debt. That is an area in which agreement should be possible. Labour is proud of the achievements of devolution and we are proud of our contribution to the Calman process, which has brought us to this point. Indeed, we hear members of parties that were not involved in that process claiming some of the credit, and that is the best tribute to the importance of the process. We are ready to work with any party in the Parliament in building on those achievements when we believe that its objectives will benefit the people of Scotland and strengthen Scotland’s economy. The challenge for us in working with the present Government is to get the judgment right—to support those proposals that will make things better and to oppose those that will not. The challenge for the SNP is to recognise that the case for increased powers is made more strongly when it has broad support across the Parliament, and I am glad that the SNP Government has risen to that challenge today. As Neil Findlay, Elaine Murray and others have said, once borrowing powers have been achieved, the real debate will be on how they should best be used to strengthen Scotland’s economy and to create jobs, and I look forward to that debate.

The minister has mentioned ambitious targets and significant technologies that have yet to be fully proven, but he has not mentioned district heating or combined heat and power. Will he comment on the role that that might play in the projection and road map that he is describing?

I congratulate all those members who have made maiden speeches this afternoon—they have been of very high quality, adding to the quality of those made last week. I welcome Fergus Ewing to his new role on the Government front bench and encourage him to follow in the footsteps of Jim Mather, his predecessor as Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism. It is not that mind mapping is compulsory, but I pay tribute to Jim Mather’s courtesy and willingness to build consensus in the previous session. That is a good example to follow. I also congratulate Alex Neil on his appointment to the Cabinet, although unfortunately he is not with us this afternoon. I am sure that he will enliven discussion about infrastructure and capital investment in the period ahead. That discussion is important and nowhere more so than in a debate about finance, employment and the sustainable growth of the Scottish economy. Neil Findlay and others spoke about the risk to the wider economy posed by cuts to public expenditure in Scotland and across the UK. Fewer jobs in the public sector mean less consumer spending in those communities most reliant on public sector employment, and real-terms pay cuts for public sector employees mean less money to go round in the economy as a whole. That risk is significant and there is a specific risk to investment in public infrastructure and the jobs and economic activity that that supports. That risk was highlighted earlier in the year when Audit Scotland published its report, “Management of the Scottish Government’s capital investment programme”. It urged ministers to think carefully about how they will deal with a situation in which the Scottish Government’s capital budget will fall by £800 million this year and by a total of £1.2 billion, or 36 per cent, over the period to 2015. We will debate the Scottish Government’s borrowing powers next week and we may well agree that the introduction of such powers under the current Scotland Bill is part of the answer. I suspect that the debate will be less about whether ministers should be able to borrow and more about how much they should be able to borrow. I hope that Mr Swinney and Mr Neil will make a case that relates the scale of potential borrowing to the value of assets held and the size of the overall devolved budget, rather than simply seeking the widest possible powers for their own sake. The opportunity to borrow will be useful but, as we have been reminded during the debate, it will also bring the requirement to pay back. Borrowing powers are, in any case, only part of the answer. We also need ministers to tell us how they plan to update their existing plans for infrastructure investment in a way that reflects the public spending world that we live in now, rather than that which existed in 2008. I have already asked the Scottish Government to publish up-to-date estimates of timescales and budgets for the largest of the many capital projects envisaged in the infrastructure investment plan three years ago, and I hope that ministers will think carefully about what they need to do to deliver on all their commitments. Audit Scotland summed the situation up in its statement that “investing in Scotland’s public infrastructure is essential to providing high-quality public services.” I recently attended the topping-out ceremony for the new emergency care centre at Foresterhill in Aberdeen, which was a project first mooted when I was the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care some five years ago. The scale and quality of the new healthcare facilities at Foresterhill will provide a very good return on investment, not only in their own right but by allowing more efficient use of existing assets. In that case, the decisions were taken early enough and the vision was strategic enough for the project to have reached an advanced stage before the squeeze on public spending began. We now need a strategic overview of the Scottish Government’s current capital investment plans and how they will contribute to economic growth in the context of the budgets anticipated over the next four years. Audit Scotland has said that ministers should extend the infrastructure investment plan to become an overarching investment strategy and that they should develop comprehensive information on the whole-life costs of all capital projects and assess their impact on future revenue budgets, to allow well-informed decisions to be made. I have asked ministers for early meetings to discuss their plans for the Aberdeen western peripheral route and Aberdeen crossrail, in which I have a particular interest from a north east perspective, but the same concerns exist throughout Scotland. There will clearly need to be significant changes if a capital budget of £2.5 billion and falling is to meet the costs of projects planned when capital budgets were £3.3 billion and rising. As the Public Audit Committee said, we need to know what changes ministers are considering in relation to funding mechanisms, budgets or timelines in order to understand how and when those projects will be delivered.

I acknowledge those points, but I am sure that Mr Swinney will accept that taking forward a number of highlighted and specified projects through the NPD programme does not answer either the question of the overall changes that will be faced by Government in future or the question of how those NPD projects will attract the finance that is necessary if they are to go forward in a timeous manner. Of course, I would be delighted if he or Mr Ewing was able to give me assurances on those points. If they can, I look forward to hearing that during the Government’s summing-up speech. Mr Swinney highlighted the issue of the devolution of powers to allow competitive business taxation. The suggestion is that if more business tax powers are devolved to the Scottish Parliament, the Scottish Government will be able to use them to attract more private investment and give Scottish business a better deal. That is one possible consequence of such devolution, but it is important to understand that possibility in the context of what the Scottish Government has done with the business taxation powers that it has, and to ask what its intentions are for its present term. I remind members that, last year, a full business rates revaluation came into force. Many thousands of businesses, large and small, faced increases in their annual rates of many thousands of pounds, but ministers decided that there was no need to provide transitional relief to phase in the changes, so those who were going to pay more had to do so immediately. The result of that was not only higher bills for larger businesses, but a situation in which many businesses that had benefited from rates relief found that the revaluation had taken them over the threshold and that they were now facing higher bills with no help at all. In Aberdeen city and Aberdeenshire, the number of firms that were able to access the small business bonus scheme fell from more than 3,500 in 2009-10 to less than 3,000 in 2010-11. Ministers also proposed in the previous session to raise a special rates levy from large retail businesses in Scotland. One of the arguments that was deployed against that proposal was that it would put Scotland at a competitive disadvantage in relation to investment decisions that are made by companies such as John Lewis and Marks & Spencer. [Interruption.] Ministers might want to indicate, other than from a sedentary position, whether they now accept that argument or whether they might still be considering having higher rate poundages for some types of businesses in Scotland than in England and Wales. That will be relevant to our debates on what business tax powers might be appropriate for the Scottish Parliament.

I am sure that ministers will want to address that issue and ensure that business fully understands their intentions.

I echo the minister’s warm words. Can she confirm that the funding package that she has described is now wholly in place to allow the work to commence on schedule?

5. To ask the First Minister, in light of comments by Sir Tom Hunter that Scotland is facing a tsunami of unemployment and that the people of Scotland deserve better, whether the Scottish Government will now enable every qualified young person to have access to an apprenticeship. (S3F-2959)

I am glad that the First Minister has indeed followed Labour’s lead on apprenticeships to some extent. He clearly still has some way to go—[Interruption.]

Does he share Tom Hunter’s concern that there are 35,000 young people who are not in employment, education or training? Will he now also back Labour’s new green deal, in order not only to insulate thousands of houses and tackle fuel poverty, but to give many of those young people access to skills and work?

Large contracts go to large companies. Was the decision to award a small number of large contracts for renewable energy development in Scotland’s forests taken by ministers or by the Forestry Commission?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has had with the board of the Scottish Police Services Authority concerning staff regrading. (S3O-13086)

The cabinet secretary will recall that I raised with him recently the concern that support staff in Grampian have been regraded at a grade that is lower than that of their colleagues who do the same work elsewhere, simply because salary levels in Grampian Police were lower than those in other forces. Has he seen the response that the SPSA sent me at his request, which appears to confirm the position that is causing concern? Will he impress on the SPSA the fact that staff grades should be based on skills and experience and not on how well a previous employer paid staff?

The policy objectives of increasing energy efficiency and reducing fuel poverty are widely shared. The issues that we consider today are whether the bill that the Westminster Government has introduced will add value to existing legislation and whether the Scottish Government is right to give the bill its whole-hearted support, especially given that the minister has conceded that much of the substance will not appear until secondary legislation is produced. Members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee took evidence on the bill from non-governmental organisations that work in the field and from the Scottish Government. It was hard to avoid the conclusion that even Mr Neil found it hard to understand the purpose of some parts of the Westminster bill that he was defending. Friends of the Earth Scotland went further. In a briefing paper this week, the organisation urged us to refuse to allow the reappropriation by the UK Government of measures to tackle energy efficiency in the private rented sector and fuel poverty. It is perhaps surprising that Scottish National Party ministers are unconcerned that such views are being expressed in the sector in Scotland. Alex Neil will recall being asked by the committee what chapter 3 of the Energy Bill will add to the toolkit that is available to the Scottish ministers under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. He said: “Chapter 3 will give us a specific power to regulate the private rented sector. We believe that, in effect, we already have that power under the 2009 act.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 2 February 2011; c 4751.] It is hard to see why ministers are keen for Westminster to legislate on the private rented sector, if that will only duplicate measures that have been agreed by all parties in the Scottish Parliament and put in statute.

The provisions include a responsibility on the tenant to request improvements—not on the landlord to offer them. Also, the powers on energy efficiency in the private sector are limited by clause 50, which provides that they may be exercised only if they “will not decrease the number of properties available for rent.” If that is what ministers want, surely it would be better for them to explain that in the context of Scottish legislation as it went through the Scottish Parliament. When he gave evidence to the committee, Alex Neil defended the proposed repeal of the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995, which requires local authorities to set targets in promoting energy efficiency. He said that not enough councils meet their HECA targets. However, a number of Scottish local authorities have used the targets effectively to make a difference to people who are living in fuel poverty. Scottish Environment LINK told the committee on 26 January: “We strongly believe that that act should not be repealed; rather, it should be amended or replaced with a duty on local authorities to have targets to achieve energy efficiency in the private housing sector in their areas and to report on the achievement of those targets.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 26 January 2011; c 4719.] Other organisations reiterated the point this week. WWF Scotland, for example, pointed out that the proposals in the Scottish Government’s long-delayed energy efficiency action plan “only extend to strengthening guidance for Local Housing Strategies and there is no requirement or duty to promote energy efficiency.” At the very time when we should be looking for ways to build on the successes of earlier efforts to improve energy efficiency, ministers in both Governments focus instead only on the deficiencies in HECA in order to remove and not replace an existing statutory duty. The Scottish ministers should put pressure on the UK Government on proposals that are not yet fully formed, as the minister said. We also want the green deal and the energy company obligation to be amended to deliver for Scotland. If they threaten to take us in the wrong direction altogether, they should be rejected.

Does Gavin Brown accept that there is also a broad consensus on the need to replace HECA, rather than simply to repeal it, as is proposed?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr McArthur have a view on why the bill has come forward at this stage, when it is apparent from everything that we have heard that many of the provisions have not yet been fully formed and are not intended to be produced before the bill has completed its passage through Westminster?

Will the member give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that pupil support assistants make a valued contribution to children’s learning. (S3O-12881)

I am delighted that Mr Ingram and I are in such agreement. Given that PSAs are usually women, that they are not highly paid and that they are often resident in disadvantaged areas, does the minister agree that any council that is considering large-scale redundancies among PSAs is under a statutory duty to carry out an equality impact assessment of cutting such posts? If he does agree with that, will he or his colleague Mr Russell ensure that Aberdeen City Council, which is planning some 290 further redundancies among pupil support assistants, carries out such an equality impact assessment before any redundancies are made?

12. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on local authorities funding severance schemes from reductions in pay. (S3O-12774)

That is an interesting contrast with the answer that Mr Swinney gave me on 16 December, when he described pay cuts as an “unnecessary” tactic that was not even worth discussing. Mr Swinney will have heard the First Minister suggest earlier today that Aberdeen City Council was seeking to avoid compulsory redundancies by promoting what Mr Salmond called “pay restraint”. Has the cabinet secretary had any discussions with the council or his Scottish National Party councillor colleagues in Aberdeen with a view to the council avoiding compulsory redundancies? If he has had such discussions, what have the outcomes been?

Does Mr Mather recall John Swinney’s written answer to me of 7 October 2010, in which he confirmed that 129,773 small businesses qualified for the small business bonus in 2009-10, as compared with only 114,620 that are eligible today? How does he explain that to the 15,000 small businesses that no longer qualify for rates relief, following rates revaluation?

As the convener said, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee set out to look at the performance of the Scottish Government and its agencies, but we quickly realised that we also needed to look at the underlying culture of Scottish business—not just how the private sector performs when it comes to earning a living in the wider world, but how Scottish companies think about the whole question of operating in global markets. Having lived and worked in Aberdeen since the mid-1970s, I am accustomed to a local business culture in which the world oil price is the single most important influence on economic activity and in which the export of goods and services to other oil provinces around the world is already more important for many Scottish companies than the money that they can earn in the North Sea. The consequences of that local culture go beyond the oil and gas sector. When small businesses, the supply chain and working men and women think in terms of a global marketplace and a global workplace, it becomes easy to promote exports in other parts of the economy, too. Families in which one partner works in west Africa or central Asia for six months of the year and communities in which the biggest employers are inward investors or local companies that thrive on export earnings are wide open to a culture of trade to prosper. In life sciences, for example, US corporates jump at the chance to locate at Foresterhill and to recruit Aberdeen’s star researchers. Those Aberdeen scientists think nothing of going to California or Boston for a few years or of working internationally while continuing to live in Aberdeen. When the committee took evidence in Aberdeen, we saw for ourselves how that global outlook works. Three of the witnesses were Jimmy Milne of the Balmoral Group, Duncan Skinner of the Production Services Network, which has since merged with the Wood Group, and Gillian Black of OPITO, the oil and gas skills academy: in other words, a local entrepreneur who sells home-grown expertise and manufactures all over the world; a management buyout company that has since merged with its main local competition to create a global-scale service company based in Aberdeen; and a skills academy, funded by employers and trade unions, that has grown to the point of having a global hub in Dubai and providing accreditation to the training of oil and gas workers from the middle east to Mexico. That is how an exporting economy should work, but is not a culture that is to be found across Scotland. As the committee convener said, Scotland as a whole punches below its weight relative to the rest of Britain when it comes to the number of firms that are engaged in exporting and the value of export earnings. Some of the witnesses whom we expected to give evidence to the committee did not do so, on the basis that many smaller firms do not regard overseas markets as critical to their overall success. Even as the committee was conducting its inquiry, we were surprised by the long delay in the appointment of a chief executive to Scottish Development International, despite positive words from ministers about the importance of exports to the Scottish economy. The appointment of Anne MacColl took almost an entire year, and the question is bound to be raised whether the leisurely pace of that appointment process indicates that there really is a high priority for SDI in the thinking of the present Scottish Government. Perhaps when he speaks again at the end of the debate, the minister can shed some more light on why an internal appointment took quite so long to put in place. The good example of Aberdeen’s export outlook holds lessons for businesses elsewhere in Scotland, for education and training providers and for government and the public sector. A number of us were fortunate enough to see for ourselves how other countries and regions approach the whole area of export promotion and operating in global markets. The devolved Government of Catalonia is very active in export promotion, and we discovered that looking outwards from Spain is part of what defines Catalan culture and the Catalan economy. We also discovered lots of enthusiasm for doing business with Scotland, which it would be good for both economies to pursue further. We discovered that Scottish companies that deal with Catalonia can get good support from UK agencies and diplomatic staff, but that the nearest SDI office is in Paris. Indeed, staff from Paris were expected to support work in Catalonia—as well as in lots of other places—but they can do so only occasionally. That example of a dynamic potential market for Scottish goods in Barcelona, with very little Scottish public sector presence there, was a powerful argument for finding new ways of delivering that presence without diluting the excellent work that SDI already does in a limited number of places around the world. The areas that are currently missed out in the SDI network are not confined to southern and eastern Europe. In the global economic recovery, some of the highest growth rates in the past two years have been in parts of South America, central America and Africa, which do not have a single SDI office between them. It is right and indeed critical to look beyond staffed and permanent SDI offices to see how services can be delivered to exporting companies with a minimum of overhead costs. I was pleased to hear the minister acknowledge that closer working with UKTI and with UK embassies and consulates will be essential if we are to get the best possible global coverage. It is vital to Scotland’s interests that those agencies continue to deliver despite the current UK Government’s cuts to its own public agencies. Closer working with Scottish Chambers International, SCDI, global Scots and established Scottish exporters can also be part of extending SDI’s reach without breaking the budget or reducing the vital support that is currently provided in places such as Houston and Beijing. Like the committee convener, I look forward very much to SDI’s new chief executive bringing forward her plans about how to strengthen the infrastructure of support for Scottish exporters abroad. I look forward, too, to a time when exporting is a genuine priority for all sectors of the Scottish economy. The energy sector in Aberdeen and export-oriented industries such as Scotch whisky and Scottish salmon are examples that the rest of Scotland’s economy needs to follow. The job of the Scottish Government and its agencies is to help make that happen, and I hope that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report points the Scottish Government and its agencies in the right direction as regards future work.

In spite of the points that he has made, does the member accept that the minister is right when he says that the UKTI network allows far greater coverage and support for Scottish companies abroad than could possibly be delivered by SDI alone?

Stewart Stevenson talked about his ministerial experience of promoting Scotland abroad. Six years ago, I was fortunate to lead a delegation to China from Scotland’s devolved Government and its agencies. At that time, the Chinese Government was looking for a new overseas partner to deliver technical education in many of its 1,000 universities. The Scottish Qualifications Authority succeeded in that bid, and Scotland’s relationship with China has gone from strength to strength since then. My view of that visit is that Scotland was successful because of a unique combination of strengths, most of which hold good today. First, it offered quality. The SQA had a proven track record in accrediting school and further and higher education. Without that, nothing else would have happened. Secondly, the presence of a Scottish minister in the SQA delegation confirmed for the Chinese authorities that the agency came with the full backing of the Government. The importance of such an approach is huge, not just in China but in many other emerging economies. An endorsement from the Government offers the reassurance that prospective partners have credibility in their home country and that they will therefore last the course. One of the findings in the report is that ministerial presence or the participation of senior figures is helpful to trade missions in general, whether the product is educational standard setting or more traditional goods or services. That approach will be even more important in tougher economic times than it was in 2005. The fact that we speak the English language is also an important advantage for Scotland. The report rightly emphasises the importance of more young Scots learning more modern languages, but it is important to recognise that the English language is the single most useful medium of communication in the 21st century. Scotland’s schools and colleges must work hard on maintaining that clear advantage. The International School of Aberdeen, which is mentioned in the report, and the Total French school, which is in my constituency, provide good models of what can be done with private sector resources, but it is critical that public sector schools continue to do their job if Scotland is to continue to be a partner of choice around the world. Local councils such as Aberdeen City Council that are seeking to cut budgets must beware of the temptation to make savings at the expense of English or other languages, as that will bring far more losses than savings in the longer term. Another clear advantage that Scotland enjoyed in China in 2005 was the nature of our relationship with the rest of the United Kingdom. A devolved Scotland was clearly a partner that was capable of acting on its own behalf and reaching agreements with third parties on the basis of mutual respect and common interests. At one event, I was introduced as a representative of the country that produced Adam Smith, whose understanding of political economy informed Karl Marx and thereby the economic policies of the People’s Republic of China. I took that as a positive interpretation of our historic connections over time. A devolved Scotland also offered the prospect of access to the resources and expertise of Britain as a whole, and it acted with the backing of the world’s sixth largest economy. That balance of autonomy and access is a big advantage in the global marketplace, which is why the report highlights the importance of SDI acting in concert with its UK counterparts and with the support of British embassies and consulates around the world.

Statistical releases are one matter, but I can tell Mr Stevenson from my experience that, actually, the engagement of British embassies in supporting Scottish efforts abroad is commendable. I am sure that Mr Stevenson, from his experience, would confirm that. Christopher Harvie suggested that we should instead act in concert with the Federal Republic of Germany, although of course I recognise that that is not the Scottish National Party’s or the Scottish Government’s official policy. The report promotes the idea of marketing Scotland’s universities and colleges overseas and highlights the role of the Scottish Government and its agencies in co-ordinating that. It is worth recording how much work has already been done in the field. Even in 2005, I met a representative of the Robert Gordon University while I was in Beijing. The University of Aberdeen, which is in my constituency, also works hard there on recruiting Chinese students, and other colleges and universities from across Scotland do the same. It is right, however, to emphasise the importance of involving new players in Scotland’s overseas efforts, which is one of the key recommendations in the committee’s report. That might be new training providers, other skills academies and colleges. With the right approach to export opportunities, they can emulate the success of OPITO in that field. It might also involve new businesses in the marketplace for selling goods and services. It would be good to see SDI engage with more and more Scottish businesses from across the economy to stimulate their interest in working outwith Scotland. That will clearly require partnership working with Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. At the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee meeting this morning, we heard from both those agencies that they could add more value if they had more resources. I suppose that that is self-evident, but it would be interesting to know what impact ministers believe this year’s further budget cuts to the enterprise agencies will have on their ability to promote the internationalisation of account-managed companies. This morning, we also heard from HIE about the importance of new air routes and high-speed rail connections, particularly for the north of Scotland. Perhaps the minister will also comment on those issues, given that they, too, feature in the committee’s report. Do ministers now support the committee’s recommendation for a reformed air route development fund to strengthen Scotland’s ability to build business relationships abroad and to attract inward investment? We all agree on the importance of trade to Scotland’s economic recovery. We now need to go beyond agreeing that it matters, build on the recommendations in the report and put a strategy in place to make those shared aspirations a reality. I believe that doing so will attract broad support.

I accept the minister’s point. We would not expect him to put in the public domain every single aspect of the appointment process, but does he not recognise that there was a 12-month process to appoint somebody who was already on the team? Will he undertake to provide the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee with further information on the process and why it took the time that it did?

Does the minister agree that, although the extension of price support to the whole range of low-carbon technologies has much merit, it is important that whatever mechanism the UK Government adopts to do that does not destabilise the existing renewables sector, its expectations and its reliance on the current system? The design of the mechanism will be critical to confidence in the future.

I agree with Alex Johnstone that sometimes a change of Government is a very good thing. I look forward to the next opportunity for precisely that. As Gavin Brown said, Scottish Power today submitted its response to the consultation on electricity market reform. Similar views have been expressed—so far informally—by Scottish and  Southern Energy and others with an active interest in the outcome of this process. I quote a little further from the Scottish Power submission. It says that the contract-for-difference type of feed-in tariff, which was promoted by Chris Huhne yesterday, carries with it "major complexities and uncertainties" that need to be resolved. That is why it calls for the "Premium FIT" approach to be explored. Scottish Power has also highlighted the importance of a Europe-wide approach to carbon pricing and the risk that too high a price in Britain alone could affect competitiveness and be costly to consumers. It has expressed a similar concern in relation to an emissions performance standard if the UK Government was to get its level wrong. It says that "In all these areas ... getting the detailed design right will be critical," and that, "first and foremost, we need to do everything we can to avoid a hiatus in renewables deployment." I endorse all those comments and, above all, I echo its summary, which states: "We are committed to working with the Government to ensure that the final package delivers the progress that we need on renewables, nuclear and carbon capture and storage whilst keeping the interests of consumers firmly in mind." Although we might not agree with the utility companies on what every detail of the final package should look like, we share their view that it is the detail that matters at this stage. The introduction of a capacity mechanism, for example, could be done in any of a number of ways. Modern combined-cycle gas generation may have a role to play, but we do not want another dash for gas at the expense of reducing carbon emissions. Nor do we want the capacity mechanism to produce public funding support for new fossil-fuel plant without carbon capture technology already in place. Setting a carbon price or emissions standards can help if the right choices are made but, if they are not, the impact could be counterproductive. That is also true of the central proposal for the replacement of the renewables obligation with feed-in tariffs. I was pleased to hear from all the parties and, I think, from all the members who have spoken in the debate, a recognition of the central importance of getting right the regime that replaces renewables obligation certificates. In recent weeks, Spain has responded to wider economic pressures by altering the feed-in tariffs that it has for solar power, leading to disputes between Government and generators, which may end up being resolved in the courts. That is not where we want the reform of electricity market intervention in this country to take us, so it is  critical that the right system is adopted from the start. Liam McArthur confirmed what Chris Huhne said yesterday, which is that contracts for difference are currently the UK Government's preferred option, although they are not the only option on the table. The contract-for-difference system would remove the obligation on suppliers to contract for renewable electricity. It might also lead to inflated prices, so instead of reduced costs by 2030, which is an aspiration that we all share, we might end up with the opposite. Likewise, the current preferred proposals aim to control price through auction structures, which may not be able to deliver lower prices and new technologies at the same time. An ineffective auction system would do more harm than good, which is why the renewables sector is keen to have other options properly considered: options that can maintain a requirement or an incentive to source low-carbon generation; options that identify an appropriate level of support in consultation with stakeholders, which is perhaps preferable to doing so by auction; and options that secure the smoothest transition from the existing renewables obligation. That is why I suspect that the support of large utilities for investigating premium feed-in tariffs may well be reflected by growing support for that approach from the renewables sector as a whole and why I hope this question will be central to discussions on these matters in the weeks and months ahead. Like others, I welcome the areas of agreement that there have been in the debate, but it is nonetheless important at this stage to recognise that there are some differences in the emphases of the motion and amendments that we will vote on shortly. I will say a word or two about those. I start, of course, by commending Labour's amendment, for two reasons in particular. First, our approach highlights the importance of making the right choices, which I mentioned a moment ago. We will not oppose change just because the current system has served us well—we think that the renewables obligation certificates have done so—but we will only support change if it promises to serve us as well or better. That is crucial. Secondly, our amendment highlights the importance of obtaining best value for consumers and of consulting consumer interests as well as producer interests on any changes that are to be made. On that basis, I hope that the chamber will support the amendment in my name.

I accept that point on the basis of what was said yesterday. I also accept the point about consultation, which we all agree is important. Nonetheless, when wording the Parliament's final view on the matter, it is important that consultation is seen to have a central place in our priorities. That said, we have no great difficulties with any of the other propositions on the table. I remind Iain Smith that the billion pound competition for carbon capture and storage was put in place by the previous UK Government, rather than the incoming one. I also remind him that Longannet was in pole position long before Chris Huhne discovered the merits of nuclear electricity. We will be happy to support Liam McArthur's amendment because we all want to see carbon capture and storage demonstrated at Longannet and hope that it will be demonstrated to be both affordable and effective. Should our amendment not succeed, we have a marginal preference for Jim Mather's motion over Gavin Brown's amendment, simply because we do not want to lose all reference to consultation. We will vote accordingly. I agree with Iain Smith about the importance of consultation with the Parliament and I look forward to the minister's confirming in his response that the plenary session that he discussed with the secretary of state and the UK Government will involve the Parliament and give an opportunity for the kind of debate that we have had this afternoon to be reflected in the discussion between Scotland and the wider United Kingdom on how the reform should be undertaken.

Although what the member said is correct and I welcome it, does he agree that certain proposed outcomes can support and protect Scotland's influence on stimulating the renewables sector whereas others would fail to do that?

Yesterday morning, in answering the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's questions, the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change was keen to stress that the UK Government sees its electricity market reform proposals as a basis for consultation rather than firm and settled plans that are already set in stone. That reflects the commitment to the plenary session in Scotland to which Jim Mather has referred. We on this side of the chamber welcome those assurances and the indication that Chris Huhne gave last month on publishing the proposals that UK ministers want to proceed on the basis of consensus rather than diktat. However, if that consensus is to be achieved, the detail of the reform has to be right, and I agree with Jim Mather that the net effect must be as good as or better than the current approach for producers as well as consumers.  Mr Huhne conceded yesterday that the representatives of the renewables sector had not been pressing him for a feed-in tariff in place of the renewables obligation, although he claimed to have taken soundings that he said showed considerable support in the sector at large. In making inquiries this week, I have been unable to find much evidence of that undercurrent of support in the sector in Scotland. That is because the existing system of renewables obligation certificates works, and renewables developers tend to the view that if it ain't broke, don't fix it. ROCs give developers a pretty high degree of certainty about the return that they will make by generating from renewable sources over a significant period. Critics of ROCs might argue that the system errs on the side of generosity, as the National Audit Office suggested when it looked into the issue in 2005, but I have yet to hear anyone in the sector argue that ROCs are to blame for any failure to provide incentives to development. A significant amount of financial support comes from the existing system. In financial year 2008-09, Ofgem issued 6.7 million ROCs for Scottish renewable generation, at £35.76 per megawatt hour, amounting to a financial benefit to the sector of well over £200 million. That is a significant sum in subsidy, not from taxpayers but from consumers of electricity that is generated from non-renewable sources. Financial support on that scale is certainly large enough to influence investment decisions and, by the same token, changes to that system have significant implications for existing production and future investment decisions. UK ministers propose a range of new measures. For me, the key one is to replace ROCs with a feed-in tariff. It is also proposed to replace the levy that was planned by the previous UK Government to support carbon capture and storage with a feed-in tariff, and to provide price support for new nuclear power with a feed-in tariff. The UK Government's current preferred position envisages a single feed-in tariff for all three sectors, which it describes as "introducing, permanently, a level playing field for low carbon technologies in the UK's electricity market." That removes the option of retaining ROCs while introducing new mechanisms for the other sectors, in spite of the success of ROCs and the absence of demand for their replacement within the sector. There could conceivably be an alternative approach of providing three separate streams of support for the three different low-carbon sectors. It would be transparent and it would ensure either that ROCs could be retained or that a feed-in tariff could be designed with the needs of renewables in mind, tailored to maintain as high a level as possible of continuity with ROCs. Equally,  according to that logic, the UK Government's ambitions to offer financial support for carbon capture and for new nuclear electricity could be met in ways tailored to the specific needs of those sectors. That was another area on which I took the opportunity yesterday to ask Chris Huhne about his Government's intentions, specifically on the issue of different levels of support for different technologies. He confirmed that he has not ruled out a feed-in tariff system with a premium rate for early-stage technologies, providing additional subsidy for a period, which would be reduced to the general rate as the technology matured. Given that new nuclear, carbon capture and the range of renewables technologies are at different stages of development, that premium approach can offer some advantages over one size fits all. As the minister said, ROCs have evolved in the context of devolution, allowing different parts of the UK to adapt the system to address particular strengths and weaknesses in their respective renewables sectors. That has allowed Scotland, on a cross-party basis, to provide higher ROCs to stimulate new technologies in the marine environment, allowing Scottish ministers and the renewables sector to play to Scotland's strengths. It has wide support and provides a flexibility that we would not want to lose without some effective alternative mechanism being put in place that achieved the same objective.

No. I am not saying that we should move away from ROCs. I am saying that ROCs have brought significant benefits and advantages and that those benefits and advantages must be retained in whatever system takes their place. It is critical that that is got right. There is no problem in principle with moving away from either ROCs or the previously planned carbon capture levy to a feed-in tariff and there is no problem in principle with the Government recognising that new nuclear can contribute to a low-carbon economy or channelling financial support from polluting plant to low-carbon generation. The challenge for UK ministers is to make the right choices, so that the new system increases rather than undermines the successes of the renewables sector in Scotland over the past few years. That is why our amendment emphasises the importance of those choices protecting existing investments and providing adequate time for transition from ROCs to a new system. We  welcome the fact that UK ministers are consulting on the option of a premium feed-in tariff, which could protect some of the most valuable features of ROCs and could be adapted to maintain devolution of decision making in providing different levels of support to different technologies in different parts of the UK. We welcome the emphasis that has been placed by UK ministers so far on achieving broad political support and listening to stakeholders, because the wrong kind of feed-in tariff could have significant unintended consequences. ROC payments depend on output: the more you generate, the more financial support you receive. With the wrong kind of feed-in tariff, the guaranteed long-term price, which Chris Huhne described yesterday as a benefit to producers, could turn into a nightmare for consumers, because it could send wholesale prices through the roof if it overregulates the market or sets the price at the wrong level. The experience of Germany and, recently, of Spain, emphasises the importance of getting that right. The key issue is not whether to change but how to change in the right way. I hope that that is the case that Scottish ministers will put to their UK counterparts; it is certainly the case that we will discuss with our colleagues at Westminster. The same is true of a carbon floor price, which is currently envisaged as a tax to be managed by the Treasury rather than as an energy initiative to be led by DECC. We need to know early how Treasury proposals will interact with the proposals in other areas coming from DECC and how long-term certainty for investors can be maintained under those proposals. We also need to know how the consultation will operate in relation to the review of transmission charges, which is currently being undertaken by Ofgem under project transmit. Ofgem will complete its review of the evidence on charges at much the same time as ministers begin to consider the responses to the EMR consultation, so we need to be sure that the different processes will be joined up and will provide a coherent result for both producers and consumers. We also need to know what thought has been given to the potential impact on wholesale electricity prices and we need to have assurances that the interests of consumers, as well as those of producers, will be taken into account before final conclusions on a new system are reached. It is crucial that all these changes are subject to proper consultation. We agree with Jim Mather that Parliament is an important stakeholder and that Scotland's distinct interests should be taken into account. If UK ministers make the right decisions, they will have our support, but to get the decisions right they need to continue to listen.  I move amendment S3M-7693.3, to leave out from "agrees" to end and insert: "recognises the potential impact of these reforms on both existing and emerging low-carbon energy technologies; believes that it is essential that the best options are adopted for developing Scotland's low-carbon energy potential and providing best value for consumers, and urges the UK Government to ensure full and immediate consultation with the Parliament and with producer and consumer interests in Scotland on the electricity market reform proposals."

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the introduction of a so-called bed tax by local authorities is compatible with its ambition to grow tourism's contribution to the economy. (S3O-12388)

That is a helpful answer. I am sure that the minister will recognise that many city centre hotels, including family-owned small businesses in my constituency, are still struggling to cope with the doubling of their business rates in the absence of any transitional relief. Hotels in Aberdeen city centre are now faced with separate proposals for tax increment financing, a bed tax and a business improvement district—those are all being discussed by the local authority or among local businesses, although no firm proposals have yet been produced. Does he therefore recognise that there is a limit to which the margins of those businesses can be squeezed at a time when we are still recovering from economic recession?

In the cabinet secretary's discussions with COSLA or with any individual council, have compulsory redundancies or negotiated reductions in staff pay been considered?

To ask the First Minister, in light of the decision to close the Sustainable Development Commission in Scotland, where the Scottish Government will seek independent advice on energy use in the public sector. (S3F-2774)

Is the First Minister aware of last week’s announcement of the merger of the  Sustainable Development Commission Wales with Cynnal Cymru to maintain independent advice and scrutiny of Welsh Assembly Government actions? Did ministers consider taking a similar approach to SDC Scotland? If so, why did they choose instead to abolish SDC Scotland?

Does the minister accept that it adds insult to injury for all those who are affected by disruption to the rail network that it has been hard for passengers to obtain reliable information before they travel or on the platform? As he is a party to a series of rail franchises that involve paying £600 million of taxpayers' money to ScotRail and Network Rail, what has he done to establish why rail travel information has been so poor, why Network Rail has been unable to address frozen points throughout the network and why the east coast operator has not run a single one of its services to Aberdeen or Inverness not only this week but for a large part of last week?

East Coast services.

Can the cabinet secretary tell us whether the Aberdeen forensic laboratory will continue to have the bench work facility for processing DNA samples as they come in?

Mr Brownlee appreciates that it is also within the competence of the UK Government to provide support to the games industry. Can he explain to the Parliament why the incoming UK Government decided to abandon that proposal?

Creating jobs and strengthening the economy are laudable aims. Jeremy Purvis proposes that the way to achieve those aims is through wholesale restructuring of the public sector agencies that are tasked with supporting economic growth. The core of his plan is that councils and perhaps housing associations and universities should bank with a new Government agency that is partnered with a commercial bank, which would use their deposits to lend money to businesses that could not raise the finance that they need from the conventional banking sector. Mr Purvis mentioned the experience of Essex County Council, which a year ago set up a bank that was then described as the first council-run bank in more than 30 years. The purpose of Banking on Essex is to provide funding when commercial banks choose not to do so, which appears to be part of the plan that Mr Purvis has proposed today. However, at least some people in Essex hold that the model does not work. Earlier this year, the Daily Mirror quoted a local councillor who said: "After all the hype and publicity everyone hoped the fund would provide much-needed support. But it would appear that borrowing from Banking on Essex has been as hard as getting cash from other banks."

I am glad that Mr Purvis takes that view. The quote that I read out from the Daily Mirror was from a Liberal Democrat county  councillor, David Kendall, who clearly concluded that the model in Essex did not work. What Jeremy Purvis proposes is far more ambitious than simply a council-run bank. The planned regional development banks would not only recycle local taxpayers' money into businesses that were struggling with the credit crunch but take over many functions of Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, VisitScotland and Skills Development Scotland. Such banks would control a range of hugely important public policy areas from business support to tourism, skills and training. Ownership and control are critical to the proposal. Jeremy Purvis suggests that initial capitalisation of a regional development bank would be provided by local authority deposits and reserves, but that "a contract would be tendered out to a private bank for the management of the Bank's lending services." That private partner could buy up to 50 per cent ownership of the regional development bank. When bankers' popularity is perhaps at an all-time low, that proposal seems to empower bankers to take more risks with public money than they are prepared to take with their own. The proposal for private control of public assets goes further. The regional development banks' boards and management would be made up of council representatives, principals of universities and colleges and local business representatives. The business representatives would be elected by other businesses in the area. Mr Purvis suggests "that there is a presumption that the chair of the Bank is an elected business leader." The plan for creating jobs and strengthening the economy is to plough local authority deposits into a regional bank that is led by a private business leader and managed by a commercial bank and to give those people a deciding voice on public policies on business support, tourism and meeting skills needs. Public-private partnerships can work. In principle, there is nothing wrong with public and private partners agreeing to work together to increase wealth on the basis of shared and managed risk and mutual benefit. However, serious questions must be asked about the plan. My local council—Aberdeen City Council—provides a warning of what Liberal Democrat notions of public-private partnership can look like in practice if they go wrong. A month ago, Aberdeen City Council's enterprise, planning and infrastructure committee decided to press ahead with setting up a city development company to take over control of a wide range of council-owned assets and which will  be a form of public-private partnership, as a regional development bank would be. The public sector will sign over to the company for five years taxpayer-owned assets that are worth millions of pounds, such as Union Terrace gardens, and will hold only a minority of seats on the board. As far as I can ascertain, the private sector will bring no assets and no capital but will hold a majority of seats. I quote: "A private-sector representative would act as chairman and have the casting vote on any contentious issues." That sounds familiar in the context of Mr Purvis's paper. The council's inability to explain its model of public-private partnership is a warning that the devil might be in the detail of any such plans.

As I said a moment ago, the difficulty is not with the principle but whether trust is retained and people understand fully what is being proposed. When Aberdeen City Council produced its paper last month, it said that Scottish Enterprise would have a seat on the board of the proposed company. When I asked John Swinney about that, it was clear that he had had no conversations with the council on that. I now suspect that even Scottish Enterprise has not been asked about taking a seat on the board. Councillors from the administration parties decided at a meeting to write to me to explain why the proposal was not privatisation—that is their word, not mine—but I am afraid that I still await their explanation. Aberdeen City Council's administration lost what trust it had from many citizens earlier this year when it chose to disregard public opinion on city-centre regeneration. When the Liberal Democrats fight next year's election, they will no doubt be asked about Jeremy Purvis's plan for regional development banks. They will be asked about their plan to abolish Highlands and Islands Enterprise and about how they plan to promote visits to Scotland from within the British Isles, in light of their plan to abolish VisitScotland. They will also be asked about their record in power—whether at Westminster or in Aberdeen: how they have handled assets; and, in the case of Aberdeen, their proposal to abdicate their responsibility, as elected local representatives, for the government  of the local area to an unaccountable private sector quango. While it was perfectly reasonable for Mr Purvis to secure the debate, in developing his proposition he needs to be careful that he bears in mind that example and the need for trust in any public-private partnership. He must be careful that he does not make the mistakes that some of his colleagues have made elsewhere.

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the First Minister to what extent new coal-fired power generation will support the Scottish Government's plans for a low-carbon economy. (S3F-2721)

Carbon capture does, indeed, have significant potential, but does the First Minister recall that, in the national planning framework, his Government offered support for new base-load electricity generating capacity at Hunterston, but only if it was fuelled by coal, and without requiring that technology to capture all its carbon emissions should be in place first? In the context of the plans and proposals for a low-carbon economy that he has described, will he reconsider his insistence that new generating capacity at Hunterston should be fuelled by coal?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that one consequence of the volume of cars that are parking at Aberdeen royal infirmary is pressure on parking on nearby streets? Does she recognise that something has gone wrong when my constituents must pay up to £200 a year to park at their own doors while parking at the hospital site is free? Will she talk to NHS Grampian and Aberdeen City Council to try to put that right?

Parliament's role is of course to hold the Government to account. When SNP ministers first came to talk to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee three and a half years ago, they were keen to tell us that their central purpose in government would be sustainable economic growth, that they would be friendly and supportive to business and that they would champion renewable energy. Alas, in all those respects, their record has failed to match their rhetoric. From the SNP's first budget onwards, the central importance of sustainable economic growth has been undermined in the devolved areas for which John Swinney and Jim Mather are responsible. We have witnessed year-on-year real-terms reductions in the budgets and responsibilities of Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and VisitScotland—the agencies that ministers should use to support businesses and achieve sustainable economic growth. Not only that, but SNP ministers have removed powers and responsibilities from the enterprise agencies, which has reduced the agencies' ability to do their job and their input to the wider Scottish economy. Ministers have centralised decision making in Glasgow and Inverness by abolishing local enterprise companies and have failed to replace them with effective local consultative structures. This week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee took evidence at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig on the Isle of Skye from 14 witnesses from across the Highlands and Islands who represented councils, businesses, community enterprises and chambers of commerce. From every perspective, the story was the same: that the remit and activity of Highlands and Islands Enterprise has been diminished since 2007 and that HIE no longer acts as the fantastic economic driver that it and its predecessor, the Highlands and Islands Development Board, have been in the past 50 years. That is little wonder when the cut in HIE's budget has been nearly three times as great as that in Scottish Enterprise's budget. However, that is not all. Ministers have imposed on HIE a narrower version of the Scottish Enterprise business model, at the expense of what HIE used to do—the provision of integrated and locally based support for a wide range of small businesses and community enterprises across sparsely populated rural areas. That integrated  local support has gone because ministers failed to recognise or to value the difference between Scottish Enterprise and HIE. HIE's distinctive contribution has been valued in the Highlands. We heard that some 60 per cent of the people of the Western Isles now live on land that belongs to the local community. The population of the Isle of Gigha has doubled since the island came into community ownership. The revival in the culture and confidence of Gaelic speakers in the Hebrides has had direct economic benefits—in Stornoway alone, more than 200 jobs are associated with Gaelic. HIE played a key role in community land buy-outs, the Gaelic renaissance and the birth of community energy companies. The clear view of many of our witnesses was that HIE could not have played that role with the limited remit and the reduced resources that it has today. It is hard to think of a harsher verdict on SNP ministers' stewardship in the Highlands. Business representatives from throughout Scotland have come to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee in the past three years to raise a wide variety of concerns. Many of them are reflected in Labour's motion—they range from the failure to maintain the pipeline of public sector construction projects, long before any hint of global recession, to the threat to jobs and businesses of introducing an extra Scottish income tax to fund local government. We have heard time and again how, on the key policies for which it is responsible, the SNP's actions and inactions have hindered sustainable economic growth. For many businesses, the final proof that SNP ministers do not understand their needs was John Swinney's decision to provide no transitional relief for those that were hit by the highest increases in non-domestic rates following this year's revaluation.

The Labour Party will campaign for the transitional relief that businesses are looking for and we will continue to press John Swinney—who I am sorry is not in the chamber—to provide it. Mr Swinney still places stories in newspapers that lead on statistics such as "almost 60% of businesses in Scotland are paying less or no more in business rates." The actual figures are that only 44 per cent of businesses are paying less and 41 per cent are paying more. The statistic that really matters is that more than 45,000 businesses across Scotland  face an increase in their rates liability of in excess of 12.5 per cent. That is an astonishing hike for a huge number of companies. It is simply bizarre that Mr Swinney was quoted in the press this week as saying that a transitional relief scheme that capped annual rates increases would benefit only "the public sector and a relatively small number of large businesses." A figure of 45,000 is hardly a relatively small number. When Alex Salmond goes to Moray, as he will, to talk about the need for private sector resilience in the face of public spending cuts, he may want to explain why 1,617 local businesses in Moray alone face rates increases of more than 12.5 per cent. The Scottish Government cannot blame that one on Westminster. This week, Mr Salmond was enthused by the opportunity to announce a renewables infrastructure fund of £70 million over four years, perhaps to make up for the decisions by the Liberal Democrats and Tories at Westminster not to deliver on the fossil fuel levy and not to set up a green investment bank before 2013. The First Minister loves to make announcements. It is just a shame that John Swinney forgot to tell the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee where the cash-strapped enterprise agencies would find the money, given what we know from our continuing inquiry into that subject. Perhaps Mr Swinney can take the opportunity to tell us—if his colleagues will tell him—whether any of the £70 million is new money, what the enterprise agencies will not do to pay for it if it is not new money and whether all of the £70 million is still available, or whether some of it has already been committed to particular projects. Those are the kinds of things that he might have told us in advance if there had been a carefully considered and fully costed scheme. If he cannot give us those answers, the suspicion will grow that this was another example of ministers making it up as they go along, and that is no way to manage Scotland's money.

Will the member confirm that that £1 million would be deducted from the Scottish consolidated fund and that the scheme, therefore, does not meet the objectives that the committee agreed?

It was Alistair Darling who, as Labour chancellor, announced plans to establish a green investment bank earlier this year, with £2 billion in capital to support initiatives that support a low-carbon economy. The decision of the incoming Westminster Government to follow Labour's lead is welcome, in spite of the 1,000-day delay until 2013-14 in setting up the green investment bank and the reduced funding of only £1 billion. Alistair Darling also committed Labour at Westminster to a review of the fossil fuel levy, in the context of the comprehensive spending review, while at the same time making available new money to support offshore wind power, because he recognised that now is the right time to consider every available means of boosting investment in the renewable energy sector. We welcome the fact that the UK Government followed that Labour lead, too, when it promised to review the fossil fuel levy in the context of the CSR. Of course, a review of a problem is not the same as a solution. It is a pity that the UK and Scottish Governments chose to hype up the promise of a review as if it represented a whole new chapter in bilateral relations. We can now see how limited the respect agenda has proved to be. Last year, in its report on determining and delivering on Scotland's energy future, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee called on the Scottish and UK Governments "to work constructively together to see if a way can be found that will release the funds held by Ofgem in its fossil fuel levy account in a manner which will not impact on the Scottish Consolidated Fund." Nobody pretended that that would be easy, least of all Labour members, but we were clear that the impact on the Scottish Government's departmental expenditure limit was the key challenge that must be met. However, George Osborne did not directly acknowledge that last week when he laid out his proposals, and nor did Liam McArthur mention the issue in his motion or in his speech: indeed, he  avoided any explicit reference to the impact on DEL, which was disappointing. The chancellor did not say, either, whether the green investment bank would have the freedom to leverage private funds, as Labour planned, or would simply be an agency that would distribute public funds. We know one thing, which is that it will not lend a penny to anyone for another three years.

It is just a shame that the design for doing that is not in place and is not intended to be in place for several months to come. The fossil fuel levy is worth nearly £190 million. It has been gaining in value year on year. In that context, if investment of £250 million after 2013 is intended as a trade-off against taking the value of the levy out of the Scottish Government's budget, that might not be as good an offer as some members would have us believe it is.

I am afraid that I do not have time. We need to know what the chancellor's proposals mean. We need to know what the consequences will be for Scotland's devolved budget and we need to know what other trade-offs might be involved. The Secretary of State for Scotland was asked yesterday to support calls from Labour for the green investment bank to be based in Scotland. He failed to take the opportunity to do so. He said: "The decision on the location of the green investment bank has still to be taken."—[ Official Report , House of Commons , 27 October 2010; Vol 517, c 299.] He said that as if the decision was someone else's. Maybe it is, or perhaps the UK Government's decision on where the bank should be is linked in some way to whether there is agreement on the fossil fuel levy. The amendment in my name calls for the green investment bank to be set up as soon as possible and for it to be part of Scotland's financial services sector. I hope that our proposal will attract broad support in this lively debate, and I hope that all parties will find it possible to support it. I move amendment S3M-7269.1.1, to insert at end:  ", and believes that the green investment bank should be established as soon as possible and should be based in Edinburgh."

Will the member give way?

To ask the First Minister what percentage of business rate appeals was successful after the 2005 revaluation and how many the Scottish Government expects to be successful this year. (S3F-2634)

I thank the First Minister, although I did not ask him by how much the rates bill had been reduced. I asked him what percentage of businesses had been successful in appeals. Perhaps he will reply in due course to that question, of which he had notice. Does the First Minister agree with the comments of the deputy assessor at Grampian valuation joint board that the 40 per cent increase in appeals this year reflects the fact that many small businesses  no longer benefit from rates relief because of this year's revaluation? Does he acknowledge that 86,000 businesses are worse off? Will he now, finally, respond to the calls from the chambers of commerce and many small firms up and down the country for the Government to provide transitional relief for the businesses that are worst affected?

I very much welcome the minister's commitment to bring forward a timetable, but when does he expect to do that?

Does Brian Adam agree that for Remploy in Aberdeen and for many of the other sheltered workshops to which he refers, use of article 19 on public procurement offers the quickest method for this Parliament and this Government to make a difference?

We propose timetabling today. What does the minister mean by tangible milestones and markers of progress?

Supported employment provides more than 800 jobs in more than 20 businesses throughout Scotland. Those jobs are especially valuable because they give access to work to hundreds of disabled people who would otherwise be at high risk of exclusion from the labour market. Only this week, new evidence from the Royal National Institute of Blind People and Skills Development Scotland identified the barriers to employment for people who are blind or partially sighted. As John Legg, the director of RNIB Scotland pointed out, blind or partially sighted people are doing all sorts of jobs in Scotland—from schoolteacher to physiotherapist to astrophysicist. However, on average, people with such a disability are 15 times more likely to be unemployed. That is why the jobs that are provided by Blindcraft in Edinburgh, by Glencraft in Aberdeen and by Remploy in Fife and other places around the country are so important. If there were no supported employment, the alternative for many workers would be unemployment. That would be no less expensive for the public purse and far less fulfilling for the people involved and their families. I am delighted that staff from supported businesses throughout Scotland will be with us in the Parliament today. It is important that they and others should understand that supported employment is held in high regard by members of all parties. There is broad recognition of the reality that people in such businesses face. If supported workplaces were forced out of business or forced to lay off their disabled staff, many workers would not move into other jobs and would cease to be economically active. They would stop bringing home a fair day's wage for a fair day's work and they would come to feel that they were a burden,  rather than an example to other people. That is why we welcome the Scottish Government's policy of promoting public sector procurement of goods and services from supported businesses and brought this debate to urge ministers to turn words into action in the public bodies in Scotland for which they are responsible. The reality is that the future remains uncertain for supported businesses and their staff. There has been policy support from successive Governments at Holyrood and Westminster and there have been highly effective campaigns by staff and their trade unions to secure emergency intervention from ministers when intervention was needed most. However, the threat to the future of supported employment has not gone away. My first parliamentary question to Jim Mather as Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism, back in 2007, was sparked by concerns about the future of Remploy workshops in Aberdeen and elsewhere. Our most recent parliamentary debate on supported employment took place earlier this year, when my colleague Richard Baker secured a members' business debate after Glencraft in Aberdeen had gone into administration in November 2009. I am delighted that Remploy in Aberdeen and a new Glencraft are still in business. Anne McGuire MP, the then Minister for Disabled People, and Alex Salmond, the First Minister, paid heed to representations and responded positively. Bob Keiller and Duncan Skinner of Production Services Network were willing to back a Glencraft 2, and their continuing engagement is a credit to them and to the wider business community in and around Aberdeen, whose support has been critical to Glencraft's rebirth during the past six months. The threat to Glencraft prompted the previous debate on supported employment; the threat to Blindcraft here in Edinburgh provides the context for today's debate. As happened at Glencraft last year, dozens of disabled people at Blindcraft face the threat of redundancy and the prospect of unemployment. Once again, the threat comes from a city council that supported the workshop in question in previous generations but now thinks that the public subsidy of supported employment is no longer affordable. As was the case last year, the trade union representatives of the affected workers are campaigning to save jobs and are asking for our support. The Blindcraft workers deserve our support. I hope that the City of Edinburgh Council will have a change of heart—as Aberdeen City Council eventually did, after PSN, Scottish Enterprise and the business community got involved at Glencraft—and decide that funding a supported employer is money well spent. However, simply to continue a subsidy is not enough.  When I and other members expressed concerns about Remploy to Mr Mather three years ago, he made the obvious point that ministerial responsibility for the enterprise lay not with him but with ministers elsewhere. However, he was quick to accept the point that we made, which was that the Scottish ministers can make a difference by directing public procurement policy in a way that is helpful to supported employment providers. Disabled workers and their unions are not looking for handouts from Governments, councils or anyone else. What they want is the opportunity to do a fair day's work for a fair day's pay and to go home with the satisfaction of knowing that they have earned every penny and made a useful contribution to the wider community. That is what this debate is all about. Ministers responded positively on the issue of public procurement. Jim Mather was good enough to invite me to attend one of the stakeholders meetings that were set up to take the issue forward. I welcomed his invitation. The means of promoting supported employment are ready to hand. Under article 19 of European Union directive 2004/18/EC, on the co-ordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts, public supply contracts and public service contracts, "Member States may reserve the right to participate in public contract award procedures to sheltered workshops or provide for such contracts to be performed in the context of sheltered employment programmes". All that is required to reserve a contract is that most of the employees concerned are disabled people who "by reason of the nature or the seriousness of their disabilities, cannot carry on occupations under normal conditions", and that contracts of significant size should be open to tenders from supported employment providers throughout the EU.

It needs to look like delivery in a measured period. Ministers can set a timetable that gives an indication of their commitment. It is for ministers to say what bodies that are under their direct authority can achieve, but I hope that we are talking about months rather than years. All of article 19 of the public procurement directive was given legal force by the previous Scottish Executive, under the Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2006. A policy position whereby public bodies are urged to reserve  contracts to supported employment providers was therefore a straightforward one for the current Scottish Government to take, and it built on decisions that had already been taken in Scotland, at Westminster and in Brussels. Ministers adopted the position, as we acknowledge in the motion. In a response to my colleague John Park in March this year, John Swinney confirmed what he had said in a written answer to a parliamentary question: "It is Scottish Government policy that every public body should aim to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 24 April 2009; S3W-22484.]  The policy is supported by parties across the Parliament. The issue is not whether the policy is right but whether it is producing results, and the evidence so far is that results are few and far between. Last week, we followed up parliamentary questions by asking the Scottish Parliament information centre whether any public body in Scotland had reserved a contract under article 19 in the three years since the Scottish ministers issued the guidance note, "Social Issues in Public Procurement". It is fair to say that SPICe found it difficult to get a clear and consistent answer from civil servants to that straightforward question. Perhaps the minister will say on the record today whether the award of a contract to Capability Scotland by Marine Scotland followed the reservation of the contract under article 19. Whatever the minister says about that, the number of reserved contracts is either none or one. That means that all, or all but one, of the public bodies for which ministers are responsible have yet to deliver on the policy objective that they have been set by awarding at least one contract to a supported factory or business. Public bodies have been told that they should use article 19. John Swinney has told them, and Jim Mather has told them. Indeed, in his foreword to the Scottish procurement directorate's new publication, "Supported Businesses in Scotland: Creating value in a socially responsible way", Mr Mather urged public bodies not to settle for just one contract per agency but to "make the maximum possible use of reserved contracts for supported factories and businesses". It is good to encourage businesses and it was good to produce a list of supported businesses, to point public bodies in the right direction. It is also good to hold events that get all the relevant people into a room at one time to discuss the subject—I am sure that Jim Mather has facilitated such events. However, there comes a time when talking is not enough and things must start to happen.  When Iain Gray visited Blindcraft in Glasgow a few months ago he called on the Scottish Government to appoint a dedicated champion for disabled workers. We reiterate that call today. We want there to be someone whose job is to turn encouragement into action and get contracts reserved and orders placed. We go further today because we believe that the need for action is all the more urgent. We would like the Scottish Government not only to appoint a disabled workers champion but to set a timetable for every public body for which it is responsible to reserve at least one contract under article 19 of the EU public procurement directive and regulation 7 of the Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2006. If ministers agree today to set a timetable, we believe that the logjam will be broken. An open-ended aspiration is easy to postpone. An objective that must be achieved by a set date is a different matter, and there is nothing like a ministerial ultimatum to concentrate a chief executive's mind. The Government should set a challenging timetable, and results will follow. Some very imaginative and creative things are happening in the supported employment sector. For example, Remploy in Aberdeen, in my constituency, has moved from a traditional workshop model to become a hub for social enterprises—some on and some off the existing factory site. Remploy in Leven has developed a specialism in offshore and marine clothing and equipment. Other supported employers have made specialist provision in relation to Ministry of Defence requirements and other specialist areas. Glencraft and other bodies of that type have been doing a lot of work to win contracts from the private sector—a move that is essential to the mixed economy of successful supported employment. Significantly, those agencies are doing a lot of work to enable disabled workers to move from supported to mainstream employment when they are able to do so. That is right and proper and is the best outcome for many of those disabled workers. It is important to recognise that supported employment will be required for as long as disabled people want to work, as long as the wider community believes that going to work is a good thing for disabled people to do, and as long as some of those disabled people do not have the skills or physical ability to take part in mainstream employment. If we want a sustainable future for supported employment providers, we cannot rely only on short-term fixes or simple public subsidy. Mainstreaming, where it is possible, will never be able to meet demand. Public procurement is  essential to the delivery of some certainty to the sector in the longer term. If ministers are not able to turn words into action on public procurement, we will again see crises like the crisis at Glencraft last year and the crisis at Blindcraft in Edinburgh this year, with disabled workers fearing for their personal futures and the sector itself in peril. However, if ministers choose to move to the next stage and set a demanding timetable, they can make a difference. Disabled workers want public bodies to reserve contracts under article 19 sooner rather than later. For disabled workers such as those at Blindcraft in Edinburgh, that progress must be made without delay. I move, That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's policy that every public body should aim to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business, as set out in its Social Issues in Public Procurement guidance document in October 2007 and reiterated as part of the Scottish Sustainable Procurement Action Plan in October 2009; welcomes this approach as the most effective means of public policy support for the sector; regrets the lack of evidence that this policy has been effectively pursued over the last three years, and calls on the Scottish Government to set a timetable for every public body in Scotland for which it is responsible to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business.

I am interested in the member's comment. Why does he think that the Lewis wind farm could not have been consented?

I congratulate Maureen Watt on securing the debate and highlighting the work of the offshore valuation group, and am delighted that there is cross-party enthusiasm for a project that was, of course, given the green light by Ed Miliband as Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change. There is also cross-party enthusiasm for a European supergrid and offshore renewables in general. However, it is easy to talk a good game on renewable energy; it is much harder to deliver. It is more than seven years since I gave consent as the responsible minister for Scotland's first offshore wind farm at Robin Rigg in the Solway Firth, and it is four years since ministers at Westminster gave the green light to wind power generation from the Beatrice oil field in the Moray Firth. Since then, important steps forward have  been taken in recognising the potential future contribution of offshore wind, but there are still vital decisions to be made. The next 10 years will be critical in realising that potential. The world's biggest offshore wind farm was officially opened the other day, but it is not in Scottish waters—it is off the coast of Kent. Just because we have the best natural resources, it does not automatically follow that we will capture the economic benefits that those resources can bring. To do that, we have to recognise and be honest about the challenges in funding the necessary infrastructure and delivering the necessary consents. Anyone who is tempted to believe that that will be easy needs to reflect for a moment on the record on onshore wind. Since the current Scottish Government took office, ministers have made decisions on 16 new onshore wind farm applications. They have approved 11 of them, with a combined potential output of 1,676MW, and rejected five, with a combined potential output of 1,153MW. That is a 60:40 ratio. In other words, ministers have approved 60 per cent, or three out of every five, potential megawatts of new renewable energy from new onshore wind farms since May 2007. Hence the need for realism as well as ambition in relation to offshore wind. Scotland can compete, but it can compete for offshore investment only if the strategic environmental assessment for Scottish waters supports wind power development as much as it is supported elsewhere in these islands, and if the consenting authority for Scotland's marine environment is able to deliver an approval rate for projects that is better than 60 per cent. We need to be realistic about a European supergrid. Norway's grid company, Statnett, is very interested in bridging the North Sea in order to export Norway's surplus hydro power to these islands. Such an interconnector might hinge on a mid-sea supernode in the central North Sea that gathers demand from oil platforms and supply from offshore wind farms. That would certainly be good news for Aberdeen, as the headquarters of offshore energy operations on the UK continental shelf. The offshore valuation group supports a Norway-Great Britain link, as the European Wind Energy Association said last year that it does, but in its report it highlighted the importance of doing other things first and anticipated that landfall for such a link would be in England rather than in Scotland. The table that shows the initial supergrid layout, which is on page 72 of the report, makes clear that the first priority is to link all parts of these islands and to connect Great Britain to Norway and to Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands via a mid-sea supernode in the next 20 years. A  Scotland-Norway direct interconnector is envisaged only in the 2030s. I hope that the Scottish Government will be an enthusiast for the North Sea supergrid, and that it will have cross-party support. The first part of achieving the supergrid should be development of our interconnectors within these islands and then from Britain to continental Europe via the central North Sea. Politics is about priorities, and those should be our shared priorities as we go forward.

The cabinet secretary said that he expected the contract to be awarded in around 2011. Can he be more specific?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in diverting waste from landfill in the north-east. (S3O-11503)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that he has had to suspend the provisions that would have resulted in fines on Aberdeen City Council for failing to meet its diversion targets? Will he confirm that he does not intend to impose the fines retrospectively? Will he say what steps he has taken, as the responsible minister, to ensure that the council does not again find itself in the position of failing to meet its targets on diversion of waste from landfill?

I strongly suspect that we would not have ruled out consideration of the social and economic benefits of the proposal before they had been properly considered, on the basis of the Natura designation, as the minister decided to do. I do not want to debate every application. I simply want to say that the Government must show willingness to deliver consents in practice, to go along with its warm words. It is essential that we take opportunities to join up our existing offshore energy sectors with the new ones that are developing. The marine environment is a tough place to grow the low-carbon economy, and the further we go from shore the tougher it will be. Labour's amendment highlights the importance of skills. There is an opportunity to use existing training bodies, such as the oil and gas academy—OPITO—and the expertise of the offshore division of the Health and Safety Executive, to ensure that people who go to work in offshore wind or marine energy industries are protected in the way that offshore oil workers have been protected since the tragedy on Piper Alpha. The grid is the other issue that most urgently needs to be addressed. Renewables Scotland highlighted the matter this morning when it published research that identifies potential generation and potential barriers to success. As Sarah Boyack said, we welcome Ofgem's announcement that it intends to review the transmission charging regime in the context of enabling additional grid and meeting climate change targets. However, we recognise that the way in which consumers pay for grid upgrading through the current charging regime is not the one-way street that the regime's critics sometimes suggest it is. Specific elements of the current regime protect Scottish consumers and spread the cost of supply across the whole of Great Britain's customer base. For example, there is the hydro benefit replacement scheme, which has been in place for six years. Such elements of advantage to Scottish consumers must not be lost. Ofgem's project transmit will be wide ranging and will consider transmission and charging regimes as a whole, which is particularly welcome. I urge ministers to approach the review as advocates and champions of consumers as well as producers of electricity. We must acknowledge that if there are to be real cuts in carbon emissions from transport, we might need more development of electricity to provide the power for the electric cars that we want. As Cathy Peattie said, a new national grid of  charging points to supply power to consumers will be essential for carbon reduction and in relation to the economic and employment opportunities that the approach can provide. In planning our future energy mix, ministers must not lose touch with the realities of our current power mix and how we can get from here to where we want to be. That is not just about ever-increasing amounts of renewable energy, welcome though that will be. Governments must also seek a diverse and balanced portfolio of energy sources. That is currently missing from the Scottish Government's plans. We all recognise the potential of carbon capture and storage, but we need to acknowledge that the technology has not yet been proved at scale in the commercial context. If it is proved, we certainly want Scotland to be in a position to take the lead. However, we must acknowledge that at this stage in the development of CCS technology it is a mistake to rule out nuclear power, even if the prospect of new nuclear developments in Scotland are currently remote, as Jackson Carlaw said. Iberdrola's plans for major investment in low-carbon energy in Scotland depend on Longannet succeeding in the UK competition for CCS. That is not a given; much will depend on the success of the first demonstration project at scale. Investment is at the heart of many issues that have been raised in the debate. There is broad agreement that investment in ports and infrastructure will require public funding. We heard that the UK Government will review the fossil fuel levy. It would be useful to hear from Scottish ministers how they will proceed if the review does not produce the additional funding for which they hope. Will ports investment be a priority, with or without the additional funding? Investment will be essential if we are to capture the surplus heat that is produced in power generation, whether it is from existing or new power technologies. I, too, look forward to the Scottish Government's energy efficiency action plan, and I will watch for the arrival of autumn, when the plan will apparently appear. Perhaps autumn will indeed start tomorrow, when the first leaf falls. In a written answer to me this week, Mr Mather told me that the plan would include material on district heating, highlighting the opportunities that exist. I hope that he will take the opportunity to build on the example of combined heat and power in Aberdeen—an example that has been followed by central Government in Westminster but not here in the past three years. On buildings and energy efficiency, I seek clarification on one specific point. New building standards come into effect on 1 October. Have the accredited construction details—ACDs—for energy been published yet, as the minister  appeared to suggest, and if so will he tell us when they were published? Achieving a low-carbon economy is a work in progress, and the pace of progress in uneven. This debate has highlighted some of the things that still need to be done. I believe that the Scottish Government needs to do more, and more quickly, if all the ambitious targets are to be met, and we all need to recognise that hard choices will need to be made along the road.

It is clear that all that Mr Gibson describes is welcome, but does he accept that most of it concerns projections, which are a long way short of becoming even planning applications? We all know that the process of obtaining consent poses the real challenge.

Does Mr FitzPatrick understand that the issue is not just about the loss of jobs in the laboratories in Aberdeen and Edinburgh, but about the loss of service to the wider communities in the cities that currently benefit from the service being on their doorstep?

It is now some 40 months since the Scottish Government took office, and some 33 months since staff in the forensic and fingerprint services in my constituency were told that the SPSA had launched a review that would result in advice to  ministers to close the Aberdeen forensic laboratory. That review is, one way or another, still going on. The cabinet secretary will perhaps recognise that this long-running saga will, for those scientists, be the defining feature of his term in office. There have been times when Mr MacAskill has recognised the anger and dismay that are felt by those staff and by many other people who have an interest in the quality of forensic services in the north of Scotland. The cabinet secretary met MSPs on a cross-party basis early in 2008. He responded to the concerns that we raised, and he told the Parliament in May 2008 that he had asked the SPSA to engage in fresh consultation, which he promised would be "full, open, transparent and meaningful."— [Official Report, 8 May 2008; c 8447.]

Indeed. I think that members will all return to that point during today's debate, because the second consultation process has fared no better than the first. When I brought a member's debate on the subject to the chamber on 8 January 2009, there was broad agreement from all parties that the new consultation document amounted to little more than a more polished package that still proposed the closure of the Aberdeen laboratory. The Government accepted that the consultation had not been good enough and that there was a need for another look. The SPSA wrote to MSPs and other stakeholders 18 months ago to present a new set of propositions on which it intended to consult. That third exercise resulted in the publication in July this year of the options paper that we are debating today. Options three and four in that paper pose a threat to the jobs of those who work in the Aberdeen forensic lab that is just as real as it was at the initial staff meeting in December 2007. The staff union Unison states: "Close reading of the document suggests that Option Four would appear to be the preferred option of SPSA." Forensic scientists are, of course, experts in the close reading of evidence, so that interpretation should be taken seriously. Of course, option four would not result in the outright closure of the Aberdeen and Edinburgh laboratories as soon as the minister made his  decision. Instead, the laboratories would be run down to the point where they could no longer do their job. One example that I might expand on is the chemistry that is required to achieve rapid drugs analysis to secure the custody and eventual conviction of the drug dealers who ply their trade in my constituency and elsewhere. The Aberdeen lab can currently turn round large numbers of such cases because its chemists have the necessary equipment to identify new substances or complex compounds in less than six hours. Because they are on the spot, they can deliver results that can secure the necessary outcomes. Option four would remove most of those staff from Aberdeen and would leave perhaps a single forensic chemist, who would supposedly deliver urgent drugs analysis when required. However, from the briefing that we have heard, the remaining chemist at the Aberdeen laboratory would be expected to do that without the state-of-the-art equipment that is currently used to carry out much of that drugs analysis, which would be relocated away from the city along with most of the staff. The benefits of a comprehensive local service would be lost and only a token presence would remain. Much was said before last week's SPSA board meeting about the importance of openness and transparency. In May 2008, Mr MacAskill told us that that was what he wanted of the consultation process; the new convener of the SPSA said much the same in April 2009. Instead, as we know, the board made a decision behind closed doors and, according to what has been said today, has still not managed to convey its views to the cabinet secretary. Given the detailed treatment of option four in the document, staff are rightly concerned that the drive to close Aberdeen and Edinburgh remains, even though it might have taken a new form. The fear is that, instead of closure at Christmas, the cabinet secretary will be asked to endorse closure in two stages. He might even be invited to proclaim that by supporting option four he has actually saved, rather than closed, two of Scotland's four forensic laboratories. I hope that he will resist that temptation. For almost three years, forensic scientists in my constituency have lived with profound uncertainty about the Government's intentions. Senior staff have gone and potential new recruits have looked elsewhere. Perhaps before the cabinet secretary comes to his closing speech today—he should pay attention to this point—he can ask officials to do what they have not yet done: pick up the phone and have a conversation with the SPSA so that he can at least tell the staff who are here today which recommendation he will consider in the next few weeks.

Mr MacAskill is correct that he requires to read the report in full. Nonetheless, he also has a duty to be accountable to the Parliament and to come to the Parliament properly briefed for a debate of which he has had proper notice. I am disappointed that he does not see that as equally part of his duty. If he does not see fit to tell us in his closing speech which of the recommendations in the options paper will go forward, my constituents will face a fourth Christmas not knowing what the Scottish ministers intend to do. That will give no comfort to them and bring no benefit to the communities that they serve.

Does the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the proposals for investment in the Aberdeen laboratory that were in place three years ago were postponed because of the consultation process that began in December 2007, and that those plans have never been put back in place?

Does the minister agree that developing wind power further offshore and wave power in the north-east Atlantic requires specific offshore training and safety standards for those who work in such hostile environments? If so, will he say what discussions he plans to have with the oil and gas academy—OPITO—and the offshore division of the Health and Safety Executive on the application of its expertise to offshore renewable energy?

I congratulate Ross Finnie on securing the debate. Hunterston is, of course, no stranger to either base-load power generation or large-scale imports of coal. What is new is the proposal that a coal-burning plant should, in effect, take the place of an existing nuclear power station, with the substantial net increase in greenhouse gas emissions that that change of generation technology at Hunterston implies. The proposal can be traced back to decisions that were made by the current Scottish Government to specify coal as the primary fuel for a new power station at Hunterston in the updated version of the national planning framework that was published last year. At the time, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee called for the national development of a new power station at Hunterston to be non-technology specific, but ministers chose not to pay heed to that call. It follows that responsibility for a coal-fired power station proposal coming forward rests squarely with ministers, and they will also be responsible if it turns out that the specific application fails to receive adequate scrutiny as a result of its inclusion in national planning framework 2. That remains to be seen, of course. The minister has made it clear that he would not wish to comment on the merits of the application, but it would be helpful if he could indicate—I saw him responding to the comment that I made a moment ago—what level of scrutiny he believes will be appropriate for the application, in the context of the inclusion of a clean coal-fired power station at Hunterston in the national planning framework.

I welcome that commitment. It is clear that we will want to judge that as the application progresses. The wider issue of carbon capture has already been raised. When Ayrshire Power Ltd brought forward the proposal, it identified its ambition to capture the whole carbon output of the plant in due course. However, as Ross Finnie said, it has also made it clear that it is not in a position to do that at the moment. Timing is crucial. It has been said that the current Government at Westminster has inherited plans for a competition to demonstrate carbon capture and storage at scale. I hope that it will deliver on that and that Longannet will be the host. It has also been said that carbon capture and storage technology is far from proven at commercial scale. It might cost £1 billion of taxpayers' money to achieve the necessary levels of capture and to transport and store the carbon that has been produced. The demonstration is not scheduled to deliver a result until 2014. Even when it does, there will be little appetite in the industry in general for spending shareholders' money until carbon capture and storage has been shown to operate successfully in a commercial environment. The good news is that carbon capture and storage facilities at an existing power station will begin to reduce carbon emissions as soon as they are operational, whereas building a new power station with partial CCS will have the opposite effect. That does not mean that we should be against carbon capture and storage at new power stations for ever more. If the technology is proven at scale and the sums can be made to add up, there is the potential for CCS at new-build plants to make a real contribution at some point in the future. That point is not now—indeed, it might be quite a few years away—but we should not rule that out. Instead, the Scottish Government should back up its warm words about CCS with action. I will give an example. The minister will know that Scottish Power has proposals for replacing the coal-fired power station at Cockenzie with a modern gas-turbine power station, and that there is to be a public local inquiry on that proposition. If we are serious about reducing carbon emissions while retaining jobs and investment in Scotland, ministers might want to consider how to expedite that public local inquiry and the replacement of existing fossil-fuel generating plants in general, rather than encourage the building of new carbon-emitting power stations. Scotland will need a diverse energy mix, and we should not rule out any low-carbon technologies that can cut emissions while maintaining production and jobs. However, new coal-fired power stations that  produce large quantities of unabated carbon emissions are not part of that low-carbon future.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

That is kind of the cabinet secretary; I acknowledge that most of my enjoyment of the debate has been via the television screen, rather than in person. I note the point that the cabinet secretary is making. Does he recognise that, in the past three years, local government budgets have been set in precisely the way that he describes, by him?

The cabinet secretary told me last month that there is a strong case for considering change at this time. Does Mr MacAskill recognise that the  modernisation of the forensic services that are provided from the existing sites, including Aberdeen and Edinburgh, is a positive proposal for change, or does he share the view of some of his SNP back-bench colleagues that only closures will do?

Is the First Minister aware that Aberdeen City Council is taking itself to court over a proposal to locate a homeless hostel in a sheltered housing complex and that this week it has served court papers on every objector to its proposal, including my constituents Master Evan Thomson, aged 11, and Miss Shana-Michelle Cunningham, aged 8? Will he pick up the phone and explain gently to the leader and deputy leader of Aberdeen City Council that they should not take children to court for standing up for their grandmothers? Will he urge them to drop the case now?

Is the minister aware of the suggestion from the leader of Aberdeen City Council that funds from the fossil fuel levy might be used for building roads? Is such expenditure permissible under statute, or is the suggestion simply a non-starter?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. The fundamental issue is whether the Scottish Government intervened as it did on the basis of a proper understanding of the financial position of The Gathering 2009 Ltd, and whether in doing so it acted effectively to protect the interests of taxpayers and creditors. The Auditor General has raised a range of issues about accountability for spending public money and the need for due diligence, which Mr Russell has acknowledged but not yet fully addressed. I will give him the opportunity to respond to some of those points. For example, can he tell us why he did not discuss with the project's other public sector funders the company's attempt to secure an emergency Government loan as long ago as April 2009? Why did he not act at that stage to establish what the financial health of the company really was, when he was already aware of the cash-flow issues that the company was facing, as they had been brought to his attention by it? How many private companies have received Scottish Government funding under section 23 of the National Heritage (Scotland) Act 1985 and how many of them have subsequently gone out of business? Mr Russell said that he sees no need to apologise to anybody. Does he realise that that will be disappointing to the many creditors in this city and throughout Scotland who were kept in the dark over several months about the fact that the company that owed them money was in no position to pay its debts and the Scottish Government knew it? Does he not understand that an apology would have been required whatever the outcome of the Auditor General's inquiry, because the Scottish Government's efforts did not protect either the taxpayer or the interests of creditors? The Government set itself an objective, as Mr Russell has laid out, of saving the company, and it failed. The Scottish Government needs to learn the lessons of this failure, as Mr Russell said, but he needs to say sorry, too.

Does Mr Mather accept that the issue for hotels in my constituency and, I suspect, throughout the country, is not the revaluation process or the appeals process but the absence of transitional relief—a decision that his Government took without consulting business first?

The Labour amendment highlights a number of matters, but I will draw attention to two in particular in my closing speech. One is the need for openness and transparency from the Government and its agencies in dealing with the tourism sector and the issues that affect it. The second is the need for the Scottish Government to address the competitive disadvantage that Scottish tourism businesses will face. The decisions on VAT clearly affect tourism businesses throughout the UK. However, the decisions on transitional relief are a specifically Scottish problem. The Conservative-Liberal Administration at Westminster has inherited from Labour a transitional relief scheme that caps at 12.5 per cent the impact of rates revaluation on any business in any one year. It is essential that the Scottish Government recognise that two additional tax burdens have been imposed on tourism businesses in Scotland in the past couple of months and that those will have an impact that it is the Government's responsibility to seek to address. Ministers have argued, as Jim Mather did again today, that they cannot afford to provide transitional relief to hotels that have been hit hard  by rates revaluation. Gavin Brown said that it was incumbent on those who look for transitional relief to suggest how that might be implemented.

No, I do not accept that. The fundamental problem is that ministers are not listening. John Swinney met Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce on 23 May. The chamber of commerce explained to him the calculations that it had made and why it had come to the view that his were flawed. He went away and examined those calculations and his officials indicated by telephone to the chamber of commerce that, fundamentally, it had got them right. However, when he wrote back to it this week, he failed to take that on board. The chamber of commerce also put to John Swinney a specific proposal for how a transitional relief scheme might be organised. He wrote back saying that he was not prepared to support that proposal and explained the reasons why he had come to that view. The chamber of commerce's disappointment at the rejection of that option was, I think, less than its disappointment that he did not provide an alternative option or even suggest that he was prepared to consider alternative options. This is not a zero-sum game. As Sarah Boyack said, John Swinney indicated last month in answer to a parliamentary question that there was a £60 million increase in the revenue that is coming to the Scottish Government as a result of rates revaluation.

If the chamber of commerce is correct, the £60 million—which John Swinney concedes as additional Government revenue from rates revaluation, even if Stewart Stevenson does not—may be an underestimate. We have seen figures from various places such as the small town of Ballater in Mike Rumbles's constituency, which was mentioned in the debate. In Ballater, three quarters of the selected small businesses that were assessed and which previously qualified for small business rates relief no longer qualify because revaluation has put them over the threshold. Those facts raise fundamental questions for those businesses, but they also affect the amount of money that is available to the Government. I hope that, when Mr Swinney meets the delegation from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce on Monday, he takes on board what we have said to him before and repeat today. These are not minor issues and we are not making a mountain out of a molehill; they are significant issues for many businesses.  There is no single solution, but there is a number of potential solutions if ministers are prepared to accept that they may have miscalculated and that their model may be wrong. They have certainly already accepted that they have £60 million that they did not have last year. Let them reconsider what else might be available to them. Even if they are not prepared to follow the Labour model that was established in England of a 12.5 per cent annual cap, what else can they do to limit the impact on businesses? It is open to them to consider that, and I hope that they will do so in a positive spirit on Monday.

Will the member take an intervention?

A common theme to many of the big issues that  have been raised in this debate is the need for greater transparency in the Scottish Government's approach to many issues that affect the sector. The shocking treatment of a loyal and successful public servant has already, rightly, been raised in the chamber and at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. The Government and the recently appointed chairman of VisitScotland still have many questions to answer on that topic. The final questions that committee members asked of Philip Riddle when he was chief executive of VisitScotland were about another topic that is of huge concern to many people in the tourism sector: the Scottish Government's decision to provide no transitional relief to hotels that have been hit by huge increases in business rates. Mr Riddle told the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on 28 April that John Swinney had not consulted VisitScotland before making his decision to scrap transitional relief. He said that VisitScotland had been given the opportunity to provide feedback after the event and that he had taken the opportunity to make representations through Mr Mather. Philip Riddle has not had the opportunity to tell us the outcome of the representations that he made. The chairman of VisitScotland, who gave evidence to the committee last week, did not acknowledge that such representations had been made when Marilyn Livingstone asked him about business rates. Perhaps the minister will tell us about the evidence that VisitScotland presented to him when it was still led by someone who was willing and able to reflect the concerns of the overwhelming majority of businesses in the hospitality sector. It is pretty clear that ministers did not engage in consultation of any form with representatives of Scottish business, any more than they did with Government agencies such as VisitScotland. The price of ministers' secret decision to scrap transitional relief is being paid by businesses throughout Scotland. John Swinney has subsequently met representatives of chambers of commerce—as I understand it, from Dundee and Edinburgh, as well as Aberdeen—and I understand that he will meet a delegation from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce on Monday 28 June. However, he has made no concessions that would address the concerns that have been expressed. The view of the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce delegation, which was made public this week, is that "the Minister has either not understood or not accepted the weight of evidence" that it presented.  I remind Mr Mather of what the delegation said to Mr Swinney. It told him that the rates paid this year by businesses in Aberdeen city and Aberdeenshire have increased by more than £30 million, which represents a 15 per cent increase in income to the Scottish Government from businesses in that region alone. Research by Ryden into the liability of 189 hotels and guest houses in the north-east shows a 33 per cent increase in rates payable—that is the increase in rates, not valuations. Analysis by Aberdeen City and Shire Hotels Association shows that its members face an increase of more than 40 per cent in rates payable. As the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce told John Swinney again this week, the association's view is that "This will undoubtedly lead to some businesses closing or a reduction in the levels of service through having to reduce staffing levels in order to pay the additional rates." Those are not idle words, and this is not simply a debating point. We are talking about real jobs and businesses in the tourism sector. I know that ministers mean it when they say that they want the sector to grow. It might well be, as Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce thinks, that ministers have miscalculated the overall increase in income to the Government from the increase in business rates. Ministers might well have underestimated the number of small firms that would cease to qualify for small business rates relief, through the revaluation of their premises taking them above the threshold, as Iain Gray said to the First Minister a couple of weeks ago. If ministers have miscalculated in that way, there might be room for them to introduce some degree of transitional relief—if they are willing to look again at the evidence and take the right decision. That is what tourism businesses are asking ministers to do. That is no doubt what Philip Riddle put to Jim Mather and it is no doubt what the Scottish Chambers of Commerce will put to John Swinney next week. It is the single most important thing that ministers can do to address the competitive disadvantage that Scottish tourism faces. I hope that ministers will listen to the representations and act accordingly. I move amendment S3M-6635.2, to insert at end: "; regrets that the combination of increased business rates and increased VAT will put Scotland's tourism industry at a competitive disadvantage, and believes therefore that there is even greater need for the Scottish Government to adopt an approach based on greater transparency and accountability, learning the lessons of the Auditor General's report on the Gathering as well as other recent events, and to give renewed emphasis to training and skills".

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the funding of infrastructure requirements associated with renewable energy may well meet those criteria, even though they are not directly involved in the generation of electricity? If that is the case, how will the cabinet secretary undertake consultation on the use of any such funds with those who have an interest in ensuring that the right infrastructure is in place throughout Scotland?

The minister will recognise the importance of managing demand in order to reduce costs and carbon emissions in residential homes, as well as of promoting microgeneration. Will ministers consider supporting measures to improve the efficiency of boilers and heating systems in properties of that kind?

To ask the First Minister when he last spoke to the chairman of VisitScotland and what matters were discussed. (S3F-2468)

Does the First Minister acknowledge the statutory duties of the chief executive, as VisitScotland's accountable officer, to be responsible for the proper use of public funds? Does he believe that Scottish ministers have been kept informed of any changes that are likely to impact on the strategic direction of VisitScotland, as required by the agency's management status? Will he tell us who, today, is VisitScotland's accountable officer?

I thank the minister for early sight of his statement. What is at issue is the reputation of VisitScotland and whether it is as free from political interference by ministers as Mr Mather asserts. He is making a statement today on behalf of the Government—in other words, on behalf of all ministers. As the minister responsible for tourism, did he—or any other ministers—have discussions with the chairman of VisitScotland about the future of the chief executive prior to the meeting of the VisitScotland board in Inverness on 14 May? Did any Scottish Government special advisor have such a meeting or discussion with Dr Cantlay or with any other member of the board on this matter prior to the board meeting of 14 May? Did Mr Mather meet Dr Cantlay at any point between that date and the press reports of Sunday 30 May? The First Minister told us earlier today that he had not spoken to the chairman of VisitScotland about the matter in the past few days. For the avoidance of doubt, can the minister confirm whether the First Minister talked to Mike Cantlay at all at the weekend? Did he speak to him at all on Sunday 30 May? Did John Swinney, who is sitting beside the minister, have such a conversation with Dr Cantlay the weekend just past? Did Mr Mather have such a conversation himself? Has the tourism minister at any point in the process discussed the issues with the long-serving chief executive of VisitScotland, whose achievements he has just outlined and whose future now appears to be in jeopardy?

Has the First Minister spoken to the chairman of VisitScotland in the past few days about the leadership provided by the chief executive of VisitScotland, and, if so, what did he say?

Given what the member has said, he will recognise that Scotland's devolved Government has the power to develop a strategy for financial services. Does he agree with the committee's view that that should be updated?

The inquiry was a fascinating one. We heard a good deal of evidence on the sheer diversity of financial services companies that are thriving in Scotland today, but at the heart of our report lies a single issue: the huge power and influence of the two major Scottish banks and the risks that we all faced as they careered towards their own destruction. The forms of self-destruction were different but the lust for growth at all costs and the failure to recognise risk were common to both banks. The Royal Bank of Scotland grew and grew until it nearly burst; Halifax Bank of Scotland lent and lent until its coffers were nearly empty. Neither was able to save itself when events elsewhere exposed them to market scrutiny. At the time of the rescue of HBOS by UK Government intervention and the merger with Lloyds TSB, the First Minister said that this was  "a situation where a bank can be forced into a merger by basically a bunch of short-selling spivs and speculators in the financial markets". Short-sighted and reckless behaviour certainly led both HBOS and RBS into a place from which only billions of pounds of taxpayers' money could save them, but that behaviour came first of all from within the banks themselves. We did not find in our inquiry that there was a peculiarly Scottish financial crisis or that regulatory failures were different in kind in relation to Scotland-based rather than London-based financial institutions. What we found was that the Scottish economy was peculiarly vulnerable to a collapse in confidence in global financial markets because we happened to have a duopoly in our domestic market of two of the worst offenders in a sector in which reckless executives, unchallenged by ineffective non-executives, were the rule and not the exception.

First and foremost there should be clarity of understanding of the different roles. Of course, circumstances have changed since we conducted our inquiry, and we will listen with great interest to what Conservative and Liberal Democrat ministers propose for the future structure of the regulatory regime. We are concerned, for example, by their decision to drop Labour plans for a small business credit adjudicator, and we will watch to see what they suggest in its place and what the additional powers that they have given the Bank of England will mean for the regulation of the sector. Of course, although the minister is right to say that many of the regulatory functions lie elsewhere, many lie here too. Our report concluded that the UK Government's intervention saved the Scotland-based banks, and that saving those banks in turn saved the economy from an incalculably larger economic crisis. The effect on the Scottish economy and society of the failure of either or both of the banks would have been enormous and would have resulted in, among other things, massive and widespread redundancies throughout Scotland. A reform agenda has been taken forward in relation to what were known as the tripartite authorities, and we shall see how that develops in the hands of the new Government. However, there are also issues for the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament because there are still specific concerns about the economy of Scotland itself. At the centre is the duopoly that continues to dominate the Scottish banking sector. The Royal Bank of Scotland and Lloyds Banking Group, as it  is now known, are in much safer hands and in much better shape than was the case two years ago, but their position in the economy remains significant. As we heard from the convener, the committee formally divided on only one issue of substance in preparing the report: our recommendation that Scottish ministers should ask the OFT to conduct a formal investigation into competition and banking in Scotland in relation to personal current accounts, home loans and business banking. SNP members on the committee dissented from the majority view, and the Scottish Government's response, which the committee considered at its meeting this morning, failed to address the recommendation directly. In his response to interventions today, Mr Mather appeared to give an undertaking, which I hope he will spell out in his closing speech. Clearly, a formal approach from the Scottish Government would be influential with the OFT. It is clear from what OFT representatives said at the Scotland's Futures Forum meeting today that it currently has no intention of undertaking an investigation into the Scottish market as such, so a formal approach is something that we want. This is not a minor matter. The collapse of HBOS was avoided by the British Government's decision to allow the acquisition of the company by Lloyds TSB and to set aside the usual competition requirements that guard against the consequences of monopoly in the marketplace. The merger created a concentration of ownership that would have been otherwise unacceptable, and UK ministers said at the time that the OFT should keep a watching brief on the competition issues that were created by the merger. It is still the case that 70 per cent of small business banking in Scotland is in the hands of RBS and Lloyds.

I am glad that Lord Mandelson made that decision. That is why we still have a successful, functioning economy today, as well as having Lloyds Banking Group as a major player in the Scottish economy. Peter Mandelson was quite right to take that decision. Jeremy Purvis's intervention is disappointing, given that his party now has an influence in this area. However, Scottish and UK ministers must now consider whether the concentration of  ownership within the Scottish lending market, in particular, merits further investigation. I believe that it does. I know from my constituents' experiences of dealing with Scotland's major banks in the real economy that there continue to be issues. The minister has said that the flow of lending has improved, but I can assure him that those issues have not all been resolved. That is why the Federation of Small Businesses said this week that a full OFT investigation into competition in Scotland's banking sector is required if we are to address the problems that face too many business customers as a result of the duopoly. Scottish ministers have recently inflicted serious damage on many of Scotland's businesses through measures such as their decision to have no transitional relief scheme for those facing increases in business rates. That decision alone will give companies in Aberdeen and Grampian an extra tax burden of £30 million a year. In that context, ministers should be doing everything that they can to help to secure access to finance for small businesses. I hope that Jim Mather will confirm the impression that he has given today by formally writing to the OFT to seek a formal investigation. That is an important step that Scottish ministers can take now to assist the recovery of the Scottish economy from the effects of the financial crisis.

I am interested in the minister's reference to an OFT decision to make a specific inquiry into the situation in Scotland. We heard today, and in evidence from the OFT, that it would look at Scotland in the context of inquiries into access to banking, for example, across Great Britain. Does the minister recognise that the FSB and the committee have called for the OFT to conduct a formal inquiry, and does he support that call?

I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary confirmed to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee yesterday that he will meet Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce to explain his policy decisions on business rates. Does he accept the chamber's calculation that this year's rates increase, net of any reliefs, will cost businesses in Aberdeen city and shire more than £30 million a year?

The European Commission's work programme on energy is focused on shared ambitions for a low-carbon economy throughout Europe and around the world. In that respect, it is very much to be welcomed. At the same time, it is vital that EU engagement plays to the strengths of different parts of Europe. In that respect, offshore energy is particularly important for Scotland. It includes, of course, oil and gas from the North Sea. Hydrocarbons from the UK continental shelf remain critical to our energy security. The oil and gas sector remains the single largest employer in my constituency and in many parts of Scotland. Indeed, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will meet later this month in Aberdeen to hear evidence about Scotland's international trade, and I suspect that we will hear  a good deal of evidence about the importance to the whole country of large and rising export earnings from that home-grown sector. However, the sector also matters because it provides skills and technologies for use in offshore renewable energies, which are rightly the focus of European interest. That interest can be hugely supportive of our shared ambitions for renewable energy from Scottish waters. The European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney, which is well known and well established, gives Scotland great opportunities for innovation in new technologies in wave and tidal power. Scotland is equally well placed to give a lead in offshore wind technologies. Offshore Aberdeen has already been identified as the best place in which to set up an equivalent centre to EMEC for the wind industry—an industry that is poised to invest billions of pounds in a new round of energy production from the UK's continental shelf. A good deal of hard work has already been done to bring the European offshore wind deployment centre to fruition in Aberdeen. I commend the efforts of the Aberdeen Renewable Energy Group for coming up with the big idea and those of Vattenfall, and those who work with it, in taking the idea forward. The Scottish European Green Energy Centre, which is based in Aberdeen, also has a key role to play. I hope that Scottish ministers will be active in supporting the efforts of all concerned to reach a positive conclusion on the project. The European Union has offered €40 million for the Aberdeen project, if it can be delivered on time. That investment can turn the positive intentions of the Lisbon treaty into real technological advantage for Scotland and Europe in laying the foundations for a new green energy sector. We should not be content simply with an injection of European Union taxpayers' money into proving new technologies, however welcome that injection may be. Turning the green economy into green jobs will also require private energy companies to invest in Scotland, which is another area in which opportunities exist and need to be taken. Wave and tidal power is not quite at the stage of placing major manufacturing orders, although we have very innovative and enterprising companies in Aberdeen and, indeed, across Scotland. Offshore wind is with us now, and we need to ensure that the exploitation of Scotland's natural resource leads to the creation of Scottish manufacturing jobs. We know about the good work that is being done in the fabrication of offshore wind towers by, for example, BiFab in Fife and in Lewis, turning oil platform building skills to good use in the renewables sector. I hope ministers will agree that it is important to go further than the  tower sector and to use the opportunity that is offered by the offshore wind deployment centre in Aberdeen to identify opportunities for the manufacture of wind turbines on this side of the North Sea—in this country—which would bring even more added value to the Scottish economy. European support is critical, too, for developing carbon capture and storage below the seabed of the North Sea. One of Gordon Brown's many achievements in government was to give a lead in that area. I hope that others will follow that lead. The carbon capture and storage levy in the UK and the revenues of the European emissions trading scheme, taken together, can give Scotland a head start in proving the new technologies. I hope that Scottish ministers will impress on their new UK counterparts the importance of continuing that investment from the UK Government and the European Union in order to realise that opportunity. We have heard today about extending the single market of the British electricity trading and transmission arrangements across the North Sea to create a European grid, which is an important objective, too. However, we must ensure that that is done alongside the creation of jobs and business here in Scotland, which means building on our existing strengths to ensure that electricity continues to be an export industry for Scotland on a European scale in the years ahead.

I note with interest what Mr Fraser says about his party's new partners. I have no doubt that we will hear many such sentiments, at least for a couple  of weeks. Given his new political coalition, would he like to express a revised view about the European Union?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its environmental policy is on the weekly collection of household waste. (S3O-10390)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Aberdeen City Council plans to scrap weekly bin collections once the general election is safely out of the way tomorrow. What guidance has he issued to councils on the link between recycling and reduced collections of household waste? What percentage of organic waste must be separated from the general household waste stream before a local authority can scrap weekly bin collections?

I recognise the point that the minister makes about nuclear waste and the long period during which it must be kept safely. Does he accept that the alternative base-load strategy of carbon capture and storage that he has pursued will require the safe storage of captured carbon for a very long time?

Will the member give way?

If Mr Gibson accepts the view that the power that would be generated at Hunterston would be surplus to requirements, does he also believe that the national planning framework has got it wrong?

The hallmarks of a mature party in a mature democracy are that it can tolerate different views on important issues and recognise that colleagues who disagree with the party line are sincere and well informed, even though it thinks that they have reached the wrong conclusions. Mr FitzPatrick's speech has reminded us that Scottish National Party policy on nuclear energy is misguided, but it is encouraging that a long-standing SNP member such as Jim Gray, a member of the Helensburgh branch of the SNP, can take a different view from the party. Members might have seen Mr Gray's critique of party policy under the title "Electric Power in the New Scotland", which he offered alongside his  evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's inquiry into the future of Scotland's energy industries, the report of which was published last June. Mr Gray has extensive first-hand experience of the electricity generating industry. He is a fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering, among other things. His commentary on nuclear power states that the SNP's 2007 manifesto is "marred by the inclusion of two self-contradictory and dangerous paragraphs." Those are paragraphs on climate change and electricity, which Mr Gray interprets as meaning that "We will reduce carbon emissions and get rid of the biggest producer of carbon-free energy we have." That goes to the heart of the contradiction in the SNP's policy position. It makes no sense to rule out nuclear power at the very time when we need more rather than less low-carbon electricity. It is good that at least some members of the SNP are prepared to stand up in public and point that out. It is no wonder that Mr Gray subtitles that part of his pamphlet with a quote that is borrowed from Oliver Cromwell to address the Scottish ministers. It reads: "In the bowels of Christ I beseech you, think it possible you may be mistaken." Electricity policy should be based on the imperatives of reducing carbon emissions and increasing security of supply while tackling fuel poverty and creating quality green jobs. Labour at Westminster has sought to deliver on those objectives by supporting renewable energy and new nuclear while putting up to £1 billion into work on carbon capture and storage and creating a green investment bank to support new jobs.

That is an interesting proposition from Brian Adam, because the SNP's position on the future of energy is much less clear than tonight's motion suggests. It refers only to renewable technologies as the way forward, yet the national planning framework 2 says explicitly: "There is a need for new baseload electricity generating capacity to replace the power stations programmed for closure over the next 20 years."

What a pity that Mr FitzPatrick did not make that point in his own speech. The national planning framework identifies Hunterston as having the capacity to accommodate a major new clean coal-fired power station, and it identifies that as a priority national development. However, again, it appears that not everyone in the SNP agrees. There was a vote here last month on an amendment to oppose unabated new coal-powered capacity and to reject plans to build a new coal-fired power station at Hunterston. Mr Gibson was one of several members of the SNP who voted for that amendment; Mr FitzPatrick was one of several who voted against it. Some might say that SNP members believe that it is all right to have new coal-fired power stations as long as they are not in their own backyards. A more generous interpretation might be that that split was a sign of a new culture of tolerance and informed dissent within the SNP. Time will tell which of those is true. If Scotland is to meet its carbon reduction targets, there will have to be a change of Scottish Government policy sooner or later. In spite of the dissenting voices within the SNP, I fear that that will not come before the election next week. Indeed, I fear that it will not come as a change of Scottish Government policy until after the election next year.

Will Mr FitzPatrick now answer Mr Brown's very pertinent question about the Government subsidies that he appears to have identified?

As the minister will acknowledge, representations on this matter were made by ministers at the Scotland Office and resulted in the UK Labour Cabinet's decision to consider the levy in the next spending review. Do ministers take the view that funds from the levy should be ring fenced for low-carbon energy and grid investment? Will the minister undertake to consult widely on setting up a fund for that purpose in order to make further progress?

Will the cabinet secretary listen to representations from Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce, which wrote to him earlier this week about their concern about the lack of transitional relief in Scotland, and agree to have the urgent meeting that it has asked for?

When the minister talks about options and says that he favours a simpler approach, does he recognise that some aspects of the current arrangements protect Scottish consumers? What proposals does he have to ensure that that protection is maintained?

The debate has highlighted areas of agreement and of difference. Importantly, we all agree that it is right to review the way in which network costs are met as electricity networks are expanded to meet increasing demand and to tap into new sources of power. All network costs are ultimately met by the consumer. At present, English consumers in the southern parts of Britain pay substantially more than those in the north pay through charges that are applied to electricity supply, but they pay significantly less than Scottish consumers pay through charges that are applied to transmission. It is right to ask whether that system of cross-subsidies and benefits is the most appropriate for the future. We want more renewable energy on the grid, but most of us recognise that intermittent renewable sources must be balanced with new forms of generation that can ensure reliability of supply after the existing fossil fuel and nuclear power stations come to the end of their operating lives. Everyone can sign up to the benefits of a balanced, diverse and sustainable energy mix that is low carbon and helps to meet the challenge of climate change. However, a balanced and diverse energy mix means different things to different people. It is noteworthy that ministers today proclaim the virtues of energy diversity, although they rule out new nuclear power stations and have put all their eggs in the basket of carbon capture,  as with the proposed new coal-fired power station at Hunterston. At Longannet a few weeks ago, I saw for myself the potential that certainly exists for Scotland to lead the way on carbon capture and storage. We can take advantage of the skills and expertise of companies such as Shell in carbon storage and National Grid in carbon transport, as well as the skills and expertise of the specialist carbon capture companies and Scottish Power. However, I also saw that there is still a long way to go before carbon capture and storage can be delivered commercially at scale without using up a huge amount of fuel simply in capturing the carbon. Most of us want carbon capture to work and believe that it can, but we recognise that it needs time and the opportunity to prove itself. One objective of reviewing our electricity trading and transmission arrangements must be to ensure that the regulatory framework is the right one to enable carbon capture to prove itself at an existing fossil fuel power station such as Longannet. If Scottish Power takes the view that proving the new technology requires a different charging regime to ensure that conventional generation in Scotland can continue, we must take its views seriously. Scottish Power's concerns and those of business, trade unions and other electricity producers, which we have heard about today, add strength to the case for a wider review.

I accept that the European context will have increasing significance, but a review of the way in which the charging regime operates in Great Britain—bearing in mind that we are talking about Great Britain and not the United Kingdom—does not require a wider European review, nor should it be put off pending a decision on a European review. In relation to other European matters that Rob Gibson raised, he will be aware that his interpretation of the European directive of several years ago has not been sustained by the European authorities in relation to the charging systems in Great Britain. We should not prejudge the outcome of a review of the system, nor should we act recklessly in relation to the Scottish consumer interest. As has been said, because of Scotland's natural resources, there is fantastic potential to increase the proportion of renewable energy in the electricity mix. Maximising that potential requires action on a range of fronts. It is simply not the case that a change in transmission charges alone will solve all the problems that renewables face or  remove opposition to every good renewable energy scheme. I said previously that planning consents and local opposition have provided much higher barriers for renewables to surmount than the level of transmission charges in Scotland. Jim Mather will know that he has rejected some 40 per cent of the potential renewable energy generation that has been brought to him for consent. He will have his reasons for that and I am sure that he would defend each and every one of them. In that context, however, it is no surprise that developers look to offshore wind as a new field for the development of wind power where they might not meet the same elements of resistance that they have met onshore. Of course, offshore wind will need to be connected too, which will require early and positive decisions from those charged with consenting to development and those charged with securing grid connections. We look to the minister to deliver that in the short term. Something like one third of renewables obligation certificates are taken up by developers with projects in Scotland, which represents hundreds of millions of pounds of public subsidy to the wind industry here. That is a good thing. It is important to bear that in mind when raising concerns about the one or two projects that we know have been abandoned, with transmission charging offered as one of the reasons for that. It is true that the business case for new fossil fuel or nuclear power stations in Scotland will be affected by the new charging regimes as much as renewables will be. Those regimes have to be reviewed from that perspective, too. In my view, the idea that Scotland's future energy needs will be met by demand management and renewable generation alone is not realistic—certainly not in the short-to-medium term. Any hope that Scottish electricity exports or green electricity jobs can be achieved without reliable base-load generation is not founded on the energy industry's experience so far. The debate about what kind of base-load generation is required is for another day, but it is important that we take those arguments, as well as the arguments on renewables, into account. When we consider the impact of the charging regime on places such as Peterhead or Longannet, it is important not to prejudge outcomes and to be clear about what we are trying to achieve. We should not insist on any particular solution before a review has been carried out, nor should we confuse means with ends. One means that has been promoted is a uniform transmission charge across Great Britain. That is clearly not the end that we have in mind; the end is to meet a range of public policy objectives. The two should not be confused.

Certainly, the public policy context has to be clear to everyone. However, some important issues are not clear in the proposition that the Scottish Government has put forward today. In his opening speech, the minister said in response to a question from Gavin Brown that he was not ruling out any locational element in transmission charges, but the motion in his name appears to do precisely that. I hope that he will provide clarity on that in his closing speech. The issue is important, because a wide-ranging review may well conclude that locational, cost-reflective charging has a role, albeit a different or lesser one. The issue of transmission losses cannot simply be wished away. Therefore, I hope that arrangements that take that into account and seek to reduce transmission losses will be part of what is considered going forward. In other words, if we can have arrangements that simultaneously encourage renewable generation and fewer transmission losses, that would be highly advantageous, although clearly difficult to achieve. That might require a system that in some respects ends up more complex. I noted Iain Smith's point about that, but sometimes greater complexity is necessary if we are to achieve the whole range of public policy objectives that we want to achieve. What matters is not the detail of the charging mechanism but its ability to deliver against the broad range of public policy objectives. As we heard this afternoon, one way to reduce transmission losses is to promote smart grids and decentralise both generation and consumption. The minister's response to Sarah Boyack did not suggest that that is on the Government's list of priorities, although it is on ours. Of course, I am happy for him to prove me wrong in his closing speech. I hope that the minister will reflect on the fact that permitted development for micro wind and air-source heat pumps, and Government backing for district heating and combined heat and power, might well reduce the case for a locational element in transmission charges, because those developments would offer another way to address transmission losses.

It certainly does. As Rob Gibson knows, and as Scottish and Southern Energy said in the quotation that I used in my opening speech, transmission losses from the north of Scotland are significantly greater than those from anywhere else in the country. That is why the issue is significant for the north as well as for the country as a whole.

As I said, we are talking about £1.4 billion in transmission and tariff charges to pay for the network, so 5 per cent of such a sum and of the electricity that is transmitted throughout Great Britain is by no means a minor matter. That should be borne in mind. The need to minimise fuel poverty is another key public policy objective that has been highlighted in the debate. I referred to the £100 million of consumer benefits in Scotland from current arrangements, which must not be lost. Whether that is described as a union dividend or simply as a positive outcome of the way in which BETTA is managed is not terribly material, but it is a significant reason why the outcome of a review should not be prejudged. That is why I—like Wendy Alexander—offer the Labour amendment as one that members can support without prejudging the outcome of a future review. I look forward to a review that safeguards the interests of both producers and consumers.

What would the member say to consumers in Aberdeenshire who currently pay through their retailer tariffs that are something like a quarter of the transmission charges that consumers in the south-east of England pay?Does she recognise that the charging system is complex, so there are no simple solutions in the way that she suggests?

Does Dr Allan recognise that what he says about the impact on fossil fuel and renewable generation in the south and north of England is equally true for transmission charging in Scotland?

I take that point, but does Mr Smith accept that a location element makes sense in some contexts? For example, providing electricity to Birmingham in a way that minimises transmission losses en route has clear economic, environmental and cost benefits for all concerned.

I am interested in Rob Gibson's explanation for why the locational element, which encourages the siting of power stations close to centres of population is, "by extension," discriminatory against renewable energy. There is clearly a coincidence in relation to where renewable energy is located, but surely the critique of the current system is based on its impact on thermal as well as on renewable generation in those areas.

I apologise for missing the minister's first remarks. The debate is principally about the case for a review of the British electricity trading and transmission arrangements, and how they can best be brought up to date in the light of carbon reduction targets and aspirations to achieve carbon capture. At the same time, it is important that we recognise a number of points that the minister has not highlighted in his motion or, indeed, in his opening remarks. First, we must acknowledge how successful BETTA has been from the point of view of Scottish electricity consumers. A decade ago,  the typical electricity bill in Scotland was up to 20 per cent higher than the equivalent bill in England and Wales. The Scottish electricity market and producers of Scottish electricity were constrained in their potential for export earnings by the fact that they operated separately from the market in England and Wales.

If Mr Gibson is suggesting that electricity differentials were working significantly against Scottish consumers' interests before the introduction of BETTA as a consequence of colder weather or poorer insulation, he is not accurate. When we average out and allow for those other factors, we discover that the differential in, for example, prepaid electricity bills has come down by two-thirds since the introduction of BETTA. In other words, if the constant is that our weather is colder and our costs are higher because our home insulation is poorer, that constant has shown a change in the price to customers precisely because of the inclusion of Scotland in the same electricity market as England and Wales.

We should indeed be careful, but the general point that BETTA has improved electricity prices for Scottish consumers is demonstrable, not only in respect of average bills but in other respects, to which I will turn. The fact that the Scottish electricity market was separate from that of the rest of Great Britain meant that, far from being able to explore ideas of North Sea or European supergrids, in the aftermath of privatisation of the electricity industry we did not even have a single integrated grid in the whole of Great Britain. BETTA has changed that. It has provided an integrated network, which has worked to the benefit of Scottish generators and Scottish consumers, by giving producers access to a wider market and by giving customers lower prices. The differential price advantage of buying power in Scotland has been greatly reduced. The current system needs to be reviewed and reformed, to better reflect the balance of public policy priorities. However, it should not be dismissed or demonised by people who choose to  overlook the clear benefits of an integrated system across Great Britain. Consumers benefit from the current system in a number of other important ways. The network costs of transmission and distribution of electricity in Scotland are significantly higher than our population share, which is hardly surprising, given the area that is covered and the sparse population in many areas. Electricity generators pay more towards network costs in Scotland than they do in England and Wales. That needs to be reconsidered. However, Scottish retailers pay considerably less, which means a saving for their customers. A generator in Aberdeenshire, for example, will pay £18.81 per kilowatt to produce electricity and a customer there will pay £5.87, via the average demand tariff charged to his or her supplier. A generator in Bedfordshire will pay only £1.56 per kilowatt—about 8 per cent of the Aberdeenshire tariff—but a customer in Bedfordshire will pay a whopping £21.84, which is nearly four times as much as his Aberdeenshire counterpart pays. Total yield from transmission charges is some £1.41 billion per year across Great Britain, which pays for the maintenance and operation of an integrated transmission network. If we take generators and suppliers together, Scotland pays in £190 million per year. Annual network costs work out at £250 million in Scotland and £1.16 billion in England and Wales, which means that the subsidy to Scotland from transmission charges relative to network costs is some £60 million per year. Of course, that is small comfort to Scottish generators, who get the hard end of that bargain, but it is important to ensure that any changes to the charges that generators face do not result in hefty price increases for Scottish customers or in a loss of the union dividend of £60 million in net subsidy to the Scottish grid from customers in the rest of Great Britain. Another union dividend that must be taken into account is focused on the million or so domestic supply customers in the north of Scotland. The hydro benefit replacement scheme and common tariff obligation came into force on the switch to BETTA in 2005, replacing similar schemes. The schemes protect domestic customers in remote and rural areas of the Highlands and Islands from discriminatory pricing and provide a subsidy to customers in the north of Scotland as a whole in relation to the exceptional cost of transmitting and distributing electricity. The licensed suppliers of electricity across England, Wales and Scotland pay upwards of £40 million a year into hydro benefit, which goes exclusively to benefit the 2 per cent of all customers governed by the BETTA arrangements who live in the north of Scotland.  The hydro benefit is hugely significant to customers. It is unique, in that the north of Scotland is the only area of Great Britain to benefit from such a scheme. It is also entirely justified. As Scottish and Southern Energy said when the scheme had its most recent review: "the system length per 1,000 customers is still more than double the GB average and the average cost per unit distributed is ... approximately 60% higher than the GB average. Even with assistance from the Hydro Benefit Replacement Scheme"— and even with the benefits of BETTA— "costs to North of Scotland customers remain higher than in any other distribution network area and higher than the GB average." Scotland as a whole receives £60 million of network costs subsidy from England and Wales, and customers in the north of Scotland receive £40 million of hydro benefit from consumers across the whole of Great Britain. That is £100 million of subsidy that Scotland would have to find from its own resources if we were not part of the British electricity network. We must not lose that union dividend and those benefits for customers in the process of addressing the competitive disadvantage that Scottish generators face compared with their counterparts elsewhere.

With respect, the member is confusing two different things. My point is that we need to remain within the British trading and transmission arrangements and make them work better; we do not need to pull out of them or change them in such a way as to jeopardise the interests of Scottish consumers.

That is an interesting proposition from Mr Thompson. An SNP commitment to remain within the British electricity network is welcome and I hope that the minister echoes that from the front bench when he responds to the debate. Addressing the competitiveness disadvantages that Scottish generators face is the purpose of Labour's amendment. We are calling for a wider  review of the charging regimes under BETTA while ensuring that the interests of consumers, as well as those of generators, are protected. There has been much discussion here and at Westminster about what is to be done if we are to meet the challenging targets that we have set ourselves for the reduction of carbon emissions to tackle climate change. Heating and transport fuels are among the most important targets for carbon reduction. Achieving significant savings may involve investing in a whole new infrastructure for electric vehicles and in combined heat and power systems, whereby heat is produced at the same time as electricity. If those things happen, demand will increase and electricity networks across Great Britain will come under significant pressure. A step change in demand and supply will require a step change in the way that we charge for the transmission, distribution and consumption of electricity, and it will require a fresh look at how we can maximise Scotland's potential contribution to the meeting of that demand. I am glad that, in recent weeks, an air of reality has begun to creep into the debate. For too long, the case for the reform of BETTA has been made in terms of renewable energy alone although there is precious little evidence—Mr Mather rehearsed all the evidence that exists—that transmission charges have deterred investors from reaping the considerable rewards that are to be had from developing wind power in Scotland thanks to the UK-wide system of renewables obligation certificates. Far more serious obstacles have been placed in the way of new development by the uncertainty of grid connection, and the regulators have taken significant steps in recent months to ease the bottlenecks by allowing active developers to move up the queue at the expense of those who have made only speculative proposals and lack the capital to make them happen. Greater obstacles have also come from the approach of the Scottish Government. Ministers' decisions to reject major wind power developments such those proposed for Lewis, for Clashindarroch in Aberdeenshire, for Calliachar in Perthshire, and for Kyle and Greenock has done far more to deter investment than any charges for transmission or distribution. Furthermore, the inordinate delay in approving the Beauly to Denny power line has pushed back beyond 2012 many of the grid connections that ministers could have enabled next year had they moved more quickly on that decision. As the minister said, work is going ahead on wind power transmission charges, not on the premise that wind power suffers a fundamental disadvantage under the current system, but in recognition of the fact that wind power is a less efficient source of electricity at peak time than  coal, gas or nuclear power. That work is welcome and could see charges to wind generators in Scotland cut by up to 50 per cent by this time next year simply because wind-generated electricity is half as likely to take up space in the grid as electricity from more conventional resources. However, the renewables argument, on its own, is simply not enough. I am delighted that the major Scottish power companies are now raising real concerns about transmission charges, namely the impact of the charging regime on the future of thermal generation in Scotland. Whoever advised the big power companies simply to hide behind the skirts of the renewables sector did them a disservice. The issues that concern those companies cannot be addressed if they are not raised in an open and transparent way. Scottish and Southern Energy is talking about the impact of transmission charges on the gas-fired power station at Peterhead, and Scottish Power is raising concerns about Cockenzie and Longannet. The future potential of carbon capture and storage is said to be at risk. All of Scotland's thermal power stations require to be upgraded in the short term and replaced in the longer term. How to do that is a matter of controversy and debate for another day. New coal, with a bit of carbon capture, at Hunterston, say some; new nuclear, with virtually no carbon emissions, at Torness, say others; retrofitting carbon capture at Longannet, as long as it can deliver at scale, says almost everyone. All those options offer potential future capacity and all face potential investment risk from transmission charges that incentivise investors to go elsewhere. That is why we need a review of the current charging regimes. National Grid's licence, Ofgem's remit and the policy of the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change all need to reflect the changing circumstances and enable the replacement of existing thermal generation with new power stations, as well as unlocking Scotland's vast resources of renewable energy. Labour at Westminster will consider all that, with the interests of consumers and generators firmly in view. Labour at Holyrood will pursue the issues in a way that is positive, responsible and realistic, which means supporting what works in the current system, as well as promoting change, where that is required. I move amendment S3M-6169.2, to leave out from "opposes" to end and insert: "recognises the importance of the British Electricity Trading and Transmission Arrangements in balancing supply and demand across the electricity networks and in supporting future energy development; acknowledges that the current charging regimes provide some advantages to Scottish consumers as well as some disadvantages to Scottish generators; recognises that Scottish and UK targets for reducing carbon emissions are likely to increase  demand on the electricity networks, requiring significant new investments and changes to these charging regimes; welcomes the current review of transmission charges for intermittent renewable generation, which could lead to significant savings for wind generators in Scotland, and calls for a wider review of network charging regimes to support low-carbon electricity generation while protecting the interests of consumers."

When John Swinney has calmed down a little, will he tell us what consultation he carried out with representatives of business organisations before he decided not to have a transitional relief scheme?

On Friday morning, Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce will hold a business breakfast in Aberdeen to give local businesses the chance to grill candidates from the main parties who are standing in the general election. Although the matter is clearly not reserved, the Scottish National Party's decision to drive through rates revaluation with no transitional relief and no cap on annual increases is certain to be high on many people's agendas, not least because it stands in sharp contrast to the approach that has been taken by the Labour Government at Westminster.  The Tories' decision to back the SNP is also certain to be of interest. Four weeks ago, I opened for Labour in the tourism debate by highlighting the impact of the tax hike on businesses in the Scottish hospitality sector. In my constituency, for example, it seems that every single hospitality business—large and small—is being hammered. The rates bill for the Carmelite hotel has gone up from just over £33,000 to just over £66,000, which is a big hit for a small business. Copthorne hotel Aberdeen is facing a 40 per cent rates increase. Skene House (Aberdeen) Ltd, which provides hotel suites and serviced accommodation across the city, faces a valuation that is up 99 per cent. Its payable rates are up by more than 70 per cent, or nearly £100,000 a year. When we debated tourism last month, I mentioned my meeting with Aberdeen City and Shire Hotels Association. Hotels were the first to react, but the impact goes much further. For example, the Charles Michie chemist shop on Union Street in Aberdeen is facing a rates increase of more than 18 per cent. Other local businesses that are engaged in all manner of trades—even in the motor trade, which is hard hit by the recession—face such increases. A rising tide of anger has spread far beyond the hotel sector. Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce has surveyed its members and is currently analysing the results of that survey. I am certain that ministers will hear from it about the deep concerns that many of its members have expressed, and have no doubt that other chambers of commerce in other parts of Scotland will express the same concerns—unless, of course, ministers want to tell me that Aberdeen and the north-east are uniquely hard hit by the increase in business rates. I listened carefully to what John Swinney said, but he should think carefully before he brushes off those concerns by claiming that most businesses are better off. That answer will not satisfy the many businesses in Aberdeen city, Aberdeenshire and throughout Scotland that face huge increases in their rates bills for the current year. It has been said that every other Scottish Administration has offered transitional relief to businesses. The Labour Government at Westminster has set a 12.5 per cent cap on rates increases this year and phased in increases over five years. If ministers had formally consulted on the issue, as they ought to have done, they would have been told that transitional arrangements are exactly what businesses want. The Tory amendment says that transitional relief should not be a priority for the Scottish Government. Like Mr Swinney, the Tories say that businesses that are hit by the tax hike should  "appeal their valuation where appropriate", as if somehow it is all about miscalculations by the assessors who conduct individual evaluations. That is not the issue at all, of course. Businesses can and should appeal if they have grounds to do so, but lodging an appeal against a revaluation does not allow a business to go on paying the old rate, and appeals are not at all likely to reverse the upward revaluation of whole groups of businesses in whole regions of the country. Appeals would be the right way to go if we were talking about one or two small businesses being harder hit than their peers and competitors, but we are talking about whole groups of businesses, large and small, in whole sectors of the economy and whole regions of Scotland. The appeals route will not reverse the impact on those groups of businesses. It is not the revaluation that is fundamentally flawed; the issue is the lack of transitional support. Ministers need to listen to what business say. For example, they should listen to what is said at the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce hustings meeting in Aberdeen on Friday morning. I know that Alex Johnstone will be present at that and that he will listen closely to what is said. I hope that SNP members will also listen. Ministers should think again. They should put transitional arrangements in place now before businesses go under and jobs are lost.

I congratulate Mike Pringle on securing the debate. The concerns that he has raised have also been raised at the cross-party group on oil and gas, and I welcome the opportunity hear the views of ministers on those issues. In December, I chaired a meeting of the cross-party group at which we considered the issues involved. We heard from the British Geological Survey and from Professor Patrick Corbett, Total professor of petroleum geoengineering at Heriot-Watt University. Members who were present at that meeting, of whom one or two are here this evening, will know that, although major oil companies tend not to rely on Gilmerton for cores because they have their own core stores, many smaller companies—including several in my constituency—as well as consultants and, in particular, the universities that teach petroleum geology and related subjects rely on having access to the Gilmerton core store and the records that are kept there. Accessible geological material in a store that is operated by a public body is useful both in the teaching of new generations of students and in identifying new possibilities for hydrocarbon extraction. The issue is also clearly relevant to the enormous challenge of achieving successful carbon storage. The consortium that is progressing carbon capture at Scottish Power's coal-fired power station at Longannet in Fife includes both National Grid and Shell, which are involved because of their expertise in gas pipelines and oil reservoirs respectively. Ed  Miliband made it clear just a few days ago that Longannet is very much in the frame for the £1 billion that is available for a commercial-scale carbon capture and storage project. The success of that project does not depend on access to the core store at Gilmerton. Nevertheless, if the Longannet project goes ahead, the ability of a new generation of Scottish university students and graduates to access such a resource would ensure both a flow of suitably-qualified and well-informed graduates entering the industry—on the carbon storage side as well as on the hydrocarbon production side—and that those working in the sector had access to the best possible sources of information. Oil & Gas UK informs me that the BGS's proposals have caused it to look again at its practices and to consider how it can better share access to core stores among the private companies involved. Some innovative suggestions have also come forward, such as the Geological Society's proposal for an online core photograph database, which are to be welcomed. At the meeting of the cross-party group in December, I asked John Ludden, the executive director of the BGS, whether alternatives to the closure of the Gilmerton store and the transfer of the cores to Keyworth had been considered. His view was that upgrading the facility at Gilmerton would require a complete rebuild because the ceilings are currently too low, and the foundations are too weak, to allow palletised storage of the type that is carried out at Keyworth. He estimated the cost of that rebuild to be upwards of £2 million. What is more, when the Geological Society made the same suggestion, it was told that the BGS was by no means certain that it would secure planning permission for such a development. Clearly, without that, nothing could happen. My questions for Mr Mather are these. First, does he accept that, if the Gilmerton store is not to close, it will require to be upgraded, and has he had discussions with the BGS about that possibility? Secondly, when he met John Ludden, did the issue of planning permission for an upgraded core store arise, and what—if anything—was the minister able to suggest? Thirdly, if funding is required to allow a core store upgrade at Gilmerton or somewhere else in Scotland, what support can Scottish ministers offer or help to secure to make that happen?

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the new green investment bank will provide an additional £2 billion of funding for low-carbon infrastructure, that that money will be in addition to the £1 billion that is already on offer from the UK Government for carbon capture and storage on a commercial scale, and that all that money will be invested—much of it in Scotland—well before the intended new date for the saltire prize of 2017?

The minister will appreciate that the rates increases that have been discussed will have an impact on the Marcliffe, as they will on many other hotels. The purpose of today's debate is to hold his Government to account, which is what we have sought to do. Will he at least undertake to talk to the Scottish Tourism Forum and hotels such as the Marcliffe about a transitional scheme that will protect them from rates increases of up to 80 per cent in a single year?

What is the member's assessment of the impact of the rates changes on the hospitality industry in his city and across Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

Feel-good factors are important. I have no doubt that Jim Mather feels more cheerful when he tells us that Scotland is bucking the trend and welcomes homecoming Scotland's success. It is unfortunate that success in government and in promoting Scotland as a destination demands more than simply climbing up to the clouds and proclaiming loudly that everything in the garden is rosy. Feeling good is important, but doing well matters more. Of course, I hope that the minister's wishful thinking is not entirely misplaced. The year of homecoming was a good idea, which he adopted from a previous Administration. Indeed, it was even more of a good idea because it coincided with the onset of the worldwide economic recession. It is a shame that SNP ministers chose to shift the focus from growing visitor numbers to "Promote pride in Scots at home and abroad". Despite such distractions, many in the industry and local communities kept their focus and worked hard to use the year of homecoming to create extra business and more jobs.

It was indeed. My point was one of emphasis, not direction. Unfortunately, the evidence suggests that Mr Mather and his colleagues go beyond wishful thinking. A Scottish Government news release in the minister's name on 18 January is a good example of that. Under the headline, "Summer of 2009 saw tourism boom", the Government asserted that "Figures published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show that Scotland enjoyed a rise in visitors, with an increase of 25 per cent in visits from North America and an increase of 43 per cent in visits from other countries outside Europe and North America between July and September 2009 compared to the same quarter in 2008." It all sounds like a feel-good factor. Indeed, Mr Mather went on to say: "These figures underline the success of Homecoming 2009 ... During these three key months, Scotland saw huge support from overseas visitors who experienced all that our fantastic country has to offer." What a shame that that was not the whole story. It would be nice to share Jim Mather's enthusiasm for the figures—if only the evidence backed him up. When considered in the round, the ONS figures tell a very different story. Sadly, ministers failed to notice that the 44,000 more visitors from North America and 51,000 more from the rest of the world were outnumbered by the 97,000 fewer visitors from continental Europe. "Summer of 2009 saw tourism boom"? Overseas visitor numbers to Scotland went down, not up. That is not all. The ONS figures also show that international tourist visits to Scotland over the first three quarters of 2009 were down by 34,000 across the board. The figures include North America as well as Europe. In its report, "Latest Tourism Figures", which was published on 28 January, VisitScotland showed that domestic visitor numbers in Scotland were up over the period January to October last year but that, when taken together, spend by British and overseas tourists was down. The minister quoted from third quarter figures, which were published last month. However, in an economic commentary on the same quarter, Fraser of Allander confirmed that in Scotland "activity in hotels and catering fell by -2.3%, compared to a contraction of -2.1% in the sector in the UK." Over the course of the recession, from the second quarter of 2008 to the third quarter of 2009, the gross value added in the hotels and catering sector in Scotland fell by over 11 per cent compared with less than 9 per cent in the UK as a whole. Figures for the fourth quarter might, of course, show some improvement, but the figures that we have argue against any bland assumption  that the year of homecoming was in any unqualified way a great success. For reasons that are not entirely within the control of Government, the reality is that progress is not being made towards the shared ambition of 50 per cent increase in tourism revenue in five years' time. The situation will not improve until ministers are willing to make a realistic assessment of why we are back to where we started five years ago. Sadly, however, Government policy is based on the assumption—or it appears to based on the assumption—that tourism businesses are prospering in the face of economic recession. Plainly, that is not the case. There is no better example of the cost of that complacency than the SNP's extraordinary decision to hit thousands of Scottish businesses with huge new tax bills just as they are seeking to recover from the recession. The decision to impose the outcome of a rates revaluation in a single year, with no cap on annual increases and with virtually no notice, risks pushing back hopes of increased revenues far beyond 2015.

I have no difficulty in supporting the small business bonus scheme. My difficulty is with the proposition that businesses large and small should be hit overnight with such a large tax hike, as the current Scottish Government proposes. Constituency members—certainly on the Labour benches—can witness to the fact that all sorts of services that visitors to Scotland use have been hit, from village petrol stations in rural Clydesdale to fashionable shops in the west end of Edinburgh. As has been mentioned, hotels and catering have been hit worst of all, because their revaluation, unlike that of other businesses, is based not on the rental value of their property but on their turnover in 2008, before the recession really hit home. On Monday, I met Peter Medley, the chair of the Aberdeen City and Shire Hotels Association, and association members to talk about the impact of John Swinney's decisions on businesses and jobs in my constituency. What they told me was shocking in its scale and in its implications for the recovery from recession of the Scottish economy in general and the tourism sector in particular. A few months ago, a new Jurys Inn opened in Aberdeen, just ahead of the brand new Union Square retail development of which it is now part. The hotel opened with a rateable value of  £400,000. A few weeks later, its manager discovered that its rateable value had been revised upwards to £700,000, with effect from 1 April this year. Just across the street from Union Square is a small privately owned hotel, the Soprano St Magnus Court, which is committed to playing its part in the development of an Aberdeen merchant quarter in the heart of the medieval city, around the Green. The hotel's owner faces a doubling in his property's rateable value, from £23,000 to £46,000, and will have to find an extra £8,000 at the tail end of a recession to pay in tax to a Scottish National Party Government. He tells me that he may have to make three people redundant in order to balance the books; he certainly will not engage a new housekeeper or hotel manager in the next financial year. If those are the consequences of the SNP's tax hike for a small hotel—a small business, such as those that Joe FitzPatrick said he was concerned to support—imagine the impact on Jury's Inn in Aberdeen of having to find nearly £100,000 more a year, when it has only just opened its doors. I wonder how many jobs will not be created there because ministers have imposed such an enormous tax increase, almost literally overnight. Imagine the impact on hotels and restaurants across the land, as well as on city shops, rural petrol stations and the rest. John Swinney no doubt shares Jim Mather's cheerful belief that the year of homecoming went splendidly well and that the tourism sector has nothing to worry about. That may explain his lack of concern about the impact of his decisions and the deeply unconvincing defence that he and other ministers have mounted. They say that what they have done to thousands of Scottish businesses does not matter, because thousands of other Scottish businesses will be no worse off. In reality, of course, SNP ministers need only look to the parallel revaluation south of the border to see what they should do to take matters forward. Businesses in England were given notice of their new liability in the autumn, which gave them far more time to adjust than their counterparts in Scotland. Hotels in England that face increases in what they are due to pay will benefit from five years of transitional arrangements, giving them even more time to adjust their business plans and to absorb the extra costs. Just to be on the safe side, there is a cap, so that the rates liability of any business south of the border can go up by a maximum of 12.5 per cent in the coming financial year. How much better a prospect that would be for hotels here in Scotland. An increase of 12.5 per cent in one year is hefty enough, but five years of such an increase would  leave a business such as the Aberdeen Douglas hotel in my constituency—another small business—paying less in 2015 than it will pay with the 80 per cent increase that John Swinney has imposed on it in 2010. No one likes paying more tax, but I am certain that, given the choice, Mary Martin of the Aberdeen Douglas hotel and many others across the country would far prefer increases of 12.5 per cent a year for five years, like their counterparts south of the border, to an increased liability of 80 per cent in one year. I know that Jim Mather is full of good intentions and that the warm words that we heard are sincerely meant, but the minister should recognise that 2009 was a tough year for many people in the hospitality industries. Those people's determination and enterprise kept them going, and the year of homecoming helped some more than others. Ministers should acknowledge that turnover in 2008 was a poor guide to hotel profitability in 2009 or sustainability in 2010. They should understand that massive tax hikes on businesses coming out of recession will put some of them out of business, leaving the sector without jobs, training and skills. Jim Mather has a chance today to take back to his colleagues a simple proposition, which I am certain would be backed by every hotel in my constituency, and which I suspect would be welcomed by the vast majority of people in the tourism sector in Scotland. The proposition is that ministers should go away from today's debate and reconsider their decision on non-domestic rates, and then come back with a transitional relief scheme that will help tourism businesses rather than force them under. Then Mr Mather really can be cheerful, and he can say that today's parliamentary debate on tourism made a real difference to the sector. I move amendment S3M-5962.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to "that year" and insert: "believes, however, that the Scottish Government must also take responsibility for meeting the skills gaps; notes that, in spite of the efforts made by tourism businesses and local communities as part of Homecoming Scotland 2009, overseas visitor numbers and economic activity in the hotels and catering sector fell in the first three quarters of 2009; regrets that, in spite of that fall in earnings in the sector, many Scottish tourism businesses are facing significant increases in non-domestic rates with immediate effect; notes".

To ask the Scottish Executive whether regeneration of Union Terrace gardens in Aberdeen is a matter for Scottish Enterprise or for Aberdeen City Council. (S3O-9718)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of yesterday's statement by the leader and deputy leader of Aberdeen City Council that "there are no proposals for the council to commit expenditure to the development", which is currently being consulted on by Aberdeen city and shire economic future. Does he agree with them that it is for the Scottish Government to put up any public funding that might go into that project? If so, how and when might such funding be delivered?

As the minister said, he is aware that transmission charges for intermittent electricity generators are currently under review on the ground that their take-up of transmission is around half that of fossil-fuel power stations. What level of reduction in charges does he believe that could bring to the wind energy sector in Scotland? Is he making representations on behalf of the Scottish Government in relation to that review?

I spoke in support of an Executive motion on the Gaelic language 10 years ago in an historic debate that happened to fall on my daughter  Iona's second birthday. I mentioned how pleased her forebears would have been to know that the Gaelic language was being debated and celebrated in the first year of a devolved Scottish Parliament. I looked forward then to the new opportunities that her generation would have to enjoy Gaelic language and culture to the full, thanks to the positive support of central Government in Westminster and Holyrood and of local government in Aberdeen and elsewhere. Ten years on, much of that optimism has proved to have been justified. My daughter and many of her age group have enjoyed Gaelic-medium education at pre-school, nursery and primary levels, and in Scotland's cities and in the Gàidhealtachd itself there are opportunities to extend that through secondary education, too, even if not always to the fullest extent. The Gaelic college at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig has continued to thrive, and the commitment of my party in government, and other parties too, has put in place a Gaelic-medium broadcasting sector such as previous generations could hardly have imagined. BBC Alba is at the heart of that, but it is not alone. We should celebrate BBC Alba, but we should support also the broadcast of Gaelic programming on BBC2 and on STV, all of which contributes to the health and strength of the language and culture. For young people of school age such as my daughter Iona, there is no better platform for their talents and no better source of information and education than "Dè a-nis?". Long may that programme continue to provide such a vibrant forum for Gaelic-speaking children and young people. BBC Alba takes matters to a new plane. The provision of a dedicated channel for Gaelic-language broadcasting is a recognition that culture in the 21 st century is as much about what people see on screen as it is about what they read in books or hear in their daily lives. It is also a powerful tool for regeneration, not only of Gaelic language and culture but of those parts of Scotland where Gaelic has its deepest roots. We should, in that context, recognise the effective leadership and judgment of MG Alba and BBC Alba in bringing this new medium to market. Many of my constituents with satellite access first take an interest in BBC Alba when they tune in to watch an as-live Scottish Premier League game with Gaelic commentary—for example, many will have watched last night's rousing encounter between Aberdeen and Hibernian when they got home. Football is as much part of Highland sporting culture as shinty is, and the platform that BBC Alba provides for football, shinty and rugby matches is appreciated by Gaels and other viewers alike. It also advertises to the population  in general that Gaelic is not only a literary language for poets and singers, important though that is, but a medium for day-to-day life of people with the same interests and enthusiasms as the rest of the population. So I am glad we have the opportunity today to express our collective view, and I hope that Parliament will, at the end of today, speak once again with one voice in support of giving everyone in Alba access to BBC Alba. That should be the first priority of the BBC trust when it makes its decision. Providing BBC Alba with the platform that it deserves, through carriage on Freeview and on cable, will be another significant step for the BBC trust—which has been supportive of the Gaelic language—to take in support of the indigenous cultures of these islands, and I very much look forward to a clear, positive and early decision. Mòran taing.

A number of years ago, when Labour was preparing for the 1997 election in the hope of forming the next Westminster Government, I had the good fortune to work with the then shadow disability minister Tom Clarke MP on our party's manifesto for disabled people and employment. At the time, some said that the Government had to choose between supporting sheltered employment and assisting access to mainstream jobs for disabled people. Tom Clarke rejected that view and concluded that, given the wide range and variety of disabilities that such workers had to face, we should support disabled workers in specialised workplaces and in the wider labour market. That approach remains the right one. On 31 May 2007, in my first oral question to Jim Mather after he took ministerial office, I asked him to meet management and unions at Remploy to discuss what the Scottish Government could do to help the factories in Aberdeen and elsewhere to achieve a sustainable future as supported employment providers. I was delighted that the  minister agreed not only to meet me but to involve management and unions in discussions on promoting the use of article 19 of the public sector procurement directive across Scotland. That approach was helpful; indeed, the commitments that John Swinney gave to Helen Eadie last year showed that the exercise was worth while, in particular the objective that "every public body should aim to have at least one contract with a supported factory or business."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 24 April 2009; S3W-22484.]  However, we must go beyond setting aims and objectives to achieving that result. That is where we need a Government champion for disabled workers, who would ensure that public bodies deliver on the objective that they have been set. I am delighted that the Scottish Parliament has been the first body in Scotland to place a contract under article 19, but it must not be the last. Agreeing that the use of article 19 is desirable is a vital first step, but it is the Government's job to ensure that it is delivered.

It is a positive suggestion, and I hope that the minister will respond to it. The minister has made the right noises about social enterprises, but sadly those noises have not always been matched by the right outcomes. The minister will recall the case of aye can in Aberdeen, in which he intervened at the point at which the council threatened it with closure and he looked to create a social enterprise to give that supported employment provider a future. Sadly that did not happen and, as we look at the case of Glencraft, it is important that we do not see the same disappointment of the hopes that have been raised by support from central and local government for the creation of a Glencraft 2. Ministers have encouraged the workforce so far, and they must stick with the project until it is up and running. If they do so, they can help to make a difference. I began by mentioning Aberdeen Remploy in my constituency. That factory is now leading the way in the Remploy brand in piloting a social enterprise model. It is doing so with the full support of United  Kingdom ministers and in tandem with plans for a recruitment branch to get disabled people into mainstream employment. As Tom Clarke recognised, that twin-track approach is the right way forward. I hope that ministers will also give it their practical support in word and deed, so that places such as Glencraft and Remploy can continue to serve a useful function into the future.

Does the member accept that the Remploy factory is open because of a decision by the Labour Government that was welcomed by all parties at the time?

Does the minister accept that his Government's target date for starting the AWPR is now the same as the previous Administration's target date for completion? In that context, will he agree today to bring forward moves to address the Haudagain pinch-point and get the work done in advance of work on the AWPR?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to make decisions on the future development of forensic and fingerprint services. (S3O-9293)

The cabinet secretary will accept that it is now more than two years since the forensic lab in Aberdeen was first threatened with closure. Why will no conclusions be made public before the summer, given that the SPSA made a commitment as recently as November to produce an options paper by the end of last year? Does the cabinet secretary accept his responsibility for removing as soon as possible the continuing uncertainty that forensics and fingerprint staff in Aberdeen and across Scotland face?

The current Administration has declared that its overriding purpose is  "To focus our resources on creating a more successful country with opportunities for all of Scotland to flourish, through increasing sustainable economic growth". Not many MSPs would dissent from that being an objective for Scotland's devolved Government. Ministers would therefore not have been surprised that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee considered the budget in the context of that commitment, and, of course, they know that we concluded: "we do not believe that the budget proposed is the right one for the economic challenges ahead." That was the view of almost every witness from outwith the Government from whom we heard, and it was the conclusion of the majority of the members of the committee. As Malcolm Chisholm said, we found that almost all the budget lines that were relevant to the economy had been reduced both in absolute terms and relative to the trends in the budget as a whole. We found that the draft budget was simply not fit for purpose. Not only that, the committee heard concerns about the efforts that ministers had made to deploy accelerated capital spending. The construction industry told the committee that too much of the accelerated housing money had been used in buying up land and acquiring houses that had already been built and that not enough had been invested in new build. Representatives of business in general expressed their concerns about the lack of progress that had been made with the Scottish Futures Trust and the resulting lack of action in commissioning new public sector projects over two and a half years. In October, the chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, Liz Cameron, said that the budget "does not suggest the government's first priority is to grow the Scottish economy." There was particular reference to the cuts in the budgets of the enterprise agencies. The committee heard plenty of evidence that there was a critical need for "a government-endorsed public/private procurement model in the marketplace", and most members agreed with that view in the end. That deficiency has still not been addressed. I refer to the statement that was made last week on the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which is one of the public sector projects for which ministers intend to seek private sector funding. In answering questions on his statement, the cabinet secretary was clear that that project will be procured using the non-profit distributing model of private-public partnership—I presume that it is to be delivered through the Scottish Futures Trust. The NPD model has, of course, already been used in Aberdeen to procure the school  replacement and refurbishment programme, for which public sector funding was put in place by a previous Administration, in 2002. Perhaps the difficulties that lie ahead for the AWPR are indicated by the experience of the Aberdeen schools programme. An Icelandic bank was the initial funder. That bank went into administration and was then nationalised as a consequence of the meltdown of Icelandic financial services. Aberdeen City Council did its best, but it was unable to secure an alternative private funder, and that vital £120 million public-private project has been able to move forward only thanks to guarantees backed by the Icelandic Government and supported by loans from the council. We do not yet know what ministers believe the final cost of the AWPR will be, but it is certain to be several times greater than the cost of the Aberdeen schools project. That is why I raised concerns last week about the difficulty of finding a private sector partner and sourcing private sector funding for a project as large as the AWPR. The project is also a very good example of the risks and costs that arise from delay in putting a credible model of public-private partnership into place. Mr Swinney and his colleagues inherited a timetable for the AWPR that could have seen the project completed by 2011 had an existing funding mechanism been employed and had the timetable that was set by the previous Administration been adhered to, yet last week Mr Swinney invited us all to welcome his announcement that construction of the AWPR would not begin until 2011.

There were many objections, there was an inquiry and ministers responded to it, but they took a good deal longer to respond to that inquiry than they did to respond to the one regarding the golf course in Aberdeenshire, which was also a useful project but which was expedited at a different pace from the AWPR. We can only wonder whether the AWPR might have been moved forward a lot more quickly had ministers either proceeded on the basis of existing PPP models or put their plans for a Scottish Futures Trust into place immediately rather than eventually. We can only wonder, too, whether capital spending headroom has been created by ministers in postponing the start of the AWPR and, if so, how much. The figures that the permanent secretary gave last week still envisaged a completion date in 2012-13, yet we can reasonably expect at least a three-year construction programme. If that is what is required,  a completion date of 2013 is clearly not going to be met. There are still opportunities for ministers to address the issues that have been raised today; to manage the capital budget in ways that support vital infrastructure projects across Scotland; to boost affordable housing and energy efficiency; and to support economic recovery. There are opportunities, too, to recognise the particular issues that young people face in entering the labour market by building on the investment in apprenticeships that ministers agreed to make this time last year. We need a budget for jobs, housing and economic recovery, but we do not yet have it. I hope that, in the next few days, ministers will engage to create a budget that is fit for purpose.

Will the cabinet secretary confirm whether the £10 million that he referred to is the money that was allocated in the draft budget for the saltire prize?

Given that, as the First Minister knows, the greatest constraint on renewable generation in the north of Scotland is access to the grid, will he remove any uncertainty and confirm today that his Government has given consent for an overhead transmission line to run all the way from Beauly to Denny?

Will the minister give way?

The case for community-facing prisons could be made anywhere, not just in Aberdeen, but it is in Aberdeen that the conflict between the aspiration and the reality of Scottish Government policy is at its most acute. Only in Aberdeen is there a proposal—which was made by ministers in 2007—to close down a community-facing prison. Only in Aberdeen, Scotland's third city—which is home to most of those who are detained in the local prison—do ministers intend to respond to the problems of overcrowding and dilapidated facilities by doing away with the local prison altogether and, sadly, replacing it with a new prison in a quite different town. As many will remember, there was a campaign in Peterhead against proposals to close Peterhead jail, which, as SNP members will recall, produced a manifesto commitment "to the long-term future of Peterhead Prison including the rebuilding of the prison" and to protect and enhance the "resource it provides in dealing with sex offenders in Scotland." Of course, it was only because of that specialised work that Peterhead still had a prison at all, which is interesting in the context of the proposal to end that work, of which Richard Baker reminded us. Before the 2007 election, no one bothered to tell people in Aberdeen that the plan was to keep Peterhead prison open at the expense of the prison in Aberdeen. Even after the election, ministers made no effort to consult informed local opinion in the city before announcing their intention to close its jail. Had  they consulted people, they might have reached a quite different conclusion. For example, any of the four ward councillors could have told them that 20 per cent of the prisoners at Craiginches have home addresses within walking distance of the prison. Ministers might have been given the estimate by a senior member of the Aberdeen City Council administration that the holding of prisoners more than 30 miles beyond the city limits would result in the council's social work budget incurring £2 million in additional costs. They might have heard the police's concerns about the extra costs and the risks involved in holding remand prisoners so far away from the courts that must consider their cases. They might have heard the concerns of Families Outside about the impact on family cohesion and the prospects for rehabilitation of holding offenders in a place that is an hour by public transport from where their families live. Thankfully, the Public Petitions Committee has heard a good deal of such evidence, and its members deserve credit for asking questions and pursuing the issue. Equally, Aberdeen prison visiting committee deserves credit for lodging the petition. Sadly, ministers have not listened—at least, not yet. It was revealing that the constituency member for Banff and Buchan, the Scottish Government transport minister, told the local press and the prison governor of plans to build a new prison in Peterhead and to close Aberdeen prison a full week before the decision was announced by the justice secretary or the SPS. Last year, Kenny MacAskill appeared before the Public Petitions Committee to defend his decision. I agree with him that "we must do what we can to ensure that relationships can be continued and that families ... can visit. The maintenance of such relationships is beneficial to rehabilitation."—[ Official Report , Public Petitions Committee , 10 February 2009; c 1470.] If the justice secretary must do what he can, he should start with the simplest step. Before he thinks about new community prisons, he should agree to keep the ones that we have. He should act on the welcome proposition that a replacement jail for Craiginches can be designed to accommodate adult males, women and young offenders, but he should abandon the proposition that that should be accompanied by the closure of Aberdeen prison, because there is no need to do that. Instead, the minister should engage in meaningful efforts to replace the existing buildings at Craiginches with the modern, fit-for-purpose prison that the city of Aberdeen is entitled to expect.

Can the minister explain how the promotion of community-facing prisons is best achieved by the closure of Aberdeen prison? Does he not believe that the best way for a prison to face the community is for it to be located in the community from which most of the prisoners come?

The cabinet secretary said that he intends to deliver the project through the non-profit distributing model. He has been clearer on that in answer to questions than he was in his statement. He also said that he expects that the Scottish Government will bear the cost of maintaining the scheme. How will he achieve that? Will there be two separate contracts—one for construction and one for maintenance—rather than the cost of maintenance being met from the annual payments that are made to the main contractor, as would normally be the case with a non-profit distributing model? What work has been done to establish whether private sector partners are willing to fund a scheme of the size of the AWPR on such a model?

I thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. I welcome his decision to grant consent. The statement has been long awaited—indeed, the decision has been long delayed. It is difficult to see what the minister has told us today that he could not have told us six months ago. As the convener of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee noted before proceedings began, on its own the statement is somewhat devoid of detail. In addition, so far it has not been accompanied by copies of the decision letters, which I assume will contain some of the important detail. I will therefore ask the minister for some of that detail on two points in particular. The minister said that he will require "a range of improvements to the wirescape and undergrounding of a number of existing lines", and that "86.5km of existing wirescape can be removed or improved". What length of existing line will he require to be undergrounded? Where he does not require undergrounding, what will he require instead?  The minister also said that intends to establish an environmental liaison group and a tourism, cultural heritage and community liaison group, which he will require the developers to consult. Will the consultations add to the timescale for completion of the project? Last year, the developers said that they could have commissioned the line by October 2012 if work had started by June 2009. Clearly, that did not happen. Does the minister expect that the conditions that he has set for the development will allow the developers to get started on the construction in the first half of 2010? Will the upgraded line be commissioned by October 2013? When will the work be finished? Will any condition that he has set for any part of the Beauly to Denny line or the essential lines that will connect to it require a fresh consent application?

The minister will know that many of the plans around carbon capture and storage in this country and, indeed, across the United Kingdom, relate to the use of saline aquifers in the North Sea. What discussions does he propose to have with developers who propose a carbon capture plant on the west coast of Scotland about the disposal of carbon captured at that plant?

I hope that the minister finds his visit to Copenhagen as informative as those of us who went there in April as part of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee's energy inquiry found ours to be. He will be interested to learn that, in a leafy suburb of Copenhagen, we visited a waste combustion plant that supplies the district heating system that serves that community. I hope that he will agree that we must take a similar approach to energy from waste, if Scotland's local councils are to meet their obligations to reduce landfilling with waste, and if ministers are to meet their targets for renewable heat. We need political leadership to achieve that. We discovered that district heating is the rule in Denmark rather than the exception. Many district heating systems there use fossil fuels. In central Copenhagen, for example, the minister may be warmed on his visit by a heating system that is fuelled by steam from a coal-fired power station, because district heating is recognised in Denmark as being beneficial in its own right, whether it is fuelled by coal, gas, waste or wood. The reason why is simple: if all of a town or city is served by a single source of heat, it will by definition make far more efficient use of energy than if every single household has its own separate heat source. Even more significantly, if a district heating system is already in place, the process of conversion to a lower carbon fuel in the future will be relatively straightforward and is likely to have a very significant impact in respect of carbon reduction and climate change. In the urban context, the kind of scheme that the minister will see in Copenhagen offers the opportunity for mass conversion of households to low-carbon energy in the future. It is crucial that that happens on a larger scale. The minister recognised, during the passage of what is now the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, the relevance of district heating and of combined heat and power. He was generous in acknowledging the example that has been set by Aberdeen Heat and Power Ltd, which leads in this country in provision of combined heat and power to domestic properties. He also agreed to alter the rating position of CHP schemes to match the  position in England, where more of the schemes are exempt from non-domestic rates. I am pleased that ministers have since then published draft regulations and consulted on them. I hope that they will acknowledge the concern that has been raised in that consultation that simply to replicate the English regulations will not, on its own, do the trick, because regulations south of the border are not designed to take into account the common areas that are typical of many high-rise properties here in Scotland. I would not expect to chide Stewart Stevenson very often for being unwilling to take a different approach from England, but in this case I hope that ministers will take a lead and go beyond even the good example that has been set by Westminster, in order to reflect Scottish circumstances and Scottish housing, and that they will go further to reduce the costs that face those who seek to set up district heating or combined heat and power schemes in Scotland in the future.

Indeed. As Maureen Watt says, biomass is the fuel for a number of schemes in rural Scotland. That is a good development and one that I wholly support. In the urban context, it may not be possible immediately to do that, which is why I think that a different approach is needed. It is not simply a case of reducing local tax liability if we are to see the new approach happen: we also need political will and Government investment. I am disappointed that, in the current financial year, Scottish ministers have not invested in district heating any of the £2 million in consequentials that they received because of Westminster spending in that area. I hope that we will see a different approach. That £2 million could go a long way in advancing CHP schemes, such as are being planned in Aberdeen and Edinburgh, or the community heating aspects of the sustainable Glasgow project. Scottish Government spending on new CHP in those cities would send a positive message to all the communities and businesses that are considering making more efficient use of energy by capturing surplus heat. The Sustainable Development Commission advised ministers to progress renewable heat by supporting district heating schemes in the short term, even when those may start life by using fossil fuels. Such schemes will make immediate carbon savings and help to cut fuel poverty, and beyond 2020 their conversion to renewable fuels  will enable us to make a step change in efforts to meet low-carbon targets, given the scale involved. The Scottish Government's consultation on energy efficiency acknowledged those points, but its renewable heat action plan for Scotland did not. I hope that ministers will consider aligning both strategies behind support for district heating. If they do so, they will put Scotland in a much better position to be able to meet its carbon reduction targets in the years ahead. As Sarah Boyack said, we want the Scottish Government to deliver on its promises of support for microgeneration of renewable electricity and domestic-scale production of renewable heat. It is therefore important that Scotland should adopt the right system of feed-in tariffs for microrenewable generation. The trade association for the electrical industry in Scotland, Select, has devised a scheme in line with the relevant European Union directive, but there seems to be some doubt about how certification for microgeneration will be done. I hope that the minister can clarify the position and ensure that the scheme that is adopted does not place an undue burden on consumers who want to install microgeneration in their homes.

Does the member concede that the critical factor in moving forward with offshore wind and other marine renewables potential lies in the Marine (Scotland) Bill that is going through this very Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive what annual provision will be required to meet the costs of the Aberdeen western peripheral route over the next 30 years, if it is procured under the non-profit-distributing model. (S3O-8706)

I am sure that the minister will recognise that, if the project is delivered even at the figures that were estimated some years ago, the annual payments to be made, perhaps over a 30-year period, will be in the region of £16 million to £21 million. Does the minister recall John Swinney's address to the David Hume Institute in April this year? In that speech, Mr Swinney criticised previous Administrations for making "vast 30-year financial commitments of growing scale and growing impact in the full knowledge that the growth years of public spending were coming to an end." Does the minister recall that Mr Swinney described that type of 30-year payment scheme as "the summit of financial irresponsibility"? That contrasts with the recent statements from Transport Scotland and the minister's and Mr Swinney's colleague Brian Adam in relation to the procurement of the Aberdeen western peripheral route over a 30-year period.  Does the minister, in the light of his plans for the AWPR, support the view of Mr Swinney or of Mr Adam? Does he have any evidence of private sector partners that are willing to provide the money up front to make the non-profit-distributing model work?

As the constituency member, I emphasise the dedication of all grades of staff at Aberdeen royal infirmary to the care and safety of patients. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that staff have the time that they need to do their jobs and that NHS Grampian has the resources that it needs to protect patients from health care acquired infections?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to review the bursaries available to further education students. (S3O-8590)

Does the minister recognise that the impact of increased demand for further education places is greatest on the largest colleges, such as Aberdeen College, which is in my constituency? Will he undertake to ensure that any additional funding that the funding council allocates for bursaries is allocated on a proportionate basis, so that the assistance goes where it is needed most?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and I welcome his announcement today on biomass heat. However, does he not recognise that district heating schemes will be critical in promoting low-carbon heat going forward, whatever the fuel source that is used? The Sustainable Development Commission Scotland report to which he referred, which was released with the action plan, is clear that action to support district heating should be taken forward as part of Government work to stimulate low-carbon heat sources between now and 2020, even though larger urban district schemes are likely to be fuelled in the short term by fossil rather than renewable fuels. Does the minister not agree with the SDC that we need to move now to put in place district heating or combined heat-and-power schemes, because doing so will make the conversion from fossil fuel heating to renewable heating much simpler in urban areas later on? The Government's consultation on energy efficiency raises the possibility of financial support for up-front costs or for local councils to establish companies to develop district heating schemes or combined heat-and-power schemes. This year's UK budget, as the minister knows—I have written to him on the matter—offered Scottish ministers £2 million to do just that. Why has that not been done? Why has that opportunity not been taken? Why does the renewable heat action plan offer no action on that particular front?

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the evidence that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee received yesterday. I draw his attention to the comments that were made by a senior officer in the European Commission's competition directorate-general. It was said that, if the Scottish Government had made representations on small business lending and the concentration of ownership in that market in only two banks, they would have been taken into account. Does the cabinet secretary regret that he did not make such representations before 3 November? Looking forward, a final decision on Lloyds has not yet been taken. Will the cabinet secretary now make such representations to ensure that choices are available to small businesses in Scotland when they seek lending opportunities in the future?

Would Stuart McMillan accept that the Opposition view, as he described it, that the bill was not fit for purpose, was one of the factors that contributed to amendments being lodged that we were able to support?

I, too, begin by acknowledging the work of the clerks to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, unused as they perhaps are to dealing with subjects such as arbitration. I also acknowledge the advice and evidence that were given to us by the many people who appeared before the committee. I welcome the fact that we have arrived at stage 3 and the fact that, as we heard, we may anticipate little dispute about the final outcome of the bill's parliamentary passage in the next hour and a half. That was not necessarily expected when the bill was introduced at the beginning of the year. As the minister hinted, the process began with some uncertainty about the character of the measure that was proposed and where it might best be considered within the Parliament's committee structure. The decision was submitted to our own in-house arbitration procedure, which is known as the Parliamentary Bureau, and as a result the bill was assigned to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on the basis of the potential economic benefits to which the minister alluded. That decision led to many of us becoming familiar with areas of public policy that are not ordinarily on the agenda of a committee that focuses on the economy. Those of us who took evidence in the committee saw witnesses and read submissions that came, almost without exception, from the legal profession and the arbitration community. In that sense, the experience has been an enlightening one for those of us who have not served on a justice committee, because the issues that were contested and the forms of advocacy that were deployed were particular to those professional groups. However, in spite of that limited constituency, there is an economic rationale behind the bill and, like other parties, we support the proposition that Scotland's arbitration law should benefit from the  more modern framework that the bill offers. In its 10 years, devolution has brought benefits in precisely such areas by allowing specific Scottish provision to be updated where such legislation might have struggled to command time in the United Kingdom Parliament's crowded timetable. Our approach has been to support such modernisation while ensuring that the focus should not fall exclusively on competing for international arbitration business at the expense of domestic consumers. At stage 1, we pressed the minister to consult directly with those involved in consumer arbitration schemes of one sort or another. We believe that such consultation should have removed uncertainties that might otherwise have surfaced only after the passing of the bill—and indeed it did so with regard to the reservation of consumer protection law to Westminster. The potential economic benefit of attracting arbitration business to Scotland is, at this stage, unknown, and the dubious numbers that ministers initially offered were very wisely withdrawn after stage 1. It will clearly take more than an updated legal framework to attract business from such established global hubs of commercial arbitration as the City of London, where a wider enabling infrastructure is already in place. Nevertheless, it is right to ensure that there are no avoidable legal obstacles in the way of attracting business, and the broad support that the measure in its final form has attracted makes us confident that that is now the case. From the outset, we were concerned whether the repeal of UNCITRAL model law would narrow Scotland's appeal as the seat of arbitration. I am glad that ministers agreed to make it explicit in the bill that parties could agree to adopt UNCITRAL model law in place of the default rules in the new Scottish law. As the Law Society of Scotland has blown rather hot and cold over the issue, I find it striking that, at this final stage, it has raised no fundamental objection to the resolution to that issue that we achieved at stage 2. Another important issue was the bill's potential retrospective effect. I am glad that the minister took the opportunity to address such concerns at stage 2, and the setting of a clear transition process and the confirmation that arbitrations that are already under way will not be affected should ensure that there is no unintended confusion for parties to arbitration proceedings in Scotland. At stage 1, the committee's cross-party view was that, although the bill had the right purpose, it was not yet fit for purpose. I welcome the Government's willingness to address a range of issues that were raised at that point in a set of amendments in the minister's name at stage 2. I also welcome the amendments that he moved this afternoon to address certain remaining issues,  including the removal of uncertainty over anonymity in court proceedings. I believe that the bill now strikes the right balance in a number of ways that it did not at the outset. The minister is also right to say that the consultation process has helped to address some of the issues that arose earlier in the process. However, he should not conclude that, in taking forward such complex and technically challenging legislation, it will always be enough to meet all the interested parties. In this case, it was helpful that the bill's fundamental principles had general support from the outset. I am sure that the minister will acknowledge that, had that not been the case, it would have taken more than stakeholder engagement to resolve some of the issues that might have emerged. Now that we have reached this stage, it is clearly helpful that the University of Aberdeen and other universities are already teaching students about the interpretation of and the arbitration procedures resulting from the bill. I hope that it will now be possible for those who are involved in the arbitration business to justify at least some of the claims made on their behalf in recent months by attracting international business to Scotland while continuing to provide a cheaper, quicker alternative to the courts in resolving issues between parties in Scotland. That will build on the good name and reputation of Scots law and Scottish arbitration, and there will also be benefits if the Scottish Government engages proactively in attracting such business in future. Of course, it is not for the public purse to pay out vast sums to allow Scottish businesses to market their own business to potential overseas customers, but I hope that the minister will confirm that the public sector's role in promoting Scotland as a place for arbitration will not end with the passing of the bill this evening.

I acknowledge the minister's clarification of those technical matters in response to the issues that were raised with members by the Law Society of Scotland, a number of which impinge on this area. It has been helpful that the minister has made clear in the bill and in the appropriate rules some of the matters that would otherwise appear only in court rules. I therefore support the amendments.

To ask the Scottish Executive what  guidance it has issued to local authorities on fly-tipping. (S3O-8433)

What advice would the cabinet secretary give—or anticipate that the forum would give—to councils on the issue of charging for uplift of single large items of domestic waste, such as fridge freezers? There is evidence that such charges can lead to increased levels of fly-tipping, and to items not being recycled when they ought to be, which has consequences for Scotland's ability to meet its national recycling targets.

I congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. In his speech, which was mature and reasoned, he made it clear that the Glasgow airport rail link is of regional importance but it can also be an indispensable component of a modern, 21 st  century transport infrastructure for the whole of Scotland. My constituents in Aberdeen would agree with him on that.

Jack McConnell is absolutely right. He speaks with authority as he was First Minister when the GARL proposals came forward. My constituents in the north-east will welcome his comments. Their ability to use Glasgow airport to access places that are not served by flights from Aberdeen is significant. On that ground, they will support a direct link from Glasgow airport to the railway network that connects our cities.

SNP members are not satisfied with setting Scotland against the rest of Britain; they spend a lot of time and effort trying to set one part of Scotland against other parts of Scotland. The cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link is not the SNP's first offence, of course. Mr Swinney and his colleagues cancelled the Edinburgh airport rail link as soon as they could after taking office. Some might believe that the cancellation of EARL and GARL is mere coincidence; others might detect a trend. For those of us who represent areas outwith the central belt, that trend is very worrying indeed. Of course, I want to see more direct routes to and from Aberdeen airport, which already has good connections with Scandinavia and generates much traffic indirectly with North America. However, a city region with a population base of 500,000 people, no matter how dynamic its local economy, cannot sustain the whole range of international and intercontinental routes. That is why I want my constituents to have the best possible access to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports and it is why I want those airports to have the best possible connections with the north-east.  The suggestion has been made—it was implicit in Brian Adam's question—that reinstating the Glasgow airport rail link would put at risk projects of importance to other parts of Scotland. That is a deeply divisive and misleading proposition. When it was first made, I raised my concerns directly with John Swinney, who responded within the same working day—I give him credit for that. However, he did not answer directly the question that I put to him then: was the Aberdeen western peripheral route considered for cancellation at the same time as the Glasgow airport rail link? That is what has been suggested by members of the SNP in the north-east, and it would be useful if Mr Swinney could answer that specific question directly this evening. The Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee heard in evidence last week that it will take three years to build the WPR—

The cabinet secretary will recognise that some of those rooms might otherwise have been available for other students and other young people. Does she recognise that pressure on student accommodation has knock-on effects on the housing of young people in general in university cities? Should city councils such as Aberdeen City Council discuss those issues directly with universities and student associations? As the minister with responsibility for educational outcomes, will she encourage councils to do that?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government intends to announce its decision on the proposed grid upgrade between Beauly and Denny. (S3F-1975)

Does the First Minister recognise that what purported to be an informed leak about the decision last weekend, far from softening up opposition to the upgrade, simply provided a platform for all the arguments that have already been heard in 105 days of public inquiry? Ministers have now had the report of that inquiry for 10 times as long as they took to make a decision on the Donald Trump golf course proposal. Will the First Minister now end the uncertainty and commit to an official announcement on a positive decision on the Beauly to Denny line, not just before the end of the year but, say, before the end of next week?

I recognise the case that the member has made for Kintore in the context of the Aberdeen to Inverness line. Does she also see a case for Kintore in the context of Aberdeen crossrail?

Almost every witness who offered evidence to our inquiry said that energy policy should be about lower carbon emissions and higher energy security at the least cost to consumers and with the greatest benefit to the economy. The question was how to strike the right balance between what can be, at times, conflicting objectives. I was impressed by the Royal Society of Edinburgh's concise formulation that public policy should give energy producers the freedom and support to use the widest range of generation technologies, maximise the connectivity of transmission and supply in Britain and Europe, and seek ways in which to reduce energy demand and increase energy efficiency. If those are the right priorities, every policy proposition should be measured against them. Most of the propositions in the committee report pass those tests. The major exception—as the convener said, it was the one issue on which the committee divided—is the Scottish Government policy of ruling out new nuclear power. We divided equally on the issue and the convener's casting vote backed the Government position. If the Government gets those big choices wrong, we run the risk of having an energy policy that is unbalanced from the outset. In the revised national planning framework, ministers recognise that "There is a need for new baseload electricity generating capacity to replace that provided by the power stations  programmed for closure over the next 20 years." If ministers rule out new nuclear in meeting that need, low-carbon baseload electricity can come from only one source: carbon capture and storage. A number of us saw carbon capture in operation at CCS Schwarze Pumpe in Germany. We know that it can be done. The British Government and the European Union have committed billions to demonstrating that carbon capture can work. However, the carbon that is captured at Schwarze Pumpe is trucked across country to be stored in a coal mine. In Germany, carbon transport and storage raise similar concerns to those that are raised by the transport and storage of waste from nuclear power stations. I believe that carbon capture can deliver. The saline aquifers that are readily accessible below the North Sea offer an answer to the storage question; the most recent study will no doubt confirm that. The expertise of our offshore oil and gas industry provides much of the answer to carbon transport. That said, no technology is certain until it is operating on a commercial scale and nowhere in the world is that the case thus far. Ministers need to bear that in mind when they consider proposals for new coal-fired power stations. Clearly, those proposals are posited on the assumption that carbon capture will be put in place at some point. If carbon capture and storage does not deliver, we must not hear again the argument that we have heard in the chamber once or twice over the past couple of years that we need to produce only enough power to meet our own needs. Accepting the argument would, of course, involve us turning our backs on the existing strength of Scottish energy production as an export industry. It would be a big mistake for us to do that. For example, the Scottish oil and gas companies that operate in oil provinces around the world bring in export earnings in excess of £4 billion a year. Scottish electricity production exceeds consumption most of the time. That is a good thing, given that it sustains jobs and economic activity in Scotland. Surplus power should not be used to justify cutting back generation; it would be far better for us to limit consumption and maximise export earnings while decarbonising as much as possible of our electricity output. It is in that context that Labour members of the committee believe that it would be a mistake to rule out any low-carbon source of electricity at this time. There was broad agreement on the need to reduce demand where possible, while there was also recognition that reducing carbon emissions from heat and from transport may require the generation of more low-carbon electricity. Half of Scotland's energy consumption is of heat, so  action on that offers some savings in emissions and in costs to consumers. As Iain Smith said, the committee had the opportunity to see one of the best exemplars of district heating when we visited Denmark and there are clearly useful lessons to be learned. At a power station such as Longannet, more energy is released into the atmosphere than is turned into electricity. Capturing that heat would be a significant gain for energy efficiency. I was pleased that ministers agreed at stage 3 of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill to reduce the burden of business rates on combined heat and power schemes. Aberdeen boasts one of the best exemplars of CHP anywhere in Britain; it has reduced both carbon emissions and costs to consumers, many of whom previously lived in fuel poverty. I hope that ministers will back up that decision, which was made in June, when they bring forward their renewable heat proposals. Ministers have received approximately £2 million in consequentials for money allocated in the last UK budget for district heating schemes elsewhere; it would show real commitment to this form of technology if that money were used to promote further CHP development in Aberdeen and Scotland's other cities. Iain Smith mentioned the need for a new wave and tidal energy support scheme. That need was highlighted only last month by the Scottish Government's advisers in the marine energy group of FREDS. When the minister sums up, it would be useful to hear whether ministers will respond positively to the marine energy group's recommendation that there should be a replacement scheme for WATES and that it should have an increased budget for use year-on-year by developers. Such commitments, whether they are in the single millions or the tens of millions, may not cost much compared with, for example, the multimillion pound commitments of the UK Government on carbon capture and storage or, indeed, the investments in grid infrastructure such as the Beauly to Denny power line, on which I hope we will very soon hear an announcement from the minister. However, they would be a positive signal of intent and I hope that ministers can respond positively on those matters today.

Has the cabinet secretary endorsed the report that the marine energy group of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland—FREDS—published on 26 August, which praised the £13 million wave and tidal energy scheme that was put in place by the previous Scottish Administration and recommended "that the scheme be re-run with an increased budget" by his Government, and will he implement that recommendation?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the minister accept that the news service that is produced in Aberdeen is regional rather than local, and that it has the highest audience penetration of any regional news programme anywhere in Scotland, England or Wales? Does he recognise that STV's current proposals would cut the level of production by nearly two thirds? How many jobs does he think will be put in jeopardy? Will he tell STV the next time he meets the company that he shares those concerns—if indeed he does—about the impact on the creative and media hub in Aberdeen?

To ask the Scottish Executive what additional transport infrastructure will be in place before the next offshore Europe oil and gas conference and exhibition in 2011. (S3O-7874)

Does the minister share my concern that the next offshore Europe conference has been cut short because Aberdeen's transport infrastructure will not be able to cope? If he shares that concern, will he publish a development timetable to guarantee completion of the Aberdeen western peripheral route in time for, if not the next offshore Europe conference, at least the one after that?

The minister will know that the Secretary of State for Scotland, too, was in Aberdeen yesterday. He said that he would throw his weight behind the city's bid to be UK city of culture in 2013. Will the Scottish Government match that commitment and also support Aberdeen's bid?

I mentioned Woodgrove nursing home in Aberdeen, which was one of the first specialist care homes for people with dementia and is supported by the dementia development centre. I would be grateful if the minister would confirm that she is prepared to take steps to encourage the agencies that are involved in supporting and regulating that work to talk to each other so that the home is not closed due to a failure to join up the care commission standards with local government funding, which has clearly been the source of the trouble in that case.

Developing a national strategy for mental health services that shifts the balance of care is important but, as members have said, is not enough by itself. Such a strategy needs to be reflected in action on the ground. That has certainly been the case at Aberdeen's Royal Cornhill hospital, where care for people with dementia has moved into the community, to the benefit of all concerned.  Woodgrove nursing home has been a very good symbol of that change. Built 12 years ago in what were the grounds of Cornhill hospital, operated by Voluntary Service Aberdeen with support from the local authority and funded by transferred NHS resources worth around £800,000 a year, Woodgrove nursing home has been involved in providing specialised nursing care to people with dementia outwith a hospital setting. Woodgrove has been an exemplar of shifting the balance of care. When I visited the dementia services development centre at the University of Stirling a few years ago, I was struck by the enthusiasm of Professor June Andrews and her colleagues for practical examples of specialised care such as Woodgrove. Indeed, the dementia services development centre was involved in setting up Woodgrove as a beacon project in specialised care. That positive view was also expressed clearly by the care commission in its 2005 report, which gave a long list of strengths at Woodgrove and few areas where improvement was required. There was praise from families for the care provided by VSA and the helpful attitude of staff. Sadly, as the minister will know, that exemplary provision is no more. I wrote to ministers in July last year after I had been contacted by relatives of residents at Woodgrove, who were concerned about plans to downgrade the home from provider of specialist care to provider of general care. I pointed out that Woodgrove had been custom built for precisely that client group, and that it had become home to people with severe dementia who benefited hugely from the dedication and expertise of the nursing staff, and who would otherwise be likely to end up back in hospital. The minister may recall her reply of 31 July last year, in which she said that it was "outwith the remit of the Scottish Government to intervene in such decisions." VSA's decision to downgrade Woodgrove was taken on financial grounds. In the midst of its financial crisis, Aberdeen City Council was not willing to continue to provide the funding that a specialist home required, despite the transfer of national health service resources for that purpose. VSA was not willing to continue to fill the funding gap.

I would not accept for a moment that the closure of a home that receives all its funding for the care of people with dementia from Aberdeen City Council through the transfer of NHS resources has nothing to do with the city council; it is directly to do with the city council. Sadly, no one was prepared to take responsibility for addressing the issue. VSA went ahead and notified the care commission, on 18 December last year, that it would no longer provide specialist care at Woodgrove. Thankfully, it did not propose to remove all 40 residents of Woodgrove, many of whom had severe dementia, but in spite of the best efforts of the staff union, Unite, the downgrading brought with it the loss of a number of excellent and experienced nurses, while the client group remained broadly the same. None of the agencies concerned acted to prevent the downgrading and none of them found a way to deal with the problems that that created. Instead, there has been a failure to agree among the agencies that are responsible for setting the standards, providing the funding and delivering the care for residents. Aberdeen City Council wanted to base funding on individual assessments of residents' needs. VSA argued for staffing that reflected a mix of specialised and general care requirements. The care commission was extremely concerned about the impact of the loss of experienced nursing staff and insisted on a staffing schedule that prioritised the welfare of those residents who continued to suffer from severe dementia. Last week, the board of VSA decided to abandon its negotiations and announced its decision to close Woodgrove in three months' time, apparently without giving prior notice to anyone else. That news certainly came as a bolt from the blue for residents and their families, who had been told that adequate care could be maintained at Woodgrove despite its downgrading. That has proved to be wrong. They had also been told that there would be no need to uproot their loved ones—that, too, has proved to be wrong. Over the past few days, I have spoken to all the agencies involved, including the city council—which has said that it will make contact with relatives—the NHS, the care commission and VSA. None of them has said that the decision to close Woodgrove was its responsibility; they have all said that it was down to someone else. However, none of them has denied that Woodgrove's closure is a tragedy for the development of specialised care for people with dementia and for the implementation of a dementia strategy. They have all said that they are willing to keep talking to find a way to resolve the issues and, hopefully, to reach a different outcome.  Of course, it would be useful if the minister were to clarify where responsibility for such decisions ultimately lies but, above all, I want to take the opportunity to ask her if she will now intervene—not to overrule the decisions of voluntary organisations or local councils, but to bring together all the parties involved in the fiasco and to find a solution. Woodgrove has been a symbol of shifting the balance of care. I want it to be that again, not a symbol of a chasm between strategy and implementation.

Does the minister recognise that Foresterhill is the largest medical campus in Europe and that the recent investment by Wyeth adds to Aberdeen's success in attracting private finance to biotechnological research? Will he ensure that the prominence of Aberdeen, particularly the Foresterhill campus, is reflected in the priorities that Scottish Enterprise sets and that the investment that Scottish Enterprise makes in the field is not restricted to any one city?

Did the cabinet secretary discuss any of the potential economic impacts arising from his decision, prior to its announcement, with Cabinet colleagues or with anyone outwith the Scottish Government?

This morning, we heard about the range of benefits provided by our devolved Scottish Parliament. Not only does it make radical new laws on land ownership and public health, it clears the backlog of more modest legislative reforms that everyone agrees are necessary but which have simply fallen off the end of the queue for legislative time at Westminster. Modernising arbitration law is one of those necessary reforms that are not politically contested and do not make front-page news but which nevertheless offer real benefits. Instead of being designed by legislators with a specific purpose in mind, Scotland's arbitration system has evolved from centuries of judicial practice. Although this bill has attracted more dispute at  stage 1 than some might have predicted, none of that controversy was about the objective of reform or the proposition that reform is required. Everyone agrees that it is important to clarify and consolidate arbitration law. Nevertheless, there has been controversy. It is just as well that the Parliament's committees are able to thoroughly scrutinise even relatively routine measures to ensure that any problems can be identified and resolved, because, as we have already heard, a number of such issues have arisen with this bill. One of the first issues that arose in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was what the economic potential of the bill might be. The allocation of scrutiny of the bill to that committee depended on the argument that economic benefit was the primary purpose, but it soon became apparent that there was no reliable or agreed basis for estimating what volume of international business a codified modern Scottish arbitration system might attract. Indeed, the minister conceded that very point today. It is not so long since committee members heard ministers justify their pledge to create 16,000 green jobs in Scotland by quoting a figure that was used in a UK Government report and then dividing it by 10. In support of the Arbitration (Scotland) Bill, we saw some figures for potential economic benefits that, it turns out, were based on the same approach. How much international arbitration business can a modern arbitration law bring to Scotland? It seems to me that, "Take the £250 million a year for London and divide by 10," is not a very scientific approach and not one that would survive much scrutiny for long. As the convener said, the financial memorandum accompanying the bill proposed a different figure for the amount of business going through the City of London, which simply added to the confusion. If the bill is indeed an economy measure, it is a pity that we have had to do without any proper estimate of what economic benefits it might bring. If attracting international business is the primary economic purpose of the bill, it is a shame that some of those fundamental issues are still to be resolved. Perhaps the most fundamental issue is the question whether to repeal the UNCITRAL model law, which is the current provision on which international arbitration business in Scotland and many other jurisdictions is based. The minister proposes repeal of the model law. The Chartered Institute of Arbitrators believes that he is right to do so, but the Scottish Council for International Arbitration believes that repeal will "discourage international business from coming to Scotland."  The Law Society believes that "parties to arbitration should be permitted the option of applying the UNCITRAL Model Law if they so wish". In the Law Society's view, the only way of ensuring that that is the case is to remove the repeal provision from the bill. Frankly, it is not enough for the minister to say that the bill says that there will be access to the model law because of section 8(4) if the Law Society is right that that is contradicted by the proposal to repeal section 66 of the Law Reform Act 1990. That is not a minor disagreement; it goes to the heart of what the bill seeks to achieve. It reflects different judgments about whether access to the model law or adoption of a single set of arbitration rules will have the most appeal in the global marketplace and how to ensure that Scotland achieves the best of both worlds. It is not the only outstanding issue. The convener mentioned retrospective effect. Future arbitrations might well arise from contracts that have already been agreed on the basis of the current system as understood by the parties to those contracts. The parties to such contracts need to be clear about where they stand and again it appears that relevant stakeholders have not yet been persuaded of the Government's approach to the issue. Confidentiality of proceedings is one of the attractions of arbitration and needs to be protected under any changes to the law. The issue arises of how the bill can protect confidentiality if a party to an arbitration goes to court on a point of law and adhere to wider principles of open justice at the same time. If neither the Faculty of Advocates nor the commercial judges of the Court of Session are comfortable with those provisions, it is clear that ministers have more work to do to get them right. It is important that ministers meet their commitment to consider how the bill might affect consumer arbitration schemes that operate currently in the context of UK arbitration law and to meet those organisations that run such schemes. The minister said today that he will do that in August. The bill is about business and the law, but it must not have unintended consequences for consumers. I hope that ministers will explore the possibility of having an anonymised digest of outcomes of arbitration cases, like the one that is published monthly in the Netherlands, to ensure that any precedent about which consumers should know is not missed. The bill should be considered as work in progress with significant amendments still required because it is not yet fit for purpose. I hope that the minister will be able to respond positively and clearly enough to show that progress will be made to deliver the bill that all parties want to see.

To ask the Scottish Executive how the consequential funding of £31 million for affordable housing will be allocated among local authority areas. (S3O-7573)

I understand the merits of flexibility. Nonetheless, the minister will recall that, when he distributed £25 million in kick-start funding just a couple of months ago, he was unable to find any funding for the £2 million bid for affordable housing from the city of Aberdeen. Is he aware that a resubmitted bid has been made by Aberdeen City Council? Will the minister ensure that, when he comes to make the allocation on this occasion, the real need for affordable housing in Aberdeen will be recognised? Will he ensure that his Government will provide fair and full funding to meet that need?

The purpose of amendment 134 is again to tackle energy inefficiency—specifically, in this case, the energy inefficiency of  homes in the private rented sector—in order to cut carbon emissions and to address social inequality. I will again begin with a local reference. I first considered energy efficiency issues in the private rented sector as part of work that I did for the energy agency SCARF—Save Cash Reduce Fuel—in Aberdeen in the mid-1980s. What I found then largely remains true today. The private rented sector still has the worst levels of energy inefficiency of any form of housing tenure. According to the key findings of the Scottish house condition survey, a rented property in the private sector is four times as likely to be rated as poor for energy efficiency as the average home. Ten per cent of private sector tenants, whether in city-centre tenements or in homes in rural areas, live in severe fuel poverty, as compared with 4 per cent of tenants in the social rented sector. Amendment 134 seeks to press ministers to achieve the target of bringing the private rented sector up to the same standard that is achieved in other sectors. The guidance that is issued by ministers on the energy efficiency of social rented housing—the Scottish housing quality standard—requires providers to achieve a national home energy rating of at least 5 out of 10 by 2015. Amendment 134 would extend that requirement to cover private landlords. The minister said at stage 2 that consultation on these issues will take place as part of work on the proposed housing bill, and I welcome that. I hope that he can reaffirm that intention today. However, beyond that general commitment, I would specifically like to hear whether ministers will consult on the application of the Scottish housing quality standard to the private rented sector, on the same timetable as applies to the social rented sector. That is partly because I would like to find out about any difficulties that might arise, but also because I would like to hear an indication of the Government's intentions for overcoming any such difficulties. As was the case with amendment 133, I would be interested in hearing when consultation will begin. Will it be accompanied by a regulatory impact assessment to consider the costs and benefits in terms of carbon as well as cash? Finally, following our discussions at stage 2, I would welcome an assurance from the minister that his approach to consulting on energy efficiency measures as consequential improvements to existing buildings, of whatever size, will be the same as his approach to improvements in the private rented sector. Will the minister assure us that steps will be taken in the next few months? I move amendment 134.

I am encouraged by the assurances that the minister has given and by the timetable that he has set. I take it from his comments that that timetable would apply to the range of areas on which he gave assurances at stage 2.

I welcome that clarification, particularly with regard to consequential improvements. Clearly, this is an important issue in terms of social justice as well as energy efficiency. The consultation will enable the necessary steps to be taken in short order to improve the energy efficiency of homes. On that basis, I seek leave to withdraw the amendment.  Amendment 134, by agreement, withdrawn.

Likewise, I will be brief and simply acknowledge the chamber's strong—indeed, unanimous—view that we have reached this point as a result of Sarah Boyack's commitment and latterly the willingness of all parties to find a common route to ensure that progress was made in this area. The critical question now is how the measure will be delivered and how we ensure that, in putting the schemes in place, local authorities have the full support not only of the private sector partners that deliver energy and have committed to improve energy efficiency but of every level of  Government. On that basis, the Parliament has taken a significant step forward.  Amendment 67A agreed to.  Amendments 67B, 67C and 67D moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to.  Amendment 67F moved—[Stewart Stevenson]—and agreed to. Amendment 67E moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to. Amendment 67, as amended, agreed to. Amendment 125 moved—[Lewis Macdonald]. Amendments 125A and 125B moved—[Stewart Stevenson]—and agreed to. Amendment 125, as amended, agreed to.

Back in 2002, Aberdeen City Council established the Aberdeen Heat and Power Company Ltd to deliver the benefits of combined heat and power to people's homes. Three successful schemes have been established, including those at Seaton and Stockethill in my constituency, and they supply 850 homes in high-rise buildings, half of which are for sheltered housing. The direct benefits are better heated homes, locally sourced electricity and lower bills.  If CHP schemes are established more widely, the potential prize will be that we significantly reduce carbon emissions while also tackling fuel poverty. That is why Labour wants more CHP schemes to be established in more towns and cities to supply cheaper and more sustainable heat and power to more homes. Indeed, I suspect that those objectives are shared by members throughout the chamber. To achieve those ends, amendment 133 requires ministers to amend the relevant regulations to remove the burden of non-domestic rates from the distribution pipes and risers in combined heat and power schemes. The Mansfield judgment in England confirmed that business rates there should not be paid on the distribution element of residential CHP schemes. To deliver the same benefit in Scotland requires action by ministers, and that is what the amendment seeks. The required change to the regulations will exempt distribution pipes from the point where they leave the plant to the hydraulic interface unit at which they enter individual homes. Where a scheme includes non-residential as well as residential properties, the exemption will apply from the point where distribution pipes that serve only homes leave the mains pipe that serves both categories. Such changes would bring a reduction in householders' bills. For pensioners and low-income households, a saving of £1 a week or even a fortnight can make a difference and help people to avoid fuel poverty. The changes would not only help householders but reduce the capital costs of developing new or extending existing CHP schemes. That is the prize. If we want more widespread development of district heating schemes, much more will need to be done. However, if members agree to amendment 133, or if the minister makes the changes that I propose in another way, we will make a useful start. I move amendment 133.

I am pleased to hear that assurance. When does the minister anticipate introducing the secondary legislation to which he referred?

I am pleased by the minister's assurances about the substance of what he intends to do. I had hoped that he might be able to give an assurance in relation to the forthcoming financial year, but I take what he said to mean that he will make efforts to introduce secondary legislation as quickly as he can do.

That is helpful. Given the minister's comment and what I took to be a back-stop assurance that the regulations will be changed within 18 months, thereby achieving the objective of amendment 133, I will not press the amendment.  Amendment 133, by agreement, withdrawn.

In the hierarchy of actions that we can take to reduce carbon emissions, action on energy efficiency must always come first. Council tax discounts offer a significant incentive for householders to improve the energy efficiency of their homes. As the minister has graciously acknowledged, we are discussing the amendments in group 17 as a direct result of Sarah Boyack's vision and persistence in pursuing the matter, and her success in building a broad coalition of support behind her member's bill proposals on energy efficiency and microgeneration, which is an important part of the same approach. As the minister has acknowledged, the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee approved that approach at stage 2. I welcome the fact that ministers have moved to support action on energy efficiency in the terms that we have heard. My amendments are designed to ensure that the scheme that the minister introduces achieves the desired results, and I welcome Mr Stevenson's support for them. Without such amendments, the minister's proposals would have allowed discount schemes that supported energy efficiency improvements, but they would not have guaranteed access to the benefits of such schemes across Scotland. If Parliament agrees to my amendments, that access will be guaranteed. Any householder who wishes to make energy efficiency improvements will enjoy access to a council tax discount. There will be no risk of a householder's council not having such a scheme, or of its not applying it to the local area or to the valuation band of the house in question. The message that such discounts are available right across Scotland is a clear and positive one. Of course, a national approach implies a national commitment, and I am glad that ministers have endorsed such an approach throughout Scotland. It is true to say that the bill must provide a framework for the energy companies so that they can invest in improving the energy efficiency of Scottish housing through the carbon emissions reduction target scheme, and we would expect central and local government fully to endorse and support that approach. Amendment 125 provides for a review of the effectiveness of discount schemes, and it does so on an all-Scotland basis, so that any changes that are made will be consistent in all 32 local authority areas. I am happy to accept the minister's amendments to amendment 125, as well as Alex  Johnstone's amendment 132. I urge members to support those amendments. I move amendment 67A.

Does Nanette Milne recognise that her comments about the Conservatives' support for Robin Harper's amendment appear to contradict the positive comments that John Scott made about the recovery of energy from waste and add to Labour members' concerns about the meaning and content of the Conservative amendment?

The cabinet secretary will recall that, on 7 May, I asked him how much of a role energy from waste would play in reducing the amount of waste that is sent to landfill. He said, as Roseanna Cunningham repeated today, that he would cap that contribution at 25 per cent of municipal solid waste. However, he also agreed to consider support for district heating schemes as part of any future proposals for energy from waste. I welcome that as a step in the right direction, although I was concerned that Roseanna Cunningham left any mention of energy to the very end of her opening remarks. My question to Richard Lochhead was prompted by my visit to Denmark and Sweden as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee as part of our inquiry into Scotland's energy future. While we were there, we visited a number of different generating stations—biofuel and coal-burning facilities, offshore wind farms and an energy-from-waste plant at Nordforbrændingen, near Copenhagen. The important point about that plant is that it combusts large quantities of waste as the fuel supply for the local district heating system. It serves one of the most prosperous and articulate communities in the country, it is located at the heart of that community and it appears to be entirely accepted by local residents in a country in which environmental impacts have been taken  seriously for many years. It is not an incinerator in the traditional sense of a plant that burns municipal solid waste in order to dispose of it, nor is it a power station in the traditional sense of a plant that is designed simply to produce electricity and in which more energy escapes to the atmosphere than is put to good use. Instead, it produces combined heat and power, making use of 90 per cent or more of the available energy. In doing so, it reduces inefficiency, limits carbon emissions and saves the customer money. The Danish experience requires us to be extremely careful about ruling out waste that is a potential source of energy in the future, as does the experience of countries such as Austria, whose innovations in waste management were showcased in Edinburgh yesterday and presented to today's meeting of the cross-party group on waste management. Austria, with a population of 8 million, has more energy-from-waste plants than not only Scotland but the whole of the UK. Denmark has a network of 29 plants that serve all the major centres of population as part of a nationwide network of district heating schemes that supply the majority of Danish homes. It is those models that should inform the debate about waste in the context of climate change in Scotland and elsewhere. Closer to home, there is a good example of combined heat and power generation in the Aberdeen CHP schemes that serve high-rise housing at Seaton and Stockethill in my constituency. In this week's meeting of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee, which was considering the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill at stage 2, I argued for the business rates burden on CHPs to be reduced so that other parts of Scotland could follow Aberdeen's good example. If Scotland does indeed choose to develop district heating and CHPs, we need ministers to send out positive signals in support of such schemes by strengthening rather than diminishing the profile of energy-from-waste schemes in the waste hierarchy and by joining up waste policy with policies on energy and climate change. The Institution of Mechanical Engineers produced a report on the subject last year, in which it argued that waste needs to be seen as a resource to be used, not just as a problem to be solved. It is, of course, both those things and, for many waste products, reuse or recycling offers clearly the best opportunities for using them as a resource. For waste streams that do not offer those options, recovery of energy should be recognised as a far better outcome than disposal to landfill. That recovery may be by anaerobic digestion, gasification, pyrolysis or combustion, as long as it  meets the highest air quality standards, and makes the most efficient use of the energy recovered. The waste hierarchy makes that approach explicit. There is broad support for that, and for low-carbon generation of electricity. The challenge is to join up those policy areas and to miss no opportunities for a low-carbon future for succeeding generations.

In light of Maureen Watt's clear misunderstanding of the debate at Aberdeen City Council a couple of weeks ago, will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that, in fact, the opposition parties in the council took the view that the Scottish Government ought to do more to ensure that Aberdeen City Council secures its fair share of spending in future? Does he accept that Maureen Watt's proposition is wrong and that there is no all-party position on funding, whether in Aberdeen or anywhere else in the country?

When does the minister expect the funds from the previous Administration's wave and tidal energy scheme to run out? Will he give us his estimate of the amount of public funding that the marine energy sector will need between that point and 2015?

Yesterday, Sarah Boyack said that the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is potentially the most important legislation that we will pass in the current session. The challenge is in how we will ensure that the bill's outcomes are as significant in practice as its words will be on paper. That was the spirit in which I and other members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee approached our consideration of the sections of the bill that deal with energy efficiency and renewable heat. I am glad that we did so but, in my view, the bill falls short of expectations in a number of areas. The first surprise comes in the opening provision on energy efficiency, which states: "The Scottish Ministers must prepare and publish a plan for the promotion of energy efficiency in Scotland", and stipulates that that plan "must include provision about the promotion of the energy efficiency of living accommodation." The surprise was that that form of words highlighted the promotion of energy efficiency, when ministers proposed to repeal section 179 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006, which committed them to preparing "a strategy for improving the energy efficiency of living accommodation." On 4 March, we asked the minister why he proposed such a dilution of the existing provision.  We did so in vain, although I am pleased to say that ministers have since then accepted the point and have indicated that they will support amendments at stage 2 to restore and, perhaps, to extend the existing provision, whereby they will have to produce an energy efficiency plan that is focused on outcomes as well as aspirations. I hope that the minister will be able to tell us that the discussions between his officials and their Westminster counterparts, which he mentioned to the committee on 4 March, have not thrown up any fresh anxieties about what the Scottish ministers can and cannot do in respect of energy efficiency.

I welcome that statement of intent, although it is not quite a response to my question about the discussions that the minister's officials have had; perhaps we will hear that in the winding-up speech. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee also recommended that ministers should include in the bill the setting of targets for energy efficiency. Unfortunately, that recommendation has not yet received a positive response. Of course, setting targets on its own does not deliver outcomes, but it stimulates activity, shows seriousness of intent and allows progress to be measured. The committee heard yesterday from Jeremy Sainsbury of Natural Power, who has been a member of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland since its inception some five years ago. His evidence was very clear, and I suspect that it would be echoed throughout the renewable energy sector. Scotland's devolved Government, by setting ambitious targets from the beginning, sent a clear message that we wanted to see the renewable energy sector grow. The raft of proposed developments that are now coming through the system is a direct consequence of that proactive approach. I hope that ministers will think again about taking the same approach to energy efficiency. A positive signal now, which other parties could support and industry could rely on, would stimulate confidence in the sector and help to maximise the contribution of energy efficiency to cutting carbon emissions. The committee called on ministers to publish a full draft of their proposed energy efficiency action plan before stage 2 of the bill. Thus far, they have chosen not to do so, but have offered one of those circular arguments that are well suited to not doing  very much. I quote from the ministerial response to the committee: "Ministers could publish an action plan before the Climate Change Bill becomes an Act but this would not fulfil our requirements under the Act—Scottish Ministers would still have to produce and publish another action plan within 12 months." That would be true, unless ministers were so bold as to amend the bill to allow themselves to introduce their energy efficiency action plan early. It seems that that is what committee members from all parties were calling on ministers to do. The committee would like ministers to be ambitious in the promotion of renewable heat. Again, the first sight of section 51 was disappointing. It will require ministers to "take such steps as they consider appropriate", which is not a clear or demanding statutory obligation. It does not give great confidence that detailed plans are already in place. However, ministers have now said that they will publish a renewable heat action plan this summer, following action at Westminster. That is welcome. They have set a target of 11 per cent of demand for heat in Scotland to come from renewable sources by 2020, which is less than the 14 per cent target elsewhere, but it is a start. I hope that there will be amendments to put more substance and more detailed targets in the bill. The committee called for combined heat and power schemes to be part of the Government's plans on both energy efficiency and renewable heat. I am pleased to say that that has been agreed to and I look forward to seeing the substance of it. It is important that lessons that have been learned to date from the experience of CHP and district heating lead to action. The Climate Change (Scotland) Bill provides that opportunity. When the committee visited Aberdeen Heat and Power Company in March, we heard about an important difference between Scotland and England in the assessment for rates liability of CHP schemes. In Scotland, the mains distribution pipes, the risers and the CHP building itself are charged business rates, but in England, they are not. The difference for a scheme such as the one at Stockethill in my constituency is some £18,000 a year, which is added to the cost of heat and power to the consumer. As, I am sure, we will hear this afternoon, local tax discounts to stimulate energy efficiency measures have huge potential but so, too, do business rates exemptions for stimulating CHP. I hope that ministers will consider that. Overall, the recommendations of the range of committees, with cross-party support, provide a  solid base for further improvements to the bill. I hope that more of those proposed changes are accepted at stage 2 and taken forward by ministers.

To ask the Scottish Executive what level of energy generation from waste it intends to achieve as part of its commitment to reduce the amount of waste to landfill. (S3O-6809)

Does the minister recognise the large potential for energy from waste to support district heating schemes in a way that generates fewer emissions than sending waste to landfill or generation from fossil fuels? Will he consider what potential exists to grow that sector? I commend to him the model of Denmark, where there are some 29 energy-from-waste plants throughout the country. Will he consider what he can do to stimulate such developments in an environmentally friendly way?

Does the minister agree that offshore wind energy offers an opportunity both to address the energy gap that Scotland will face in the next 15 to 20 years and to diversify the economy of Aberdeen and the north-east on the basis of proven technology and established offshore skills and expertise?

Does the minister accept that the higher tax on petrol and diesel in island communities is a result of the higher price and not the other way around?

I hope that the minister will check the Official Report very carefully, because he will find that that is far from what I said. I pointed out to him that the critical issue on fuel prices was, first, the price of crude oil, and, secondly, how that price was passed on to consumers. The price for consumers throughout Scotland is a good deal less now than it was a year ago. Surely that is the critical point, and therefore the issue of differential price is one that the minister and his devolved Government ought now to address.

Does the member believe that there are any steps that the Scottish Government could take to address the differential pricing that affects rural areas?

Will the member give way?

We debated a motion on the cost of fuel in the Western Isles and the northern isles on 28 May 2008, which also happened to be the day on which Gordon Brown and Alistair Darling held a summit meeting in Aberdeen with the leaders of the UK oil and gas industry. Those of us who attended the cross-party group on oil and gas yesterday evening heard a good deal about the consequences of that meeting and the ways in which it was reflected in the announcements that were made in last week's budget. The discussions in May last year also set the context for today's debate. As members know, the price of Brent crude peaked last summer at $147 a barrel. The average price in 2008 was $97; in the year to date, it has been only $45. Those crude oil prices are the greatest influence on the cost of fuel at the pump, and the lower oil price is the main reason why unleaded petrol retails at £1 or less a litre in most of mainland Scotland and, indeed, in the Isle of Harris today.

The minister knows the answer to that question and knows that it is high for reasons to do with tackling climate change, an issue that I would have thought is close to his policy priorities. The differential in retail prices in rural Scotland still exists, albeit that it is less than it was. It is entirely reasonable to ask the Scottish ministers what they will do about that, but it is also important to acknowledge that the price of a litre of diesel in Kirkwall or Lerwick today is some 10p less than it was in Aberdeen or Edinburgh at the time of our previous debate on the matter. Today's motion offers little challenge to the Scottish ministers to address the relative disadvantage of island consumers. That is disappointing, because Tavish Scott said last May: "We certainly need action, but we need it here in Edinburgh as well as in London."— [ Official Report , 28 May 2008; c 9069.]  That emphasis seems to have been lost a little today. Instead, the focus of the motion is entirely on UK excise duty on fuel. The chancellor wisely postponed a 2p rise in fuel duty when oil prices were at their peak. He has now brought in that increase while, at the same time, introducing new field allowances offshore and abolishing some elements of the taxation that used to apply when North Sea assets changed  hands. That seems to me a sensible balance of maximising production, limiting carbon impacts and protecting public revenues. That sensible balance of production and consumption has its origins in the Aberdeen summit that took place at the time of our previous debate. Following that summit, Treasury ministers considered a rural fuel duty rebate but rejected the idea for a wide range of reasons. The most fundamental was the simple fact that differentials in price are not a result of differentials in duty, because differentials in duty do not exist. Differentials in price arise despite the Government charging consumers everywhere a single, standard rate. If the tax take on a litre of fuel in the islands is greater than that on a litre of fuel in the cities, it is not because of a difference that the Government has imposed but because of a difference that those selling the fuel have imposed. That is why it is disappointing that parties in the Scottish Parliament continue to focus on matters for which the Parliament is not responsible. It is disappointing that John Swinney continues merely to write to Treasury ministers about the tax issue as if he believed that he was unable to address it directly. Surely the right approach for the Scottish ministers and members of this Parliament is to focus on the causes of the differential prices that fuel suppliers set and to consider what they can do to address them. That is the real issue within the scope of devolved powers. The Scottish ministers are piloting road equivalent tariffs on ferry travel to the Western Isles, but they need to explain why they have failed to extend that price intervention to the retail or wholesale price of fuel. They have responsibility for harbour dues, which directly or indirectly have a bearing on the cost of delivering fuel. They also have powers to provide additional support for rural transport. All those measures are within their competence, and John Swinney and Stewart Stevenson should take a leaf out of Alistair Darling's and Gordon Brown's book—

Presiding Officer, I want to complete this point without sedentary interventions from the minister. I am encouraging him to follow the good example of the chancellor and Prime Minister of Great Britain, and to sit down with the producers and refiners of oil, the suppliers of fuel and the retailers of petrol and diesel and agree what they can do to address differential pricing. John Swinney and Stewart Stevenson should accept that varying the tax rates is not a simple answer that they can hide behind when it comes to addressing variable prices. They should stop using fuel duty as an alibi for doing nothing and use the  powers that they have, as any mature and responsible Government should.

Does the minister recognise that, through no fault of their own, several well-run, enterprising small companies in the oil and gas sector in the north-east currently face difficulties with overdraft facilities? What action has Scottish Enterprise taken to ensure that companies in that position have ready access to advice and, if need be, to short-term funding?

The report of the Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change Committee is indeed very welcome but, of course, it does not stand alone among the recommendations of the Parliament. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee considered the national planning framework earlier this year, and we, too, heard a lot about the importance of strategic rail connections to sustainable economic growth. We, too, agreed across the parties that there were three national developments that should have been included in NPF 2 but were not. One was the subject of today's debate: a high-speed rail link between Scotland and England, including facilities for rail freight. Another was the enhancement of rail services in the north of Scotland, in parallel with planned enhancements in the west, and another was strategic rail connections between the north of Scotland and the central belt. Good reasons were given for promoting high-speed rail to England alongside improvements to services in the north of Scotland and to services between the north and the central belt. Those improvements, if not the high-speed rail link, were acknowledged by ministers as desirable, as we saw in their inclusion in the strategic transport projects review. Specifically, there is the building of a direct dual-track rail link between Inverkeithing and Halbeath in Fife, with new rail junctions at both ends to improve journey times between the north and the central belt. It was precisely that project that was raised with the committee by Confederation of British Industry Scotland, which had pressed for strategic transport projects to be included in NPF 2 and wanted to know why Inverkeithing to Halbeath was not one of them. I would be interested to hear more from the minister on that important point when he replies to the debate. If we are serious about bringing the benefits of high-speed rail to the north of Scotland, another  valuable improvement would be a new bridge and dualling of the railway at Montrose. That, too, would bring strategic benefits by cutting out avoidable delays. It is in the strategic transport projects review, and it would be useful to know how much priority the Government attaches to the scheme, and when it believes that the scheme can be taken forward. Today, I am interested above all in how ministers intend to affirm the relevance of a high-speed rail link to travel to and from the north of Scotland. We have heard that high-speed rail can compete with air travel on the routes from London to Glasgow and Edinburgh if it can achieve a three-hour journey time—as on the Paris to Lille route, or the Barcelona to Madrid route. High-speed rail is clearly less well placed to compete directly with air travel between Aberdeen or Inverness and London, but a high-speed link could certainly make rail travel a more competitive alternative than it is now. It is currently possible to travel from Aberdeen to London by sleeper, going via Carstairs and Crewe, and getting into Euston station in good time for an early-morning meeting. Likewise, the sleeper service provides a good alternative for people who are travelling to the north—it is especially well used by leisure visitors to Kyle of Lochalsh as well as to Aberdeen and other destinations in the north. A high-speed link could surely offer other options for long-distance rail travel in both directions. We have heard that the high-speed rail link between London and Paris has a journey time of just over two hours. We also know that there are existing rail links for freight between Scotland and Europe, for which the journey times are slower but which show the potential connections that might be made for passenger travel. If a high-speed rail link can be made a priority by both the British Government and Scottish ministers, overnight services that would bring benefits to the north of Scotland could surely be achieved along with benefits to the central belt. At the moment, a rail journey from Aberdeen to London takes upwards of eight and a half hours, or longer overnight. An onward rail journey to Paris involves a walk of only a few hundred yards between King's Cross or Euston and St Pancras for someone wanting to take the high-speed train from there. Given the straightforward alternative of a two-hour flight from Aberdeen to Paris by Air France, not many people travel from Aberdeen to Paris by train. However, if it were possible to link up the high-speed train connections that exist south of London and those that are being discussed for north of London and to upgrade the strategic links between Aberdeen and the central belt, the opportunity of joining a sleeper train in Aberdeen and waking up in Paris might not be so far away as it currently seems.  I hope that, in responding to the debate, ministers will consider all those opportunities to secure benefits for the whole of Scotland. In that context, improving links to the north must be considered as a priority from the outset. In addition, all the operators of Scottish railway services—including National Express and CrossCountry Trains—must not only take their franchise commitments seriously but maintain their rolling stock, make their services user friendly and not sacrifice the customer experience in the pursuit of marginal savings here and there. The minister will know that it is, in part, his job to hold franchise operators to account. He will also want to be involved in planning the enhancement of all those services for the future. I hope that he will do so in the context of the benefits that are available for Scotland as a whole.

The minister will be aware that the best tidal energy resource in Scotland is to be found in the central part of the Pentland Firth, which is—as he will also be aware—an international shipping channel. Will he ensure that steps are taken to reduce the risk of conflicts between tidal energy development and the safety of those at sea? Will he work with the Crown Estate and the Maritime and Coastguard Agency to ensure that the issues are given the highest priority?

On funding for marine energy, does Mr Swinney accept the point that the Institution of Mechanical Engineers and others have made that, after the completion of the current wave and tidal energy scheme and long before the awarding of the saltire prize, a funding gap of perhaps £40 million will kick in some time in the next year or two?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will publish the report of the study that it has commissioned on future energy options. (S3F-1573)

I am sorry that the First Minister appears to have forgotten the undertaking that he gave after the publication of the Scottish energy study, at the behest of his Council of Economic Advisers, to commission a study of energy options. I look forward to receiving an answer from the First Minister on that subject in due course. He has already mentioned the report on the electricity transmission network across Great Britain that was published this month. Given that that report confirms that urgent action is needed to provide grid access for future renewable generation and that that action goes beyond what the Scottish ministers have included in the national planning framework, will he, when he publishes the energy options study, which I hope that he will do in due course, set out a timetable for the decisions that the Scottish ministers will need to take to realise that vision, starting with a decision on the Beauly to Denny transmission line?

Does the minister recall his announcement on 16 April regarding the aye can project in Aberdeen, which provided supported employment in recycling for disabled people, and its transfer from the city council to become part of a social enterprise? Does the minister recall that the Scottish Government news release at that time promised that aye can would reopen on 1 August? Is he aware that it still has not reopened? What will he do to deliver on his promises to those disabled people?

As Des McNulty said when opening for Labour, we want rail links to be strengthened within as well as between Scotland's city regions. Aberdeen crossrail is firmly part of that approach. The SNP's approach is less clear. On the one hand, the minister wants us to welcome "the opening of Laurencekirk station ... and the bringing forward of work on Kintore station". On the other hand, he wants us to agree that "the introduction of additional stops increases journey times and can, in certain circumstances, reduce the viability of services overall". That seems to be a confused way of setting out a direction of travel. However, when ministers talk of the Aberdeen crossrail project being tackled incrementally, the inference must be that the increments will not be additional stops and that there will be no new stations besides those that have been mentioned. That would certainly explain why Aberdeen crossrail, like the Haudagain roundabout, failed to win ministerial support for inclusion in the strategic transport projects review. From the minister's description of his plans this morning, it seems that he sees Aberdeen simply as the junction of two main railway lines, rather than the centre of a city-focused crossrail project to serve the needs of people who live and work in Aberdeen.  Recently, Stewart Stevenson received the finalised Aberdeen city and shire structure plan, which I am sure he will already have cast his eye over. Paragraph 3.9 on page 10 of the plan explicitly promotes the crossrail proposals "to provide more regular journeys and extra stations". SNP councillors voted for the plan, which makes no mention of an incremental approach. I hope that that aspect of the plan will attract the minister's approval and that he will rethink his approach to the proposals. Instead of cutting back our ambitions for crossrail, we should be looking at what more can be done. In my constituency of Aberdeen Central, a new station at Kittybrewster could help to cut back on car commuting, congestion and parking problems at key locations. In recent months, Aberdeen royal infirmary has been overwhelmed by a parking crisis, since SNP ministers decreed an end to hospital parking charges without first working out how to manage parking demand. The University of Aberdeen is developing an iconic new library in Old Aberdeen, which will attract users from across the region and beyond. Parking zones are already being planned for neighbouring areas as a result. Both Foresterhill and Old Aberdeen would benefit from new access by rail via a new Kittybrewster station. Because Aberdeen crossrail, as originally conceived, is designed as an integral scheme for the whole city and region, it has the potential to deliver that, although there is no guarantee that it would do so. However, a Government that has set its face against additional stops and insists on taking what it describes as an incremental approach that does not recognise the wholeness of the city will not deliver that. The parts of the city that I represent do not need a new road and bridge increasing traffic by way of the proposed third Don crossing. I hope that the minister will reject that part of the finalised structure plan when he forms a view on it and that he will support more rail, not more roads, into the city. It is to the credit of Alison McInnes that, when she was chair of Nestrans, she did not endorse the enthusiasm of her party colleagues on Aberdeen City Council for directing thousands of car commuters every day through Tillydrone and Old Aberdeen. Sadly, those councillors have now done Aberdeen city and shire a major disservice by including that contentious local project in strategic transport and structure plans for the region. The minister could put the matter right by refusing to endorse the third Don crossing proposal in the structure plan. Instead, he should encourage local partners to work with the Scottish Government on sorting out the Haudagain  roundabout and exploring how Aberdeen crossrail can be delivered. Those projects, along with the completion of the western peripheral route, are the city's real transport priorities, and ministers should support them.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive, when a householder receives advice from an energy saving Scotland advice centre, funded from the Scottish Government's energy budget, and subsequently takes steps that produce a carbon saving, by whom that carbon saving is reported. (S3O-6102)

The minister will understand the importance of clarity in carbon accounting in the context of the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. When measures are taken under a Scottish Government-funded programme, are the savings reported by that programme? Similarly, when measures are taken by a power company under the carbon emissions reduction target, are the savings reported by that company? In either case, does an insulation or heating installer deduct from any carbon savings that are reported an amount that is equal to the savings that the Energy Saving Trust reports to the minister in respect of advice that has been given?

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the feasibility study that is under way on proposals for city centre regeneration in Aberdeen, which focus on Union Terrace Gardens? If the study produces recommendations for action before 2011, will the Scottish Government provide funding to assist with that regeneration project?

As with green jobs, the First Minister will recall that it is now nearly two years since the consultation closed on proposals for a Scottish energy efficiency strategy, the intention of which was to improve energy efficiency and create green jobs. When does he intend to publish his Government's energy efficiency action plan?

In recent months, the cabinet secretary has taken an interest in the financial challenges that face Aberdeen City Council. Does he recognise that many public services in the city attract as many or more users from other council areas as they do from Aberdeen itself? If he will not replicate the  Edinburgh model for cities that are regional centres, how will he ensure in the next two years that the funding of those regional services is not left to Aberdeen City Council alone?

Eighty-five per cent of adult male prisoners at Craiginches are from the city of Aberdeen, as are the vast majority of the women and young offenders from the Grampian area who are currently in prison. Can the cabinet secretary offer any explanation for his decision to replace Craiginches with a new prison in Peterhead rather than in Aberdeen?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Members have—rightly—focused on the SNP's failure to prioritise key projects on the A96 and the A90. The junction of those roads at the Haudagain roundabout is the worst single pinch point on either road, but it is not even mentioned in the strategic transport projects review.

After I have laid out my argument, I hope that the minister will respond. He will have the opportunity to do so. When the STPR was published, John Swinney said that the Haudagain was missed out because the problems at the junction would be solved when the Aberdeen western peripheral route was built. He told The Press and Journal on 11 December that the traffic bottleneck at the Haudagain was "essentially influenced by the effects of the construction of the AWPR, which will take an enormous proportion of traffic from the A90. So therefore, it seems to me to be a prudent approach to concentrate on a strategic project of that nature." So the SNP said that it would concentrate on the WPR because that strategic project would—apparently—solve all the problems. An SNP Government spokesman backed that up when he told the Aberdeen Evening Express that the Haudagain scheme had been superseded by the Aberdeen bypass. Stewart Stevenson has tried a couple of different explanations. When I asked him about the issue last December, he said that the STPR was about "strategic transport projects. The Haudagain is an example of a local project."— [ Official Report , 10 December 2008; c 13254.]  However, he told The Press and Journal something different—that "the work ... is set to be completed before 2012, which means it does not have to be featured" in the STPR. He has since confirmed that the WPR will not be completed before 2012. That suggests that work on the Haudagain would have to take place alongside work on the WPR, if work on the Haudagain was missed out of the strategic transport projects review because it would be finished by 2012. However, that is not the situation according to Alex Salmond. The First Minister told The Press and Journal emphatically that work on the Haudagain "will be done but let's get the bypass done first, it would be daft to do it the other way round."  The Evening Express put Mr Salmond on the front page, saying: "I will fix the Haudagain ... but work to revamp the Haudagain roundabout won't start until after Aberdeen's bypass is completed." That is funny, because Mr Stevenson has since told me in a written answer that the A90 between Charleston and Blackdog will be detrunked and that responsibility for it will be transferred from the Scottish Government to Aberdeen City Council on 1 April, following the WPR's opening. That does not suggest that much work is being done by central Government. If the project is local, as Mr Stevenson said in Parliament, perhaps the work is the local council's responsibility.

No, indeed—Mr Salmond told The Press and Journal on 18 December that "the key commitment is" that roundabout improvements "will be paid for and delivered before the road is de-trunked." That will not be down to "Aberdeen city. It will be the Scottish Government that will do the work and then it will be handed over as an improved roundabout." So there we have it. John Swinney thinks that the WPR will take care of things; Stewart Stevenson wants to hand the Haudagain to the council as soon as the WPR is finished; and Alex Salmond says that he will not hand over the Haudagain until the WPR has been built and the roundabout has been sorted out. The three SNP ministers have three different plans. Just for good measure, Brian Adam told the Evening Express on 6 January this year that Stewart Stevenson "was not in a position to give a timescale or say which option would be used." Perhaps today ministers will finally sort out the party line and tell us what the Scottish Government intends to do at the Haudagain roundabout and—above all—when it intends to do it.

To ask the First Minister what additional funding has been provided for homecoming Scotland 2009 since 5 November 2008. (S3F-1374)

That modest additional support will be welcomed, but will the First Minister explain why £0.5 million in new marketing support  was not worth a mention when we raised concerns about the funding of homecoming in the debate last week? Total public investment in homecoming, even now, is half of the investment that was made in the 2007 year of Highland culture, so does the First Minister intend to provide any more additional funding in the months ahead?

Does the minister nonetheless accept that the concern is that, in spite of the cabinet secretary's words the other day, the SPSA still appears to be advocating publicly the closure of the laboratory in Aberdeen? It is for that reason that members remain highly concerned about the direction in which the process is going.

On 18 December 2007, staff were called together to be told that the Scottish Police Services Authority had launched a review of forensic services with a view to advising ministers to close the forensic laboratory and fingerprint unit in Aberdeen. The people who attended the meeting report that the authority's director of forensic services, Tom Nelson, was apologetic, not about the proposal to put an excellent service out of business but about being obliged by leaks and rumours to tell staff of the plans "before a decision had been made". The cavalier approach to consultation has continued since then. In every action, senior managers of the SPSA have reinforced the impression that they have already decided that they want to close the Aberdeen facilities. A business case, which was prepared last February and made public only as a result of a freedom of information request, made clear the authority's intention to close Aberdeen and use savings arising from the closure to build a new forensic laboratory in Dundee. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice approved a new build in Dundee in May last year but told the authority that there should be a "full, frank and transparent" consultation on plans to close the Aberdeen laboratory. Even after his comments, senior management acted as though there were only one option for the future of forensic services  in Scotland: a two-centre model, starting with the closure of the Aberdeen laboratory. More than a year after the first announcement, the staff union—Unison—has yet to be consulted. Promises by Mr Nelson and his chief executive to publish a formal consultation paper have not been kept. The document that the authority produced in November offers not options but more arguments for closure. It is entitled, "Delivering forensic services to north and north-east Scotland: Addressing the key questions", but it raises more questions than it answers. Ministers have received a copy of Unison's response to the document, which reflects the expertise and judgment of forensic and fingerprint staff in Aberdeen. I hope that ministers have had the opportunity to read the response, which addresses the key questions of why SPSA management is so determined on closure and what effect closure would have. The staff's case is simple: forensic science is vital in the fight against crime and the service that is provided from Aberdeen to Grampian Police and Northern Constabulary is second to none. The excellent performance of the Aberdeen service is a model for the close partnership working that the SPSA says it wants to encourage. Staff and their union have campaigned vigorously against the closure proposal. An electronic petition launched by Unison attracted more than 2,000 signatures in a matter of weeks, and the petition was formally lodged with the Scottish Parliament this week. Many of the people who are affected by the closure proposal have taken the opportunity to come here today to speak to MSPs and to hear what ministers have to say. On Tuesday morning, colleagues from across the north-east and I met the Minister for Community Safety and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to express our concerns about the flawed consultation process. Kenny MacAskill was clear: he said that no decision had been taken, either by ministers or by the SPSA, and that the new convener of the SPSA board would be asked to review the consultation to date to ensure that all relevant information had been fully taken into account. Colleagues left that meeting under the impression that, for the first time, there was some prospect of a fair and balanced review of the process by a new and impartial convener. How shocking it was, then, to hear the SPSA's director of forensic services on Radio Scotland this morning. "I want every pound spent to have a significant return for the communities of Scotland," said Mr Nelson, reasonably enough, "and therefore I want to make sure that where we invest that money we will get that return."  Mr Nelson continued: "I believe that will be through a merger of the Aberdeen and Dundee laboratories into a new purpose-built facility in Dundee, to allow us to provide that excellent service to the whole of the north and north-east of Scotland." There was not much sign in those comments of a review of the consultation. Has Mr Nelson told ministers yet that he believes that the only way forward is to close the Aberdeen laboratory?

I thank George Foulkes for those remarks. Have ministers told Mr Nelson that the consultation so far is supposed to be under review? It appears that he has not heard that. I have invited Vic Emery, the new convener of the SPSA board, to meet MSPs at Holyrood next Tuesday afternoon. We will put all our questions to him, but I hope that Fergus Ewing can tell us tonight whether the views of Mr Nelson are those of the SPSA and whether he believes that there can be a fair and balanced consultation when the responsible officer of the authority is so emphatic in his belief that closing the lab in Aberdeen is the right thing to do. The final decision will not be for Mr Nelson or even Mr Emery to make; it will be for ministers. Of course, it is open to ministers to call a halt to this whole sorry consultation process today. If they will not do that, I hope that they will at least recognise the strength of the case for the continued development of forensic services for the north of Scotland, delivered from Aberdeen—whatever advice they receive from the SPSA. I hope that ministers will reject all closure plans for any of the laboratories that serve Scotland.

In such tough economic times, it is, as the minister said, important to play to our strengths and to respond to opportunities. Homecoming 2009 offers opportunities to play to Scotland's strengths, and its timing has proved to be fortuitous in the current economic context. It is a long time since a boost to economic activity was quite so urgently needed. Homecoming has the potential to play to some of our greatest strengths. It has a global reach among those whose families emigrated in centuries past, and a vast potential new market in the friends and relatives overseas of the people who have come to live and work here in more recent years. Rabbie Burns personifies the internationalism of Scotland, so to commemorate him while promoting Scotland as a destination worldwide is the kind of smart move of which he would no doubt have approved. The issue for debate today is not whether homecoming is a good idea for 2009 but whether it is being promoted effectively, how significant a role it can play in sustaining the Scottish economy, and what more can be done to secure the best possible outcomes this year and to ensure a significant legacy. The wider picture of Scottish Government support for Scottish tourism is not entirely positive. Government investment in the sector is due to fall in real terms by 4.8 per cent in the next financial year and by 2.8 per cent in the financial year after that. The response of ministers to last year's Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report on achieving 50 per cent growth in tourism revenues was distinctly mixed; in some areas it is not yet clear what their final response will be. Labour's amendment highlights one concern that the committee raised regarding the withdrawal of adult apprenticeships in the tourism and hospitality sectors. I hope that the minister will go further on those today and guarantee that the apprenticeships will be available again in the  future. It is not enough to say that training needs to be worth while and to reflect the needs of employers; it must also meet the needs of trainees and of the sectors as a whole. Our amendment also highlights our concerns about Scottish Government support for the Scots language and cultural institutions. It is not acceptable on the 250 th anniversary of Burns's birth that the Scottish Language Dictionaries should be obliged to issue redundancy notices because of uncertainty about future Government funding. Ministers could end that uncertainty and they would save a lot of anxiety for all concerned by doing so now rather than in three months. Those are two examples of areas in which Scottish ministers could take early steps to demonstrate their commitment to tourism and homecoming 2009, but they are not the only ones. Perhaps the biggest question mark is over the funding of homecoming. As VisitScotland has conceded, £5 million to support the homecoming calendar of events is a "pretty modest" contribution. It is not the scale of funding that might be expected if homecoming were being given its full potential weight. On one level, it was good to see homecoming highlighted as one of the SNP Government's six points in response to the imminent risk of recession. Sadly, however, as with most of the other points, its inclusion in the economic recovery plan is not accompanied by significant additional resources. I listened with interest last night when Alex Salmond told the BBC that he hoped to see £40 million in additional tourism revenues as a result of homecoming 2009. That aspiration needs to be seen in the context of other outcomes to which Scottish ministers are already signed up. In context, £40 million might turn out to be a "pretty modest" ambition. The tourism sector and the previous devolved Scottish Government agreed a common target of a 50 per cent increase in Scotland's tourism revenues between 2005 and 2015. Scottish National Party ministers have endorsed that target. Achieving the target would require annual growth over 10 years in the region of 4 per cent, or £160 million. Therefore, the question is whether the First Minister's £40 million target is in addition to the existing targets for increasing revenues annually or whether it stands alone. If it is additional, a total of £200 million in additional visitor revenues is required, and that is a challenging aspiration. All parties in the Parliament want homecoming to succeed. Almost all of us want it to attract international as well as domestic visitors. What we ask of ministers today is clarity about the objective criteria for success and how success will be measured. Is the aspiration this year for increased  revenues of £200 million, of which £40 million will be an identifiable consequence of homecoming? If so, how will that contribution be measured? Alternatively, is the aspiration only to grow revenues by £40 million net, in which case, how will Scotland's longer-term targets be achieved? Clear answers to those questions and a positive approach to other issues raised by Labour and other parties today will enable homecoming 2009 to progress with the broad support that it needs. I hope that the minister will respond accordingly. Like Burns himself, homecoming is too big and too important to be the property of any one party in Scotland today. I move amendment S3M-3173.1, to leave out from first "recognises" to end and insert: "welcomes and supports the calendar of events and activities taking place this year from the weekend around Burns Night to St Andrew's Day; recognises that this will make for a unique year for all those joining the celebrations, including the people living in Scotland, the diaspora Scots and those with an affinity for Scotland who visit in 2009, and calls on Scottish ministers to maximise the potential for Homecoming Scotland 2009 to boost international and domestic tourism in support of the Scottish economy by restoring full access to apprenticeships in the tourism and hospitality industries, bringing an end to uncertainty around future funding of Scots language and arts organisations and detailing how they will measure the contribution of Homecoming Scotland 2009 to supporting sustainable economic growth in the course of this year and beyond."

When will the Government introduce measures to cut red tape on microrenewable generation for households and small businesses, as it has promised to do, and will it do so in line with World Health Organization guidelines on permitted development?

Does the First Minister not then accept that the consultation document that has been issued offers only a single option, namely the closure of the Aberdeen laboratory? Will ministers take the opportunity to withdraw that document?

Will the minister explain in more detail what that means? Is there a commitment for the Scottish Government to invest funding in upgrading the Haudagain? If so, is it part of the STPR programme or not?

Will the member take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When you invited back-bench questions, you indicated that you were looking for brief and focused questions and answers. Unfortunately, although I do not doubt the minister's sincerity on these matters, his answers were distinctly lacking in brevity. As a consequence, local members have not been able to raise many important issues, but instead have had only a lengthy description of the inspectorate system. I seek your guidance on this matter, Presiding Officer, as it seems to me that the purpose of a statement is to allow members to ask questions in Parliament.

Mòran taing. I congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing the debate this evening, and I congratulate the learners of Gaelic who have spoken so well. The debate offers an opportunity to celebrate the progress that has been made in strengthening the place of Gaelic in Scottish life since—and, indeed, before—the establishment of the Scottish Parliament nine years ago, as well as a chance to consider what more needs to be done. The Gaelic language is important to me as a native of the Isle of Lewis and as a representative of the city of Aberdeen. On the island side, my family have lived in Harris, Uist and neighbouring islands for as long as anyone can remember, and many of them are still active in some of the communities that Alasdair Allan represents. My father, the Rev Roddy Macdonald, was both a translator into Gaelic and a Gaelic bard in his own right. He translated all the works of Burns from Scots and English into Gaelic, and he collaborated with others in writing a book of trilingual poetry that celebrates the diverse languages and cultures that are native to Scotland. He was the latest in a long line of people in my family who were fluent in the Gaelic language, which stretched back to the bard Peter Morrison in the 17 th century. That is my Gaelic inheritance. Equally important to me, however, is our investment in the future of Gaelic. That future lies not only in the Highlands and Islands, but in cities such as Aberdeen and in communities in countries overseas for which Gaelic remains important. Like Pauline McNeill, I have the privilege to have a Gaelic-medium school in my constituency. Gilcomstoun primary school is host to both the nursery and the primary school units for Gaelic-medium education in Aberdeen. This year, we celebrate 25 years of Gaelic pre-school education in the city, and we look forward to building on those successes going forward.  My daughter Iona has enjoyed Gaelic-medium education from the age of two and is now in primary 6. She is looking forward to taking her bilingual skills into secondary school. Her experience of Gaelic-medium education has been immensely enjoyable and productive, not least because of its success in passing on the culture as well as the language of the Gàidhealtachd in the heart of an east coast city. The experience has also been immensely productive for an inner-city school, where Gaelic has been a vehicle for making a distinctively Scottish contribution to a multicultural environment. It is important that all those advances are not lost. Gaelic must not be seen as inward looking or it will fail. It must be a part of what makes Scotland an inclusive and multicultural society, and it must be as open to those who arrive in Scotland as it is to those whose families have lived here for many generations. Gaelic-medium education is also affected by wider policies in education. In the area that I represent, a number of cuts in education funding are being considered. It is important to recognise that Gaelic-medium education cannot succeed in isolation, but can do so only in the context of a successful schools system. I am therefore concerned at the proposal that is being considered in Aberdeen to end French immersion teaching at Walker Road school. The same initiative has been very successful in another constituency and has been praised by ministers in the present Government and in previous ones. Ending the initiative would send the wrong signal not only to members of Comann nam Pàrant whose children already attend Gilcomstoun and Hazlehead primary schools, but to other parents who may be considering doing the same. Proposals to end schooling on a Friday afternoon or to reduce school transport have serious implications for all children at all Aberdeen schools but particularly for those at a Gaelic-medium school that serves the entire city. I hope that councillors in another place will take those implications into account. I welcome the debate. I hope that the minister will take the opportunity to reinforce the position of Gaelic-medium education in our cities as well as elsewhere. It matters for our young people, our Gaelic heritage and our multicultural communities and it reinforces the message that a bilingual education is an asset for all those who enjoy the opportunities that it offers.

Is the cabinet secretary aware that work on five of the new primary schools that are being built in Aberdeen has stopped? As he knows, the development is being progressed under the non-profit-distributing model. Will ministers offer Aberdeen City Council the additional bridging finance that its private sector partners will need to resume the work without further delay?

This morning's debate has highlighted some important aims and objectives that are shared among all the parties. It has also highlighted how much more needs to be done, although some important progress has been made. The £1 billion that was announced by Gordon Brown in September for action on energy efficiency throughout Britain offers a good framework for further action in Scotland. I am glad, too, that Scottish electricity and gas suppliers have responded positively to the opportunity to invest in energy efficiency measures and to work with communities to reduce carbon emissions and cut bills. The community initiatives that were launched this week by Scottish and Southern Energy in Comrie and elsewhere, Scottish Power's support for warm zones in Aberdeen and Lanarkshire, and the commitment of Scottish Gas and other suppliers to work with Government on rolling out the community energy saving programme are all welcome signs of the willingness of energy companies to play their part. Further progress, however, does not depend simply on installing more insulation or more energy efficient central heating systems, important though those are. My involvement with the sector goes back to the early 1980s, when I carried out a number of energy efficiency surveys for Save Cash Reduce Fuel, which was then a brand-new agency. SCARF has since gone on to draught-proof and insulate many thousands of homes throughout the north of Scotland. As other members have mentioned, Fife Council's housing insulation and renewables programme, which has been running since 1997, and Edinburgh's community energy project, which was established by Mark Lazarowicz, offer other excellent models of what can be done. However, the success of past initiatives means that insulation investment must now be about  homes that are harder to heat. That will require active engagement, both by the Scottish Government and local councils, if Scotland is to win a proportionate share of carbon emission reduction target expenditure and investment. It is also essential that established community projects consider microgeneration as well as energy saving. The Government, too, needs to act to support microgeneration. I believe that the proposals in Sarah Boyack's proposed bill offer a clear route map for using Scotland's devolved powers to support small-scale renewable energy developments. Ministers have said that the proposed climate change bill will include measures to deal with such matters. They have also mentioned today their intentions in relation to microgeneration and business rates, which are welcome. Nevertheless, if they want to meet the need to cut carbon emissions and tackle fuel poverty, they should go further and follow, as far as they can, the directions that are set out in Sarah Boyack's proposed bill. Feed-in tariffs are important—Stewart Stevenson acknowledged developments in that respect. They are important at the point at which a generator produces enough power to be able to sell the surplus to the grid. They offer certainty, a fixed price and a predictable return. However, long before that stage is reached, fiscal incentives to install renewable generation technology can make all the difference to the initial decision on whether to go down the route of microgeneration. Householders, like businesses, will consider doing so in the expectation that they will achieve long-term savings and reduce their carbon emissions, if there are short-term fiscal incentives to provide an early benefit and strengthen the business case for their so doing. That is why ministers should not fight shy of acting on that now, even if they hold to their expectation that they will change the local taxation system. As long as households, as well as businesses, are liable for a property tax of any variety, a tax rebate or discount is an effective and legitimate means of promoting greater energy efficiency and more renewable energy generation. Ministers should accept that now and, if the need arises in the future to adjust the mechanism, they can do so in the context of the reforms that will already have been put in place. The Government could do other things to promote energy efficiency. For example, much needs to be done to implement the recommendations of the Scottish fuel poverty forum, to which others have referred. Energy advice and assistance should be provided to those who need it most. Ministers must also make the right decision on permissible noise levels, which is an issue that is delaying their commitment to bring microwind  turbines under the general permitted development regime. World Health Organization guidelines could readily be applied through the statutory instrument to which Stewart Maxwell referred. That should be done in such a way as not to put at risk the microgeneration manufacturing sector that we all agree should be supported. Other things could be done. Aberdeen's award-winning combined heat and power scheme, which has been running for some years in my constituency, could readily be replicated elsewhere and bring benefits to other areas. Much could also be done to improve the energy efficiency of the existing housing stock. Over recent weeks, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee has heard from many witnesses who have highlighted the severe short-term difficulties facing the construction sector. They have called for Government action on retrofitting existing homes with up-to-date energy efficiency measures. Such action would allow ministers to deliver on their pledge of more action on energy efficiency and fuel poverty in the context of the current economic pressures. I hope that there will be a positive and urgent response on that. Today's consensus is about the need to act; the responsibility to deliver those actions lies with ministers. If they act, they will, as they have heard today, have broad support.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the First Minister recall the Government's approval in December of Aberdeen City Council's much delayed schools renewal programme on the basis of £120 million in funding from an Icelandic bank that has since gone into administration? If it is confirmed in the next few days that new private finance providers are required to get the job finished, will the Government offer whatever financial guarantees may be necessary to bring such financiers on board?

Does the member recognise that the point of the amendment is that such agreement has not yet been reached and that Mr Swinney's motion is therefore premature, as Mr McLetchie said?

Does the member agree that in the short term, and particularly in relation to programmes that have already been consented and await connection to the grid, there is simply no time to wait for new technologies in grid connection? What is needed is an urgent decision on the Beauly to Denny project to allow the connection to be made so that we can export power.

I simply ask Brian Adam whether he agrees that the amendment in Michael McMahon's name is also reasonable. Do he and his colleagues intend to accept it?

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and to Mr Swinney for missing the very beginning of his remarks, but I listened closely to everything else that he said. Today's debate could have been an entirely consensual one if only Scottish Government ministers had been able to resist temptation in drafting their motion. Members on all sides welcome any evidence of the success of the British-Irish Council. When ministers here in Scotland report on a successful meeting of the council, we are all encouraged by that. When Mr Swinney's motion states that the council is "an invaluable forum for strengthening intergovernmental relationships", we could not agree more. To be such a forum is precisely the point of the council, which was created to reflect the new devolved arrangements in the government of the United Kingdom and assist with the development of a shared approach to public policy in the island of Ireland and between our countries. For a devolved Scotland, the council provides valuable opportunities to build both bilateral and multilateral relationships with both sovereign and devolved Governments within these islands. That is all valuable, whether people support the devolution settlement in the United Kingdom or want a different relationship among its constituent parts. In order for the arrangement to work to the mutual advantage of all concerned, it is essential that it is based on mutual respect among all the parties and proceeds on the basis of consensus and therefore, implicitly, on the basis of compromise and a willingness to resolve unresolved issues in a way that is acceptable to all  the Governments concerned. What is not required is for Governments to negotiate in public or to seek to outbid one another in demonstrating their commitment to shared objectives by praying in aid the endorsement of their respective Parliaments for their negotiating positions. The temptation to do that appears to have proved too great for Scottish National Party ministers to resist this afternoon. The British-Irish Council has agreed that energy is an important shared concern and that it should be considered by member Administrations. One view, which has been advanced by Alex Salmond and today by John Swinney, is that energy should be a stand-alone work stream and that it should be led by Alex Salmond. As has been alluded to, another view is that the best way to address energy issues in these islands is in the context of climate change and the environment and that the existing environment work stream, led by the UK Government, should be widened to encompass energy issues. As has been said, the issue was not resolved at the summit meeting at Hopetoun house and it was agreed to continue the discussion the next time that the council meets, which will be in Cardiff in February. It is reasonable for Alex Salmond to lobby other members of the council in the interim if he wants to persuade them that there ought to be a separate work stream on energy or that the Scottish Government is best placed to lead it. However, what is not reasonable and may prove to be counterproductive is for ministers to come to the Parliament to seek to demonstrate a consensus in support of a particular view, when clearly none exists. There was no vote on the matter at Hopetoun house, nor should there have been. That is not how the British-Irish Council works.

Indeed. There neither could nor should have been a vote. The origins of the council lie in moving away from the entrenched positions of the past to build a new and consensual approach. It is sad but perhaps not entirely surprising that the SNP chooses to risk that ethos of consensus and of resolution by discussion rather than division. By bringing to the chamber today a motion that seeks support for a lead being taken by Scottish ministers in an area that is still under discussion in the British-Irish Council, the SNP Government may well have undermined not only the spirit of consensus in the council but its own negotiating position with other member Governments. It is just possible that those who observe these matters from Dublin, Cardiff or Belfast might have been prepared to consider the position advanced by Mr Salmond but been worried that an energy work stream led by  SNP ministers could conceivably be exploited politically to create fresh grievances for Scottish ministers to express against Westminster.

I can assure Professor Harvie that the Irish Government has not expressed a view on the issue that we are debating today: the nature and leadership of a work stream dealing with energy issues within the British-Irish Council. That is what we are debating and the Irish Government will express its view on the matter in the context of the British-Irish Council, as it and all member Governments of the British-Irish Council should do. If there were worries before today about the possibility of SNP ministers exploiting the lead on energy to create political divisions with Westminster, those will surely be multiplied following the SNP's decision to bring forward for debate a motion in these terms. Whatever the outcome of today's debate, other member Governments will know that SNP ministers have chosen to use the Parliament to negotiate in public, to use a discussion in the British-Irish Council as a platform for raising issues that may cause contention within the United Kingdom and to ensure that there is a vote and a division in this Parliament on an issue on which it could as easily have sought all-party support. There is, of course, another reason why other member Governments might have been worried about a proposal that Scottish ministers should lead a separate work stream on energy—I refer to the anxiety about the Administration's actual delivery of support for renewable energy, to which I now turn. There is much to be said for the argument that Scotland's unique position, which comes from our strengths in oil, gas and the offshore industry and from our enormous renewable energy potential and support for developing technology, makes us well placed to lead in the area. I certainly agree that all those aspects of Scotland's energy industry are important. Sadly, however, the reality is that, although the Administration talks a good game on renewable energy, there are critical areas in which it has signally failed to deliver. Ministers never tire of saying how enthusiastic they are about renewable energy or of claiming credit for investment decisions that private companies made three or four years ago and for projects such as the Glendoe hydro scheme, to which ministers in the previous Administration consented.

However, ministers neglect to mention their failure to deliver consents for nearly half the wind energy developments that have come to them for approval since May last year. As recently as last Friday, at the end of a Scottish parliamentary recess, we learned from the press that Scottish ministers had rejected another wind power application. The Kyle wind farm in Ayrshire could have delivered an additional 85MW of renewable capacity to the Scottish grid. What happened adds to the lengthening roll of failures to deliver on wind power, which is currently the only proven renewables technology that is capable of allowing us to reach our renewable energy targets for 2020, which were set with cross-party support.

I acknowledge the point that Mr Swinney makes, but the point that I am making is that if people want to demonstrate their commitment to renewable energy, they must demonstrate a willingness to find solutions to the problems that arise. I am afraid that that has not happened in the case in question. Everyone is, of course, aware of the ministers' rejection of the Lewis wind farm project. If that project had been approved, the wind farm would have been the largest in Europe and would have provided much-needed work and income in one of our most peripheral areas. Fewer people may have registered the decision that was taken last year to reject the proposed Clashindarroch wind farm in Mr Salmond's constituency or the rejection of the proposed Greenock and Calliachar projects. Ministers have not explained the implications of their decision to reject the Lewis application without formal consideration of the social and economic benefits that that development would have brought. A decision to reject an application that was based on the availability of alternative wind farm sites elsewhere in Scotland and treated  any intrusion on a Natura 2000 site as unacceptable has serious implications for the rest of Scotland's renewable energy potential. When official figures become available, they may prove that the level of interest in investing in renewable energy projects under this Administration has gone down rather than up, for the good and simple reason that the current record of projects considered and determined so far shows that there is a 45 per cent chance of rejection at the hands of Scottish ministers. Many good projects will not come forward for approval until ministers finally announce their conclusions on upgrading the mainline grid connection between the north and south of Scotland—I refer to the link between Beauly and Denny. The industry will tell ministers, if they trouble to ask it, that consent for that proposal is essential to further renewables development in the north of Scotland—not only for future onshore wind developments but to fulfil the enormous potential of offshore wind, wave and tidal power, which is largely concentrated in the Highlands and Islands and off our northern coasts. Mr Swinney will, of course, rightly say that there are planning considerations and procedures that must be gone through, but I hope that he will tell us at the end of the afternoon that a decision on the link between Beauly and Denny is imminent in order to allow the renewables industry to bring forward further good proposals that he and his colleagues can approve. That would be the single most important thing that ministers could do today to signal their readiness to give a lead on renewable energy. Perhaps then, other Governments in these islands will take their aspiration to leadership in the field a little more seriously. I move amendment S3M-2767.1, to leave out from "Scottish ministers'" to end and insert: "proposal for the Council to take forward a workstream on renewable energy; encourages Scottish ministers to work in co-operation with all the members of the British-Irish Council, and encourages them to continue to support the Council in addressing issues of real and common concern."

I am delighted to congratulate Jamie McGrigor on his persistence in seeing the bill through and achieving consensus among those who are involved in the two existing registers of tartans. I congratulate, too, my colleague David Whitton for strengthening the link between the new register and the actual process of making tartan. I was born in the Isle of Lewis and my father's people are, and have been for generations, workers on land and sea in the Western Isles of Scotland. Like most crofting families in the Highlands and Islands, they have been, and remain, familiar with the crafts of spinning and  weaving, and all the other processes that go into the production of homespun cloth. Lewis and Harris are, of course, more widely known today for tweeds than for tartan plaids. It is nonetheless important to all the rural craft workers of Scotland that the creation of a Scottish register of tartans should reflect the simple fact, which David Whitton has pursued so vigorously, that tartan is a distinctive pattern produced in the weaving of cloth. The tartan that I am proud to wear today is that of the Macdonalds of the Isles. The register of tartans will protect and enhance the status of the tartans of the clans and districts of Scotland, whether they reflect patterns that can be found in early portraits of clan chiefs, as my tartan tie does, or are of more recent vintage. For me and many other people of Highland descent in Scotland and beyond, it is important to assert that the heritage of clanship and kinship is not the property of clan chiefs and their closest relatives alone. For those who were cleared, as well as those who did the clearing, the badges of clanship are symbols of the common people's ancient rights as possessors of the land, which were marvellously restored in many places thanks to the land reform legislation that was passed in the early days of the modern Scottish Parliament. Earlier this year, my family and I were able to travel on the direct air service from Glasgow to Halifax—sadly, it has since been grounded—to visit Atlantic Canada. We discovered in Cape Breton, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island a Highland diaspora that still cherishes its links to home, holds the Gaelic language in the highest regard and remembers the story of how so many common people of the MacDonalds, MacLeods and MacNeills were forced to leave their home islands and cross the seas. We met people from Glengarry County in Ontario and people from Toronto, British Columbia and the United States who share that same heritage. We visited St Francis Xavier University in Antigonish, the Highland Village at Iona and the Gaelic College at St Ann's. Wherever we went, we were reminded that the Scottish Highland heritage, of which tartan is such an important part, is the rightful inheritance not of Scotland alone but of millions of people of Highland descent around the world. That is why today is, indeed, a day to celebrate. The amendment to the bill that was accepted today reflects the questions that we, as members of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, raised during earlier stages of the bill. Labour members challenged the notion of tartan as unwoven design not out of elitism or, indeed, anti-modernism, but to ensure that the tartan brand  continues to remain unchallengeable and that its links with the weaver's craft are undiminished. I believe that the bill as it now stands achieves all those things, and I very much look forward to voting for it later tonight.

The member is right to say that the target is an industry target, but will he acknowledge that, when it was first published in "a tourism framework for change", it was adopted by the Government at the time? I take it that nothing that he is saying takes away from this Government's commitment to achieving the target in partnership with industry.

It gives me pleasure to welcome the committee's new convener to his first debate. I also welcome Maureen Watt who has, I think, just spoken in her first debate on tourism, as John Park will do later. On this occasion, only the Conservative party is out of step. The inquiry was thorough and resulted in a wide-ranging report. As we have heard, there was general agreement that those who make a living in the tourism sector should continue, where possible, to take the lead in adding value to Scotland's fantastic natural and cultural assets, and that the Government and its agencies should continue to work with the sector on the shared objective of future revenue growth. There was general, if not unanimous, agreement that the structures of VisitScotland are about right and that the agency is fit for the purpose of marketing Scotland at home and abroad. It is a pity, therefore, that this week's draft Scottish budget confirms that VisitScotland's budget will be £1 million less next year than this year. If it is the right agency to do the job, it needs to be properly resourced by Government, especially when growth will be particularly difficult to achieve. On the role of Government agencies, our report notes at paragraph 267 "the potential loss of local expertise in tourism in terms of local business involvement in the enterprise networks." The jury is still out on whether the much-reduced enterprise networks and Skills Development Scotland will be able to continue the effective support for tourism businesses that was praised by a number of witnesses to the inquiry. The committee has agreed to examine the enterprise aspects next summer and has made some specific and radical proposals on skills, which have been referred to already. Another area of concern was connectivity, both electronic and physical. I am pleased to learn that visitscotland.com has entered into discussions on how it might change its approach in line with the committee's recommendations. We may hear more about that shortly. If the Rosyth to Zeebrugge ferry gets back to business soon enough to protect its market share and survive, that will be good news. However, as Iain Smith  said, it is not the only direct link to Scotland to be put in peril in recent months. That is the context in which the report states at paragraph 210: "Almost all of the witnesses heard by the Committee were supportive of the Air Route Development Fund (ARDF) model and called for a replacement initiative." We called on ministers to consider "establishing destination marketing initiatives, targeting customers on potential new flights into Scotland" in a way that "would involve clear branding and marketing and air route development." I am happy to acknowledge that some of that is now happening. VisitScotland and easyJet are spending £1 million on attracting visitors from London. However, at a time of such weakened global economic confidence, it is important that Scotland's devolved Government is seen to back such initiatives. That is why clearly branding marketing initiatives as Government backed is important. We called on ministers to organise an urgent summit of transport providers and tourism operators to innovate further on joint ticketing arrangements for visitors. Like Iain Smith, I am disappointed that ministers have not yet jumped at that suggestion. They acknowledge that there is good practice from which to learn but, instead of bringing industry together to see how that good practice can be rolled out, they propose only to discuss it among different bits of the Government machine. I hope that that discussion will lead to such action as the committee suggests. I hope that ministers will also respond to our call at paragraph 274 for the international passenger survey to "record all the relevant international visitors to Scotland through all major ports of entry, specifically including Aberdeen airport." The failure to do so currently means that Scandinavian visitors in particular are undercounted when VisitScotland is planning future marketing campaigns. Although the statistics are collected on a United Kingdom-wide basis, there are implications for devolved Government agencies, therefore I hope that ministers will have something to say on the recommendation. Ministers are more directly responsible for some of Scotland's transport providers and tourism operators. The committee drew attention to ways in which public enterprises such as CalMac ferries and public agencies such as Historic Scotland might improve the visitor experience. I am sorry that ministers did not respond enthusiastically to  those suggestions. It is easy to say that Government should get out of its silos and work across portfolios to achieve sustainable economic growth, but it is harder actually to do it. Ministers need to give a lead and support practical suggestions for better joint working, which is all that the proposed reviews are intended to achieve. I hope that ministers will also respond positively to the suggestion that they consider all funding options to enhance the programme of homecoming Scotland 2009. We heard a lot during the inquiry about investment decisions. Scotland needs more quality hotels across the whole price range, particularly outside Glasgow and Edinburgh. There are some models of good practice where tourism projects have benefited from being fast-tracked by planning authorities. I hope that ministers will support measures to spread that best practice as well as back the national tourism investment plan. The conclusions of the report are cautiously optimistic about Scotland's potential for meeting its targets on growing tourism revenues in the next few years. The report recognises the roles of both the industry and the Government and its agencies. I hope that ministers will go beyond those areas in which they have met the committee's recommendations and consider seriously those areas in which they have not, and will think again about the resources that those recommendations will require.

To ask the First Minister how many enforcement actions the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has taken resulting from sewage pollution of beaches since May 2007. (S3F-1021)

I am pleased to hear that. The First Minister will be aware of the wide range of leisure uses of Aberdeen beach, from windsurfing to dog walking. I suspect that he shares my view that bathing water quality at Aberdeen beach is important to tourists and local people alike, even during a wet summer such as the one that we had this year. Will the First Minister ensure that Scottish Government agencies continue to make every effort to enable a return to the excellent grading that Aberdeen beach achieved two years ago? Does he agree that such efforts should include, if necessary and where appropriate, further enforcement action by SEPA to prevent sewage pollution in future?

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the decision earlier this year to merge the north-east  and north and west divisions of the service was taken with absolutely no consultation? Does she recognise that the partnership information network guidelines for the NHS say that staff and their representatives should be involved in the design and planning of change, not merely told about it afterwards? Will she now call a halt to the merger process and allow any change to proceed on the basis of full, prior consultation?

The cabinet secretary helpfully mentioned the need to make progress on cross-border issues. Does he agree that that is a matter that the Lord Advocate might usefully discuss with her counterparts in other jurisdictions?

I congratulate Nigel Don on securing the debate and I welcome the opportunity to address issues around disputes over the jurisdiction of courts in the different parts of the United Kingdom—without, on this occasion, wishing to comment on the wider issues that are raised by the terms of Mr Don's motion. I am certain that there will be further opportunities in the not-too-distant future to discuss some of those concerns. Respect for the authority of the courts over contact with children in the event of family breakdown is essential if the courts are to deliver on their principal duty, which is to protect the welfare of the child. To achieve that, it is important that courts are clear and consistent in dealing with issues of jurisdiction. The case that has been highlighted is one with which I am familiar and one in which the issue of jurisdiction has still not been resolved to the satisfaction of all concerned. The most important consequence is that the focus of legal proceedings, over a number of years, has been not on the welfare of the child, but on the jurisdiction of the courts. The legal position is essentially unchanged from that which is set out in section 41 of the Family Law Act 1986, which provides that a child who is removed from his or her area of habitual residence by one parent without the consent of the other parent should continue to be treated as resident in the original jurisdiction for a year. The difficulty in the case in question has arisen because of the apparent failure of a court in England to take that legal provision into account, which led to a court  order being issued in England in a case that ought, at the time, to have been dealt with in Scotland. The fact that Scots law operates separately from the law of England and Wales, with no common court that has oversight to resolve uncertainties, means that in a case of that kind it is very difficult to find the means to challenge a court that assumes jurisdiction to which it may not be entitled. For that reason, the case has been raised with both the Lord Advocate and the Lord Chancellor. It has been the subject of correspondence on several occasions, over a number of years, between justice ministers in both the UK and Scottish Governments. It has, indeed, been the subject of parliamentary debate prior to this evening, as many of the issues were raised last year in the House of Commons by my colleague, Frank Doran MP, on behalf of his and my constituent. As has been mentioned, due process in the Scottish courts has found that jurisdiction in this case properly belongs to the Scottish courts, in spite of the views that were previously held by lower courts in Scotland that they were entitled to cede jurisdiction to courts elsewhere. The English courts system has yet to reach a final view. It is clearly not for MSPs to take a view on what may or may not have occurred in a relationship, or even on which court is right in law. Our concern must be with how such issues of jurisdiction can be more speedily resolved. That matters not as an obscure point of law, but because a failure to resolve such issues simply distracts attention from the issues of substance in a case of this kind, which are issues around the welfare of the child that include, but are not confined to, issues of residence and contact. Along with other members, I look forward to hearing from the minister how ministers and law officers in the various parts of the UK can work together constructively to ensure that issues of jurisdiction can be more speedily resolved so that the appropriate court is able to deal more quickly and effectively with the consequences of family breakdown, thereby protecting the interests of the child.

Does the minister recall that previous assessments of the viability of ferry routes to and from Campbeltown took into account the advantages of the Vestas manufacturing facility there and the prospects for passenger and commercial traffic that arose from that? What assessment has he made of the potential impact on the STAG assessment of routes of the closure of the Vestas factory? What indication has Vestas given of the importance of those routes to the decision-making process in which it is involved?

Will the minister indicate whether class sizes are falling in her home local authority area of Aberdeen? Will she confirm that the number of teaching posts in Aberdeen schools in this school year is 30 lower than it was in the previous school year?

Will the minister describe for us the role of Scottish ministers in relation to the Migration Advisory Committee? Can she make representations to that body on behalf of Scottish interests?

Does the cabinet secretary recognise that he is being given an opportunity to address two important issues at once? Following his decision to close Aberdeen prison, will he now consider the establishment in Aberdeen of a remand unit for prisoners awaiting trial, and will he talk to Grampian Police and the police board about the possibility of combining such a unit with facilities for housing some of those detained in police custody in the city?

If ministers in Scotland's devolved Government are indeed to make a serious contribution to achieving sustainable economic growth, they will need to focus on those sectors that can help to grow the economy and on those measures that are within their power to deliver under the devolution settlement. Energy and tourism are recognised as key potential growth areas for the wider economy. References to both sectors were made in this  morning's programme for Government, but we heard surprisingly little about detailed commitments to action on the part of SNP ministers. Alex Salmond talked of using the opportunity of the homecoming 2009 celebrations to deliver the maximum benefit for tourism nationwide. That seemed to be hopeful. The many enterprising and innovative people from the tourism sector who will gather at the royal yacht Britannia this evening to mark the achievements of the finalists in this year's Scottish Thistle awards would be keen to know how ministers intend to deliver on that pledge. So would those members on the Parliament's Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee who heard evidence from VisitScotland and others about the pretty modest funding that has been provided to homecoming 2009 so far. Unfortunately the programme for Government document does not tell us how ministers intend to respond to those issues, or to the committee's recommendations that they consider other funding options. Instead, the only action that it records is a change in the project's organisational arrangement that was already in place before the committee's inquiry. There is no indication of how ministers intend to use the opportunity to maximise its benefit, and no sign of whether they will provide additional support to ensure that all the quality events that are seeking support as part of the year of homecoming 2009 will actually happen. An opportunity has also been missed to widen the scope of homecoming 2009, as Jack McConnell recently suggested, by drawing on Scotland's growing links with ever more countries around the world. There will, of course, be an opportunity for members to consider all those points more fully when the committee's report is debated later this month. In the meantime, it would be useful to know from the cabinet secretary whether there will be substance behind the words that were used this morning. There are other things that ministers might usefully do to maximise Scotland's tourism potential but which are, again, sadly missing from the programme. On air route development, for example, there is no sign of any action to put in place a new scheme to support direct routes to follow up on the success of the previous Scottish Government's route development fund. Jim Mather told the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that ministers are "actively pursuing" ideas for working with airlines to develop joint marketing campaigns in support of new direct routes. That is good, but it is a pity that nothing in the programme for Government explains how it is being done and how, if at all, ministers will actively support the development of new direct routes. There is no word either of action to restore direct ferry links with continental Europe. Again, the SNP  has presided over a reduction in visitor access to Scotland whereas that was increased by ministers in previous Administrations. Of course action in all those areas does not necessarily require legislation, but it does require political will. On sea routes, ministers have again said that they recognise the importance of direct routes for tourism and the wider economy, but restoring those links does not appear to merit prioritisation in today's programme for the year ahead. The programme for Government has a little bit more to say about the energy sector. It recognises Scotland's renewable energy potential. We believe that the success of that sector will be vitally important to our future economic fortunes and to achieving our targets for reducing emissions and climate change. However, critical issues are again simply not addressed. The biggest single contributor to Scotland's short-term renewable energy potential is onshore wind, but that is the one renewables sector that can take least comfort from the SNP's record in Government. Since taking office 16 months ago, Mr Salmond's Government has rejected four of the 10 applications for new or extended wind power developments under the Electricity Act 1989, representing almost 900MW of rejected applications against just over 1,100MW in approved applications. That is a rejection rate of almost 45 per cent. I was glad to see this week's report from the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland on the potential of small run-of-river hydroelectric schemes. The forum's work on identifying the potential of new technologies during the past five years is very welcome. However, even the most optimistic assessment suggests that it would take hundreds of new run-of-river hydro schemes to offset the rejected wind power potential of the Lewis wind farm proposal alone. The test of Government is not just whether ministers are willing to endorse new technologies verbally, but whether they are prepared to support already-proven technologies. By that test, the SNP has yet to show willingness to take the tough decisions that are sometimes required to deliver cleaner energy. If the potential of tourism and energy to contribute to Scotland's sustainable economic growth is to be realised, ministers need to go beyond today's warm words, to listen to those who have a stake in those sectors and to take action to deliver progress across the board.

Does the cabinet secretary nonetheless accept the point that Andy Kerr has just made that including 2002-03 in that series is entirely misleading, as that year is much more aptly included in the series of seven years of Labour administration, when the overspends at no point exceeded £5 million on provisional outturns? Indeed, the cabinet secretary will know that, on final outturns, in all those seven years, including 2002-03, there was an underspend by Aberdeen City Council.

I am glad that Nigel Don showed me the courtesy that Brian Adam did not show when he refused to allow me to intervene. We said to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth two months ago that it is not in our gift or the council's gift but in his gift to consider a transfer of funding from capital to revenue. I see that the cabinet secretary is shaking his head, which makes me a little anxious. However, in the context of capital projects of the scale of the £80 million Marischal college project, there is scope for moving funding from capital to revenue, which might offer part of the solution.

Will the member take an intervention?

I hear what the member says about not wishing to revisit decisions that have been made. Does she accept, however, that the proposition that further school closures for budgetary reasons should be averted is a different proposition from the proposition that we should revisit decisions that have already been made? Does she join me in urging the council not to consider further school closures this year?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

On Tuesday, petitioners from Aberdeen Trades Union Council, from Glencraft and from Future Choices came to Parliament to seek support for the defence of jobs and services in Aberdeen. Many trade unionists, disabled service users, disabled working people and campaigners for schools and for the rights of senior citizens have made their voices heard at Holyrood again today, and I am delighted that some of them have been able to stay for this evening's debate. The message from those campaigners is loud and clear: Aberdeen City Council must balance the books and sort itself out, but it must not do so at the expense of the most vulnerable people and communities. Never before has a Scottish city council required such drastic treatment as the Accounts Commission for Scotland has prescribed for Aberdeen. It is essential that the council now accepts the findings as well as the recommendations of the Accounts Commission. At the weekend, the council's leader, Kate Dean, appeared to say on television that she would implement the Accounts Commission's recommendations but that she did not accept its analysis of why they were necessary. Taking the medicine but not listening to the expert advice about what went wrong in the first place will result only in painful short-term term fixes. The fact that that is what the council has said that it will do does not offer hope of a long-term cure. The Accounts Commission's very first finding is that "the challenges facing the council are collectively extremely serious", but that there is "a lack of a full appreciation of the seriousness of its current circumstances."  That is what has to change, and urgently. If leaders of the current Administration recognise the reality of the situation, they need to demonstrate that by accepting that some of the choices that they have made have been the wrong ones. For example, the Accounts Commission's fourth finding and fourth recommendation address the lack of "leadership and direction" in the council's two largest services, education and social work. The commission says that it is "concerned that the council believes the organisational structure is fit for purpose," despite the findings to the contrary of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and the Social Work Inspection Agency. The commission believes that "there is a case for the organisational structure to be simplified and for effective leadership, which commands the respect and support of employees, to be put in place for the council's major services." To achieve that, "Immediately following the appointment of a new chief executive a review of the council's organisational structure should be undertaken," in full consultation with council staff. The import of those findings and recommendations could hardly be clearer. In the past three years, education and social work services have been plunged into chaos by the abolition of their director posts and the loss of leadership and direction. Those mistakes urgently need to be put right. For that to happen, those who made the mistakes must acknowledge them. It will not do for those who run the council to maintain that the current situation is somehow the responsibility of every member of the council and every administration of the past 12 years. To make such claims only adds to Aberdeen citizens' sense of council leaders abdicating responsibility instead of leading from the front. The Accounts Commission has no axe to grind, and it is in no doubt about the relevant timeframe. The commission states: "Over the past three years, the council's expenditure has been significantly in excess of its budget, giving rise to concern over diminishing reserves". That is not a tentative conclusion; it is a clear summary of the evidence that the commission has found. The council's precarious financial position arises directly from significant overspending in the financial years 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08. In 2003, Aberdeen City Council had healthy reserves of over £23 million. The Accounts Commission has described a position five years on in which the council is without an adequate reserve and the  value of revenue from sold assets is quickly swallowed up by a chronic deficit. I am delighted that the commission has backed the Labour proposal for the appointment of an independent expert in local government finance in order to establish whether the council's proposed savings are accurate and achievable, and to monitor closely the delivery of the savings. In this context, the word independent is just as important as the word expert. It is essential that such an independent expert has full access to the accounts of each and every part of the council. Only that way can he or she have the information that is required to ensure that everything possible is being done to realise savings in everything other than front-line services. Of course, the debate is not just about balancing the books; crucially, it is also about securing the future of schools and services that were sacrificed all too easily in the wild panic of budget cuts earlier this year. I hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth will now act on the suggestion that I made to him on 9 April and permit the council to transfer funding from capital to revenue. If he does that, the council must be ready to take a different approach in addressing the current crisis. There must be no repeat of the unplanned, uncosted and illogical cuts that we have seen this year; nor can opposition parties be asked or expected to endorse planned savings that make no sense. The Accounts Commission has laid out a plan for taking the council forward. I know that Labour councillors in Aberdeen are ready to work with others to implement that plan, and I expect ministers to give their support. However, in doing all that, we must not lose sight of what local government is about: the provision of schools and services. A council that succeeds in balancing the books only by closing schools in disadvantaged communities and taking away services from vulnerable people is still a failing council. If Aberdeen is to succeed, it must start by putting schools and services back at the centre of the council's purpose, where they belong, bringing back effective financial management and winning back the trust of its citizens. Accepting in full the findings and recommendations of the Accounts Commission would be a good place to start.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that the standing orders require members to treat one another with courtesy. To launch a personal attack on a member and then refuse an intervention from that member is surely the height of discourtesy.

To ask the Scottish Executive how national health service boards and local authorities should support services for people affected by alcohol misuse. (S3O-3553)

Does the minister recognise that a brief interventions approach will be of benefit mainly to those in the lowest tiers of need, as defined in the national plan for action on alcohol problems and elsewhere? Does she accept that, often, those who have more complex and highly-specialised needs have the greatest impact on health services, short of hospital admission, and on social work services? How much latitude will joint alcohol and drug action teams be allowed to apply funding to best meet what they identify as local priority needs?

I also congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing the debate. He represents a constituency that I know well. Indeed, many of his constituents are members of my extended family, and therefore I am well aware of the importance of many of the issues that he has highlighted. The issues around fuel costs apply to island communities in general and to many remote rural communities; they also apply to various sectors of the economy that are important to us in urban and rural environments. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation has highlighted its concerns about its sector, but fuel costs can have significant impacts for the wider economy through the impacts on road haulage and road passenger transport, as Stewart Stevenson highlighted earlier this afternoon. Ministers in the UK Government and the Scottish Government must consider what they can  do to address the causes of the problem and develop solutions to it. I was interested to read in The Press and Journal this morning what Gordon Brown had to say about the international supply issues—in which the UK Government has a particular locus—and demand-reduction policy, which this Parliament debated only an hour ago in the context of climate change. I am glad to say that, this afternoon, the Prime Minister and the chancellor went to the north-east of Scotland to meet members of the board of Oil and Gas UK to consider supply and demand issues in the context of the UK continental shelf. I understand that that meeting, which was attended by a wide range of representatives from the UK production sector, was constructive and considered not only introducing new developments but maximising recovery from existing fields. The UK Government has today approved new developments with the potential to produce an additional 50,000 barrels of oil at peak. I also understand that the industry expects that recent changes to the petroleum revenue tax will stimulate investment in up to 30 existing fields in UK waters. Of course, the supply of fuel is not only a matter of how much oil is extracted from reservoirs; it is also about how that oil is refined and marketed. The UK Petroleum Industry Association has highlighted the challenges that face the downstream sector of the industry in rebalancing the output of refineries throughout the UK. Not so long ago, the development of unleaded petrol as a cleaner alternative fuel appeared to suggest to the industry—and, I think, to other stakeholders—that future demand for diesel was likely to decline, but that has proved not to be the case.

That is one of the proposals that is made possible by the support that the UK Government has given it in the European context, which creates the opportunity for a case to be made. It is certainly one to which I would listen with great interest. We must consider the balance between refining petrol and refining diesel, because it is fundamentally an issue of supply and demand. To achieve that rebalancing will require substantial capital investment. As in the upstream oil industry, the economies of scale to be gained from addressing that issue on a UK basis are highly attractive, but it is important that we know whether the Scottish ministers, through their membership of PILOT, will support the exploration and production initiatives that the UK ministers have taken forward today. It is also important that we hear what role the Scottish ministers will play in  supporting the refinery sector in rebalancing what it produces to address the issues for our island communities and Scotland more generally.

It is not every day that I welcome an announcement by SNP ministers, and certainly not twice in the same day. However, on this occasion, I am happy to be able to make an exception. When we debated the issues in January in the context of the UK Energy Bill, I pressed ministers to conclude their discussions with UK ministers on carbon capture and storage and to allow initiatives on carbon storage in Scottish waters to progress as part of the UK Energy Bill, through a legislative consent motion in the Parliament. I am delighted that this morning, at the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, Jim Mather did precisely that and confirmed that an agreed approach is now in place. I welcome that and I am glad that the delay in reaching agreement was not too prolonged after our debate in January. The joint approach by Holyrood and Westminster to the licensing of carbon stores offshore creates the necessary framework to allow the development of carbon capture technology, which is welcome in the context of climate change. The issue now is to make progress with the development of the technology. I hope that we will see early funding of projects from UK ministers and clear and unambiguous support for that from Scotland's devolved Government. I would like to be equally positive about the Scottish ministers' support for renewable energy generation, but on that the record of the SNP's first 12 months in power is distinctly mixed. In that time, the Scottish ministers have approved, under the Electricity Act 1989, major wind power developments with a combined capacity of less than 600MW, whereas they have rejected major developments with a combined capacity of nearly 900MW. That is a disappointing record, however ministers choose to present it. Wind power is not the only way of generating low-carbon electricity. Ministers should not close the door on any power source that has a low-carbon impact. Scottish Government support for the development of wave and tidal power technologies is welcome and builds on initiatives that were taken by the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, with ministerial support, throughout the past five years. Hydro power is capable of further development as part of a diverse energy mix. Reducing the impact of carbon emissions also depends on greater energy efficiency and on reducing landfill disposal of waste. Yesterday evening, the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on renewable energy and energy efficiency and the cross-party group on wastes management met jointly to consider the potential environmental benefits of well-designed approaches to obtaining energy from waste, which  is clearly one of a range of important and diverse initiatives that are relevant to the debate. If ministers are serious about using low-carbon electricity as part of tackling climate change, they must acknowledge that onshore wind is the one renewable energy technology that is most capable of making a substantial difference in the short term. The opportunities for new large-scale hydro schemes are limited, precisely because of the success of hydro power two generations ago. The opportunities for large-scale offshore wind are real enough, but developments are not yet in place in Scottish waters, other than the Robin rigg development, which is currently under construction in the Solway Firth. The new marine technologies of wave and tide are capable of delivering environmental benefits and economic advantages for Scotland, but they are unlikely to contribute either soon enough or on a large enough scale to put us ahead of the curve on reducing carbon emissions in the next 10 or 12 years. When, some weeks ago, I put to the First Minister his Administration's record on wind power applications, he did not dispute my figures. He should know—one of the rejected projects was in his constituency. Instead, he said that there would soon be renewables capacity in Scotland of 3GW, and that we therefore had more to celebrate than to regret about his Government's approach. The reality, of course, is that most of the existing capacity was approved by previous Administrations. Ministers could have chosen to add 1,500MW of new capacity over the past 12 months—such is the rate at which proposals for new developments are still being made—but they have rejected most of the opportunities so far. When ministers come to consider some of the outstanding applications before them, I suggest that they acknowledge the need to send out positive signals to the wind power industry that Scotland is still a place where it can do business, and that decisions will be quick and positive. Making such decisions will help ministers to meet targets for renewable energy and to work towards emissions targets. We will need to meet targets here and now if we are to meet the long-term targets that have been described.

The cabinet secretary has said that she wants more control over the regulation of energy markets to help Scottish consumers, while the First Minister wants to change the electricity transmission charging regime to benefit Scottish producers. Both those objectives are desirable, but does the cabinet secretary accept that the current electricity transmission charging regime is designed to reduce costs to consumers in direct proportion to their distance from London? Will she therefore discuss with consumer representative organisations the impacts on fuel poverty of any changes to that regime? Will she also ensure that the issue is considered fully by the Scottish fuel poverty forum when it is set up?

Following some recent decisions, does the minister acknowledge the need to boost the wind power sector's confidence in Scottish Government policy? Does he also acknowledge that existing grid provision would allow the connection of a number of significant projects in the south of Scotland? Those projects are currently before him for approval. Will he offer encouragement to the wind power sector by making early and positive decisions on a number of those proposals?

I welcome the minister's decision to ask the SPSA to consider the matter again. He will recall that I first raised the matter with him in February, and he will recall that he told me in a written answer on 14 April that—on its proposal to close the forensic science laboratory in Aberdeen—the SPSA had consulted "staff, unions, police authorities, Chief Constables and regional procurators fiscal".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 14 April 2008; S3W-11133.]  Will the cabinet secretary now publish the responses to the consultation? If not, why not?

Wind energy must be a part of meeting our future energy needs. Can the First Minister confirm that, in the first 12 months of his Administration, his ministers have approved major wind power developments with a combined capacity of under 600 megawatts, while they have rejected major wind power applications with a combined capacity of approaching 900 megawatts?

It is clear that this debate has implications for how Scottish ministers should deal with major development proposals in sensitive locations in the future. If Scotland is to benefit from the controversy surrounding the application to develop a world-class golf resort on the Menie estate, the lessons that we have learned must be applied to any future reform of the land use planning system and to the actions of the current ministers with responsibility for the operation of the system. I am a supporter of the proposed development—that is my starting point. In November last year, I lodged a parliamentary motion welcoming the support of Aberdeenshire Council's Formartine area committee for the Trump development. On 4 December, I lodged a further motion in which I took issue with the decision of Aberdeenshire Council's infrastructure services committee to reject the Trump application. It was entirely in order for me to express those views as a member of the Parliament. It would not have been appropriate for me to do so when I had ministerial responsibility for planning, and the same applies to any minister. As a constituency member, I had no problem with the decision on 4 December to call in the application when it was announced. At the time, there appeared to be some prospect that the call-in would lead to an early decision by ministers. Sadly, any hopes of an early decision soon unravelled, for the reasons that have been properly investigated and explained in detail by the Local Government and Communities Committee in its report. In the event, it took ministers 85 days to get round to announcing that there would be a public local inquiry into the called-in application—a decision that, according to Aberdeenshire Council, could readily have been made before Christmas. It is a simple matter of fact that ministers' intervention failed to achieve a quick decision. Instead, they got into a state of indecision. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the process following the call-in will prove just as time consuming as an appeal by the developers would have been. Ministers should acknowledge such issues in the context of the objectives that they say they set themselves. If they do so, they can hope to command some respect when making future decisions and avoid the impression that they are making things up as they go along. As the committee showed clearly, Alex Salmond's enthusiasm for the project caused him to act in ways that imperilled its progress. As First Minister, he would have known how important it was to avoid any actions that might give rise to controversy or concern about the integrity of the  planning process, but he failed to take the necessary precautionary approach. I say that in the light of subsequent developments, which were entirely predictable given the controversy that already existed around the local authority's previous decision. Alex Salmond's personal intervention was bound to add to that controversy, which made essential the committee's thorough scrutiny of the planning process and how it operated in this case. The right response from ministers would be for them to acknowledge positively the criticisms and recommendations that are contained in the committee's report. If ministers really want to strengthen Scotland's reputation as a good place in which to do business, they should not appear to regard parliamentary scrutiny of ministerial actions as irrelevant or partisan. They should be willing to recognise the conclusions of that scrutiny and should resolve to seek to do better next time. It is concerning that Brian Adam, who is the Government chief whip, has pursued the argument that parliamentary scrutiny of ministerial actions is in some way a waste of public money or pursued for partisan ends. That argument carries with it a logic that all parties represented in the chamber should reject out of hand.

Mr Adam has confirmed that he regards the committee's scrutiny as a waste of public money and time. That is deeply to be regretted. In the manner and content of what he said this afternoon in response to the committee's report, Stewart Stevenson provided no reassurance. It is one thing to defend or justify the actions of colleagues but quite another to disparage the legitimate concerns and conclusions of a parliamentary committee. If ministers in a parliamentary democracy have one bounden duty above all others, it is to respect the roles and responsibilities of Parliament and its committees. They should accept the committee's recommendations and respond to them positively and in detail. They should acknowledge that the consequences of their action, unintended as those may have been, have done Scotland's reputation no good, and should seek to ensure that their confusion of roles and responsibilities never again impacts on the planning system.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that Aberdeen City Council's ability to deliver choice and quality to school pupils is helped or undermined by the fact that it, as an education authority, has no department of education, no education committee and no democratically accountable convener of education?

Does the minister agree that developing Scotland's potential in hydro power and other renewables will depend on acknowledging the importance of social and economic development in remote rural communities? Does he acknowledge the widespread concern about his recent decision that in Lewis "there is no basis on which to consider the test of imperative reasons of over-riding public interest"? Does he believe that that judgment might risk creating no-go areas for hydro, wind and marine renewables across large parts of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it can take to help Aberdeen City Council achieve long-term financial stability and avoid cuts to essential services. (S3O-2941)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer and for his offer to meet me and colleagues from other parties to discuss matters next week.  The cabinet secretary will have read the controller of audit's report to the Accounts Commission. Does he agree that part of the reason for the £27 million of public service cuts in Aberdeen this year is the imbalance between capital and revenue budgets over the past three years? Too much was set aside for capital projects and not enough was available to provide services. Will the cabinet secretary consider what he can do to assist and encourage the council to put that balance right?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept Joe FitzPatrick's figure of £27 million of cuts in Aberdeen this year?

As Richard Baker said a few moments ago, a new era for local services has begun in the city of Aberdeen. The danger is that what is true of Aberdeen today will be true of the rest of Scotland tomorrow.  Today, in Aberdeen, supporters of the homelessness charity the Cyrenians are beginning a week-long action of sleeping out in the shadow of Marischal college. Usually, its supporters take part in sleep-outs to raise the public's awareness of the problem of homelessness in Aberdeen. This time, they are braving the elements to protest against local government cuts. The Cyrenians alone face a cut of £900,000 from the annual funding that they receive from Aberdeen City Council. They expect that four valuable projects that work with homeless people will close, and that 30 voluntary sector jobs will be lost.

Is that not a peculiar question from a member from Dundee? Let us see whether we can engage in some dialogue with SNP members from Aberdeen. It would help if members, in making speeches and outrageous claims about the city of Aberdeen, engaged in debate rather than refusing interventions. In practice, the new-found freedom of local government has meant £27 million of cuts across the board in the city of Aberdeen and the seeking of a further £2 million of savings from proposed school closures. SNP ministers say that councils can now set their own priorities, decide where money should be spent, make local decisions to meet local needs, and be accountable to local people. It is a shame, then, that SNP councillors in Aberdeen have not explained their priorities to local people, have made decisions that remove services from those who need them the most, and have declined to take the opportunities that have been offered to them to be accountable to the people who are affected by those cuts. Likewise, SNP ministers say that they want smaller class sizes and that they support parental choice, yet the policy that SNP councillors in Aberdeen are pursuing is to merge and close primary and nursery schools whose class sizes are deemed to be too small, and to deny parents choice in the placing of their children. All that comes back to local government finance—to the funding that ministers provide and the choices that councils make about what to do with that money. As John Swinney said, the Accounts Commission announced last week that it will hold a public hearing to examine more closely how Aberdeen City Council has implemented best value and community planning in the past four years. That will be followed very closely by the many people in Aberdeen who face the loss of services as a result of council cuts, and I hope that  it will be so arranged as to allow many of those people to attend the public hearing. Like the Cyrenians' supporters who are sleeping out in the shadow of Marischal college, those people will want to know why it is okay to spend £80 million on turning a Victorian granite building into council offices while schools have to close because they cost too much to maintain. They will want to know how council reserves of £23.5 million in 2003 disappeared during the following four years, and why the council administration voted through £27 million of cuts last month just as the Accounts Commission was coming to a view on what to do next. If those drastic, panic-stricken cuts were designed to persuade the Accounts Commission that the council had no case to answer, they have clearly failed. The administration of Aberdeen City Council should set aside its cuts and closures programme until the public hearing has been held. It should engage in genuine dialogue with all parties and with the public—the council tax payers of Aberdeen—on what the city's priorities should be and how they should be met. In that way, the council can hope to reconnect with its proud tradition of providing excellent public services, which it did for many years, and the citizens of Aberdeen can have some hope for the future of those services. If the administration fails to protect services and fails to reverse the decisions to cut and close vital services, it will not readily be forgiven in Aberdeen.

Will the member give way?

Mr Peacock asked what advice the minister would give to the staff at Highland Council. In the same vein, what advice would the minister give to the staff of the voluntary sector agencies in Aberdeen City Council area who are losing their jobs as a consequence of changes made by the council in the light of the settlement?

I welcome the minister's information that talks are continuing. She will be aware that the Lemon Tree, which is in my constituency, has served the city and the whole region well over several years. Will she join me in welcoming the initiative taken by Aberdeen Performing Arts to allow the venue to reopen, albeit on a more limited scale of operation than applied before its forced closure a few weeks before Christmas? Will the minister assure us that decisions by the Scottish Arts Council on future funding of the Lemon Tree will not be affected by the decision of Aberdeen City Council to cut funding for Aberdeen Performing Arts and other trusts by £50,000 a year over the next three years?

How does the minister intend to fund the western peripheral route when final decisions on it have been taken? Will those details be made public before the public local inquiry?

Does the minister agree that, in addition to the funding from Scottish sources that he has indicated, it is important that tidal energy initiatives in the north of Scotland continue to attract UK Government funding, as they have done in the past four years? In view of industry predictions that commercially achievable tidal and wave energy projects are likely to come on stream eight to 10 years from now, will he indicate his intentions in addressing base-load need in the interim period?

To ask the Scottish Executive how proposed changes to VisitScotland.com will affect potential visitors to Scotland. (S3O-2535)

In the light of what the minister has already said this afternoon, will he confirm his continuing support for the target of increasing tourism revenues by 50 per cent by 2015? Will he join me in commending VisitScotland.com on its success in developing over the past two years a world-leading technology platform for the changes that it is making? How have visitors to Scotland and providers of tourism services been consulted on the changes? How will their experience be monitored in the future?

Is the First Minister aware of the view that the Aberdeen Hotels Association expressed last week that setting targets for growing tourism on the one hand and cutting the route development fund on the other hand "just does not stack up"? Given that in Aberdeen next week, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee will take evidence on the tourism growth targets, will the First Minister offer some good news for tourism in the north-east by announcing a new fund to support direct flights into Scotland?

Does the minister acknowledge that UK ministers and the oil and gas industry are guided by guidelines that were drawn up by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, whose data do not bear out the concerns that Mr Harper has expressed? Does he share my view that the UK Government's requirement that a strategic environmental assessment be carried out before a block is released for exploration under a licensing round is the right approach?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the designated place at Albyn house in Aberdeen provides a good model of how to deal with people who are drunk and incapable that can be copied by other alcohol support services to avoid inappropriate admission to hospital and detention in police cells. (S3O-2422)

I am sure that the health secretary agrees with Kenny MacAskill, who praised the work of Albyn house when he visited it at the end of last year. Is she aware that Albyn house delivers big savings to health and social work budgets? It is funded by NHS Grampian and Aberdeen City Council and it is in the middle of reviews that they have commissioned. Does she share my surprise that Aberdeen City Council has chosen to cut its funding while it is in the middle of that review? Will she join me in calling on the city council to continue its funding of the designated place, in partnership with the NHS, at least until the reports that have been commissioned are made available?

My constituents in the Seaton area of Aberdeen know why prisons matter. They know who it is who commits most of the housebreaking and petty thefts in their neighbourhood. They know when he is up in court and how long he will serve when the sentence is handed down. They know when he is coming out of prison and they check that their doors are locked and that the kids have not left anything valuable lying outside. Prisons matter to those constituents of mine because prisons give them respite, not from the crimes of a serious criminal but from the crimes of a persistent repeat offender. Seaton is no different in that respect from communities throughout the land. Prisons matter because the public require protection from those who break the law and because the victims of crime rightly demand that the perpetrators should be punished. Crimes are committed daily in Aberdeen, as they are in every city. Courts deal with offenders week in, week out, and some of them are sent to jail. Aberdeen prison has often been the most overcrowded in the land, not because more crimes that justify imprisonment are committed in Aberdeen but because the prison is an old, cramped, Victorian building that is not fit for purpose in the 21 st century. The decision to replace Craiginches with a modern purpose-built prison ought to be welcome, but its intended replacement is not in Aberdeen. Instead, SNP ministers announced in the summer that a new prison is to be built in Peterhead to serve both as a serious sex offenders prison for the whole of Scotland and as the local prison for the north-east, including Aberdeen.  Elected representatives of all parties on Aberdeen prison visiting committee believe that Aberdeen should continue to have a community prison. They have not argued that the existing prison should be retained, but they have asked ministers to consider providing at least a remand unit in the city, so that prisoners who have not yet been convicted are not held in a prison that houses serious sex offenders and is 40 miles away by road from Aberdeen sheriff court. I am sorry to say that they received neither a direct answer from ministers nor any response to their request for a meeting with ministers. Remand prisoners need to appear in court for their cases to be considered and they often need to appear more than once. It is surely fundamental to prudent prison estate management that ministers should seek to place prisoners who are on remand as near as possible to the court in which they will appear, to avoid the on-going cost of transporting them many times further than is now the case. Aberdeen prison visiting committee has not asked ministers for a commitment to a new prison in Aberdeen, although there is a case for putting a prison where prisoners' family members can have access to it, in the interests of the rehabilitation of the prisoners. The members of the committee have not even asked ministers for a commitment to a new remand centre in Aberdeen. They have simply asked the Cabinet Secretary for Justice and the First Minister to meet them to discuss their concerns, and they have asked ministers to support a feasibility study to consider whether there is an economic case for the Scottish Prison Service to invest in a modern, purpose-built remand centre in Aberdeen. Ministers should meet those with knowledge and experience of the issues in Aberdeen and they should agree to consider the case for a remand centre in the absence of a prison in Scotland's third city. That does not seem to me to be too much to ask.

In that context, does the minister see a continuing role for Government support as well as for the work of the other partners that he mentioned?

Bayern Munich's visit to Pittodrie last week was a great occasion. For young fans, such as my daughter Sophie, it was a first chance to see the Dons match up to one of Europe's biggest clubs. For those of us old enough to have been at the previous game between Aberdeen and Bayern Munich 25 years ago, it was a chance to remind  ourselves where we were sitting the moment that winning goal was scored back in 1983. Tomorrow night is the return leg, but tragically one great Dons supporter has not lived to see whether Jimmy Calderwood's team will match the achievement of Alex Ferguson's, as Alexandra Stalker of AFC Trust died at the weekend. Alex Stalker was what the supporters trust movement is all about. She loved the game, and she was a passionate follower of her team, but more than that she was dedicated to ensuring that the game and the club belonged to football supporters and the wider community—not just in Aberdeen, but wherever professional football is played. I was privileged to know and work with Alex Stalker in the past seven years, after the AFC shareholders association turned itself into a supporters trust in March 2001. For much of that time, she played a critical role on the trust's committee. She was not afraid to speak out on behalf of her fellow supporters, while her calmness in difficult moments commanded respect from all sides. Alex Stalker understood well that supporters trusts are about more than just a single football club; they are about shifting the balance of power in the football industry to ensure that supporters have their say and can influence decisions. She recognised that a strong supporters trust is one of the best defences that a community can have against its football club falling into the hands of people who have no real interest in its future. That was why she promoted links through Supporters Direct, encouraged new trusts at clubs in Scotland and England and even—I am told—helped to get the supporters trust up and running at Celtic Park. That wider approach is not just about trusts themselves. The AFC Trust and others have supported initiatives such as Show Racism the Red Card, which uses football to break down barriers. There have been other initiatives by fans, such as the Dnipro kids fund, which Hibs fans set up after their team played FC Dnipro in 2005. Dons fans supported children in the same Ukrainian sanatorium when Aberdeen were in Ukraine at the end of last year. Of course, there are issues nearer home for trusts and supporters. For example, Aberdeen Football Club has been at Pittodrie for more than 100 years, but it is exploring options to relocate to the edge of town. Different views are held about that. My view is that moving the football stadium out of the heart of the city would be bad news for fans—no more walking to the game or catching the service bus into town for people who want to leave the car at home or do not have a car. However, people have different views, and what is  important is acknowledging that supporters have those views and listening to them. Football supporters should make their voices heard. That is why the AFC Trust and its equivalents elsewhere are important and why Alex Stalker would have wanted more people to join and become involved. The supporters trust movement offers the right vehicle for fans to get their views across and for clubs to hear from the people who matter most. I hope that the debate helps to reinforce that message, not just in Aberdeen, but throughout Scotland. Beating Bayern Munich again would be a wonderful achievement. Securing the future health of all our clubs and a say for supporters in the game's future might take a little more than 90 minutes, but it will be well worth the effort and will be a tribute to all those who have gone before.

When Parliament gives funds to local authorities, we also devolve responsibility—now more than ever—for setting priorities. In my constituency in the city of Aberdeen, local government's priorities were clear and consistent over many years: Labour-led local government invested in support for disadvantaged communities, older people and young people at school. Up to now, thanks to Labour policies set in this Parliament, many of those same priorities have continued to be delivered in spite of changes in the political leadership of the city council five years ago. Social inclusion initiatives, home zones, community enterprise and community wardens have continued to make a difference to the lives of thousands of my constituents. In education, Aberdeen has a tremendous legacy as a result of historically high levels of spending on schools and decisions taken by the Scottish ministers in the previous Administration.  At the other end of people's lives, in providing sheltered housing for older people who are able to stay in their own homes, Aberdeen has also enjoyed the benefit of many years of sustained and substantial investment. All those services cost money, but they also depend on the vision and the priorities of those who make the decisions. Last week, the SNP and its partners in the administration of Aberdeen City Council confirmed that they will seek to close several city schools, including schools that serve disadvantaged areas such as Tillydrone in my constituency. Monday's Press and Journal revealed the financial saving that is expected from the school closures—revenue savings of £2 million a year and capital receipts of £3 million from the sale of school sites. On the same day, the Daily Record revealed that Aberdeen City Council accounted for half of all Scottish council spending on external consultants in the past three years, including more than £6 million in the first eight months of the current financial year—with the SNP in charge of council spending. Politics is about priorities, and those reports tell us a lot about that. Politics is also about vision—it is about the kind of city that the council's elected representatives want. However, the present administration's vision for the future of sheltered housing in Aberdeen appears to be bleak. All 69 sheltered housing wardens throughout the city have received redundancy letters in the past three weeks. According to the Aberdeen Evening Express on 25 January, wardens were told that their service "does not represent effective or efficient use of Aberdeen city council resources" because they are "'inactive' for parts of their working hours." In other words, those who make decisions in the council chamber regard having members of staff who can help, befriend and support elderly residents not as a high-priority social service but as a form of economic inactivity. Cost savings to the council are to take priority over the interests and wishes of residents. I have mentioned only some of the services in Aberdeen that face real and imminent risk in the coming financial year. The potential losers are those who need public services the most. Of course, that is not the responsibility of ministers alone. It is true that the settlement has left little room for growth, but it is also true that it gives Aberdeen the lowest funding per head of any council in Scotland, a recent misfortune that is set to continue under the Government and which contrasts with the situation when Labour was in charge, when Aberdeen had the lowest council tax of any major city. However, what makes a  difference to service users is what is done with local government funding as well as how much there is. Local government throughout Scotland has had to cope before with tight financial settlements from ministers, most recently in the 1990s. At that time, the council leaders in Aberdeen set the right priorities to protect the vulnerable and maintain investment in schools. That is not the case today, which is why my constituents will look to the Parliament and to Aberdeen City Council to protect services that parties in the Parliament say they support. When ministers finally reach single outcome agreements, they will be accountable, alongside local councils, for the outcomes for children at school, for older people in sheltered housing and for people who live in regeneration areas. The Parliament will hold ministers to account on that. The budget debate may be nearing a conclusion, but the outcomes debate is about to begin.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

The SNP said last year: "We will match the current school-building programme brick for brick". It also promised to deliver a maximum class size of 18 in primaries 1 to 3, and on 5 November last year, in reply to a parliamentary question from Richard Baker, Maureen Watt said that ministers "entirely endorse the views of the Accounts Commission and Audit Scotland ... that an occupancy level of below 60% should not automatically trigger consideration of a school's closure."— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 5 November 2007; S3W-5300.]  How hollow those words sound to parents in Aberdeen this week. Aberdeen City Council's school building programme has yet to start but, when it does, the new schools—such as the replacement for Mile-End primary school in my constituency—will no longer allow for out-of-zone placements but will be built to a specification that assumes that no out-of-zone pupils will attend through the exercise of parental choice. That approach has been taken only since the SNP joined the city council administration in May and it threatens to deny parents and children their statutory rights. Last year, SNP education convener Kirsty West and her colleagues launched a review of Aberdeen's school estate. Aberdeen has an average class size of 24 in primaries 1 to 3. That means reducing class sizes by 25 per cent to meet Government targets of a maximum class size of 18. A good reason to review the school estate would be to identify where all the new, smaller classes might be accommodated and what new schools should be built, but that was not the purpose at all. Instead, the review explicitly set out to find ways of reducing the school estate, and the trigger for consideration of a possible school  closure was just what Maureen Watt said it should not be: "an occupancy level of below 60%". Perhaps SNP ministers should tell SNP councillors in Aberdeen why that is the wrong approach. Perhaps they should tell parents of children at Causewayend school in my constituency about matching Labour's school building programme brick for brick. Instead of doing that, SNP councillors in Aberdeen have drawn up a school closure programme and a hit list of primaries and nurseries across the city. Causewayend school is top of that list, and yesterday, parents at the school formed a parents council as a first step in their campaign against closure. The chair of that parents council attended Causewayend school as a boy. He still lives on the next street and has one child in primary school and one in nursery at Causewayend. He does not see how smaller class sizes can be achieved by closing schools such as Causewayend, which has served city-centre residents well for the past 132 years. The SNP's school closure programme in Aberdeen does not stop there. Hilton nursery school, which is bursting at the seams and has been the nursery school of choice for generations of families in a relatively disadvantaged area, is threatened with closure. One of two primary schools that serve the regeneration area of Tillydrone—St Machar school and Donbank school—is threatened with closure, just as plans go forward for hundreds of new affordable homes in the area. Outstanding Catholic primary schools in my constituency, such as St Peter's and St Joseph's, face the threat of rationalisation just a few years down the line. That is the reality that Scotland's schools face under the SNP. It is simply not acceptable for SNP ministers to say that these are local issues and are therefore not a matter for them. SNP ministers and councillors were elected on a manifesto commitment to deliver smaller class sizes and a promise to build and refurbish schools in order to achieve that. When SNP councillors propose school closures and amalgamations, they are breaking those promises. SNP ministers should own up and be big enough to take their share of the blame.

My reference was to written history of events in Scotland written in Scotland. I recommend that she read Tacitus's account of Agricola's conquest of Scotland.

As Ken Macintosh said, the skills and discipline that are essential for the study of history are important in their own right. Young people who are trained in historical method learn how to question received wisdom, examine sources critically, test motive and judge evidence. All of those skills are relevant, regardless of the career path that a person chooses to follow. Today, we might have some critical examination of the claims of ministers to do something differently, which is a position for which they have advanced no evidence whatsoever. Indeed, Rob Gibson's shameless rewriting of recent history is the best evidence of the need to examine very closely the SNP's claims and motives in this debate. I studied history at school and university and, on occasion, I have taught history to undergraduate students. My doctoral thesis was concerned with modern African history, but I also completed a course on modern Scottish history in the fourth year of my undergraduate degree, which had a strong focus on the last 200 years, including the Highland clearances, the industrial revolution and red Clydeside. However, long before I read Karl Marx's interesting views on Highland history, I learned a good deal more about the history of Scotland in general and Gaelic Scotland in particular from my parents and grandparents. Stories that have been passed down from one generation to another in Gaelic culture are a collective memory of the history of communities and form an invaluable record of what has often been a marginalised part of Scotland's story. As a boy, I also imbibed the history of Scotland that was supported by BBC schools radio and taught in primary schools. That is where many of my generation got their first formal taste of Scottish history, and the high quality of much of that material remains vivid for me. I welcome the proposition that the history of Scotland should be part of the history that is taught in Scotland's schools, but it is essential that it is not taught in isolation. The earliest written account of events in Scotland dates from the first century of the Christian era, which means that the present  century will mark 2,000 years of recorded history in this country. In all of those 20 centuries, what is most striking is the extent to which Scotland's history has been intertwined with the history of other countries and of other parts of these islands. The truly historic events have been not those that affected Scotland alone but those points in our history when our relationships with other countries changed—usually, when those relationships became closer than they had been before. The arrival of the Romans in the first century, the coming of St Columba 500 years after that, the development of feudalism 1,000 years ago, the beginning and the end of the old alliance with France and the choice, instead, of alliance with England are all critical milestones in Scotland's history and they are all characterised by key decisions and developments in Scotland's relations with the outside world. The past 500 years are even more about the story of Scotland's relations with the wider world—the period of reform and union, of emigration and empire, of democracy and, now, devolution, of the war with fascism and the post-war welfare state. Scottish history is the story not of a self-absorbed nation looking in on itself, but of a country that has prospered in the world precisely when it has been most outward looking, forward looking and international in its perspective. We want Scottish history to be a firm part of the curriculum, but we do not want that to happen by leaving out the common history that we share with our neighbours. We also want our children to be taught a British history that reflects the importance of Scotland and all our neighbours to the development of the British state and society in recent centuries. We cannot ask that others recognise the importance of Scotland's contribution if we do not, equally, acknowledge the importance of the British, the European and the global context in which Scotland has flourished. History should not be taught as if the human experience can be divided into national silos, whether they be Scottish, British or even Argentinian. The Scottish history that is taught in our schools must be as relevant to those whose forebears lived in Pakistan or in Poland, in Donegal or in Durham, as it is to those who can trace their Scottish ancestry back through many generations. The way in which our schools teach Scottish history must reflect the history of regions such as the Highlands and Islands, the north-east and the south-west, which have different historical experiences from the core areas of the medieval Scottish kingdom. One of the past limitations on the appeal of Scottish history to our young people was the approach that a generation ago saw too many  Scottish history books end in 1707 or 1746. If the teaching of history is partly of value because of the light that it sheds on the present and future, then the more recent the history, the clearer its relevance will be to those who learn it. I welcome the recognition of the importance of history in general and of Scottish history in particular. I emphasise that those who teach history should first understand it and, therefore, the importance of advanced study for those who teach. The Labour amendment is right to emphasise the importance of basic learning skills for students of history. Those basic learning skills give access to the whole curriculum and the range of additional and critical skills that the study of history can bring. The history that our young people are taught must be balanced, must reflect the whole of our historical experience, and must put Scotland's history in its widest context. If it does that, it will add to the skills and knowledge of future generations.

Will the member take an intervention?

Can we deduce from that that no marketing fund, in whatever guise, will be provided to support the introduction of new routes into Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the full range of children's cancer services will continue to be delivered in Aberdeen. (S3O-1905)

I am sure that the minister will be aware of the fact that quite different reports have been circulated in the local press regarding both the timetable and the likely outcome of the consideration of the matter. I will press the minister on the timing a little bit further. She will be aware that, following her decision to move cleft lip and palate surgery away from Aberdeen, there will be intense interest in the decision when it is made. Will she indicate a little more clearly to the families concerned when that consultation process is likely to begin?

As some members may recall, at this stage in the previous parliamentary session I had ministerial responsibility for the energy portfolio that Jim Mather now holds. In that role—as I was reminded at yesterday's meeting of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—I was particularly involved in two Government-industry partnership bodies. I was vice-chair of Pilot, which is the Government-industry task force for UK oil and gas that the Labour Government at Westminster set up some nine years ago. I was also the original ministerial chair of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland—FREDS—which, as the name suggests, seeks to apply and develop the  Pilot model to maximise the economic benefit for Scotland of new renewable energy technologies. Pilot and FREDS are a good place to start today's debate because they highlight the range of energy sources and the huge significance of the energy industries in Scotland, both historically and for our future sustainable economic growth. Labour's amendment to the motion points out that there are "ongoing concerns about different sources of energy generation". The burning of fossil fuels causes perhaps the most widespread concerns, but no serious or responsible mainstream party in Scotland argues that UK policy is wrong in seeking to maximise the production of hydrocarbons from the UK continental shelf. If the oil industry were to leave the North Sea tomorrow, the energy gap that we face would multiply exponentially and the impact on the Scottish economy would be little short of catastrophic, with the loss of tens of thousands of jobs, many millions in Government revenues, billions of pounds in export earnings and the driver of technical innovation in everything from remote operated vehicles and offshore wind to information technology and keyhole surgery. If it is impossible to imagine any mainstream party demanding an early end to North Sea oil, it was equally bizarre last week to hear senior members of the Scottish Government—as we have heard again today—appear to dismiss surplus production of electricity as somehow unnecessary, unwanted or irrelevant to Scotland's needs. A fundamental assumption in the setting up of FREDS and in the previous Administration's renewable energy policy was that we wanted to sustain Scotland's role as a surplus producer of energy and an exporter of electricity. In a new era of power production, we wanted to sustain the technical expertise and high-quality jobs that the energy and power sectors have provided to the Scottish economy over many years as well as reduce carbon emissions to the atmosphere.

Of course not. In each and every energy sector, clearly there is and must be a balance of argument. However, senior Scottish ministers have argued that, because at a particular point in time more than 90 per cent of energy consumption could be met by coal, oil, gas and renewables, there is no energy gap and therefore no need to think of any other sources. They are guilty not just of using selective statistics for their own ends, but of being fundamentally wrong in their suggestion that Scotland should produce only the energy or electricity that Scotland will consume. They are also guilty of talking down a  major Scottish export industry and the jobs that go with it. Ministers have trumpeted the idea of energy self-sufficiency and have been hugely creative with statistics for the sole purpose—as we heard again in Jim Mather's speech—of being seen to be against nuclear power generation. Their fundamental proposition that only the SNP stands in the way of a new generation of nuclear power could hardly be further from the truth. We all know that there is no queue of multinational energy companies eagerly awaiting the opportunity to build the next generation of nuclear power stations in Scotland. The transmission charging regime, which the SNP also likes to be seen to oppose, effectively incentivises companies—given the scale of capital investment involved—to locate new nuclear power plants closest to the largest markets in the south and midlands of England. The logic and economics of locating close to markets would be difficult for any developer to overcome.

The next time that Alasdair Allan intervenes on me to welcome comments from members on the Labour benches, it might be appropriate if he welcomed the comments that I have just made rather than jump to a different part of the debate. The reality of electricity trading and transmission is that Scotland is not self-sufficient in energy in any meaningful sense because it is not a separate market. Scotland is part of a single national network and a single national grid that covers Great Britain as a whole—long may that continue. The British electricity transmission and trading arrangements give Scottish electricity producers access to the larger markets in the south, provide Scottish consumers with a direct price benefit relative to consumers elsewhere and minimise the risks of power cuts anywhere in the country. Those arrangements mean that nuclear electricity does not stop at the border. When we export Scottish electricity to England, we export the product of Torness and Hunterston as well as that of Longannet and of Scottish hydropower. When the UK bridges the energy gap by developing new nuclear power stations in the south of England, Scottish as well as English consumers will continue to take electricity from the grid that those power stations supply.  SNP members' portrayal of themselves as the great opponents of nuclear electricity is simply an illusion. In fact, by opting out of the Energy Bill and a common strategy for nuclear waste and by declining to extend the polluter-pays principle to nuclear power station decommissioning, they are opting out of the real debate, opposing Scottish new-build proposals that no one has made and making no real difference to the level of nuclear electricity generation in these islands in the years to come. Of course, the opt-outs do not stop there. We heard from Jim Mather that carbon capture and storage offers a potential new technology that the SNP would have us believe it supports. Alex Salmond positively demanded that Scotland should host a pilot project worth potentially billions of pounds in subsidy from the UK Exchequer. Labour at Westminster has put Britain in a position to lead the world in this area. The potential benefits of concentrating on carbon sequestration from coal could be enormous, not just for this country but for all the emerging economies around the world that are currently burning huge quantities of coal. However, today's SNP motion calls for further dialogue on carbon storage, despite the fact that legislative provision for carbon capture and storage could readily be inserted in the UK Energy Bill. There would then be no need for further dialogue with UK ministers on whether provision should be made for carbon storage in Scotland. If ministers really wanted that technology, they would proceed on the basis of the existing devolution settlement, lodge a legislative consent motion and work with UK ministers to implement in Scotland the same provisions that the UK Government intends to implement elsewhere. If Scottish ministers fail to do that, it will only add to the impression that all their opt-outs have little to do with promoting cleaner energy and a lot to do with breaking up Britain's energy market.

I recognise the potential of carbon capture and storage to operate both inshore and further out at sea, depending on the sector in question. However, when the UK is legislating for carbon capture and storage in inshore waters, which is most relevant to carbon capture from coal, it makes no sense for Scotland not to be at the table and part of the process. Ministers should focus on how they will work with UK ministers to make carbon capture and storage happen.  Scotland should not seek to opt out of the British electricity and energy market and should not abandon its leading market position as an exporter of electricity and other forms of energy to the rest of the UK. Instead, we should build on that established strength to become a lead player in renewables and cleaner fuels technology and to earn money and create new high-quality jobs by producing more than we use and selling it in England and beyond. That is why we call today for work towards more ambitious renewables targets in the future, for the development of the full range of new technologies and for Scotland to remain open to as diverse a range of energy sources as our natural assets and scientific knowledge allow. In our manifesto last year, we called for 50 per cent of electricity to come from renewables by 2020. We welcome adherence to that objective from any quarter, but the experience of the past four years confirms that, in the competitive market in which we operate, simply setting targets is not enough. That is why we set up FREDS. It will take work—work with the industry, building on the success of FREDS—for us to meet our targets. That means partnership with the trade unions, which bring a good deal of expertise to the table, as well as with energy companies large and small. We must work with the Scottish Renewables Forum and with those Scottish industrial companies whose expertise is in fossil fuels. They understand just how hard it will be to bring clean coal technologies to market, but they also have the knowledge to get the job done. In my time on FREDS, we took the first steps towards realising Scotland's potential in marine renewables and biomass. Much progress has been made in both areas, but there is still a long way to go. We should not assume that that potential will be realised until the technology is proven, nor can we take for granted that the economic benefits will be realised in Scotland. However, it is right that we should work towards both ends, because marine renewables and biomass have great potential. Labour will support Scottish ministers when they work in the way that I have described and will call them to account when they do not. We will press them to address fuel poverty, to improve energy efficiency and to support microgeneration and combined heat and power. We will not support the SNP when it threatens Scottish jobs or the interests of Scottish consumers by undermining the British energy market, no matter how much it seeks to present that as something other than a political ploy. That is what is at stake today. I move amendment S3M-1152.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "supports the further development of a Scottish energy strategy, in partnership with the UK Government, which  delivers a mixed energy supply and a focus on energy efficiency to meet our energy needs, secure sustainable economic growth and tackle climate change; believes that the Scottish Government should work towards more ambitious targets for generating electricity from renewable technologies; believes that Scotland needs the full range of renewables to be developed including biomass, marine and local combined heat and power technologies; believes that the investment in the grid and the costs of transmitting electricity should continue to be shared by consumers across Great Britain; believes that, while there are ongoing concerns about different sources of energy generation, we should not rule out any single energy source, as doing so may risk both the security of our electricity supply and thousands of jobs across Scotland, and calls on Scottish ministers to work in partnership with UK ministers on addressing our future energy needs."

If it is significant that Aberdeenshire Council's allocation is above the average in each of the three years, is it not also significant that Aberdeen City Council's allocation is below the average for each of those years?

Is the minister aware of the successful use of dispersal orders under the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004 to deal with the antisocial behaviour of drivers on the Beach Boulevard in Aberdeen and, more recently, the use of antisocial behaviour orders in collaboration with the local authority? Will he commend that successful use of the legislation to police forces and local authorities elsewhere in Scotland?

Does the First Minister agree that the situation arose only because the planning authority in Aberdeenshire had so far delegated its powers that it no longer had authority over vital decisions in its area? Does he agree that the best way to protect the local decision-making process in future would be for the council urgently to review its rules so that never again will a project of regional and national importance be rejected on the say-so of barely 10 per cent of its elected members?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government considers that the route development fund has assisted the growth of tourism in Scotland. (S3F-315)

I am pleased to hear that. The First Minister will recognise that there are further opportunities to attract visitors to Scotland from around the world with the year of homecoming, the Commonwealth games, the Ryder cup and the promotion of Aberdeen city and shire as a world-class golfing destination. Does he accept that this is the wrong time to be winding up the route development fund with no alternative scheme in place, and will he now listen to the views of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, the British Hospitality Association and many others, and put in place a new destination marketing scheme to work alongside the efforts of  airports and airlines in supporting further new direct flights to Scotland?

At the end of the three-year spending review, will the budget that is allocated to VisitScotland have increased or gone down in real terms compared with the current year?

Will the member describe to me, as I seem to have failed to note this at the time, the figures that were attached to the statement that the marketing element of visitor engagement will increase?

We welcome the debate, but it is a debate about means, not ends. The objective of a 50 per cent increase in tourism revenue by 2015 is one that we supported in government and support today, but it is not enough to agree on an objective or to hold forums and seminars on an objective. Achieving the objective can involve tough decisions about priorities, resources, and change in order to achieve structures that are fit for purpose. Labour and our coalition partners took many such decisions. We had a tourism minister at the Cabinet table, we doubled the money that was available to VisitScotland to market Scotland in the wider world and we created a coherent national network to do that job in the most effective way. Sadly, tourism is no longer the lead responsibility of a Cabinet minister and the spending plans for VisitScotland over the next three years do not propose real-terms increases in  the core budget for marketing Scotland. The agency is to be further restructured in line with changes to the enterprise networks, but those networks face savage cuts to their capacity to contribute to the growth of Scotland's tourism businesses. Labour's amendment highlights three issues that we believe are crucial to the further growth of tourism in Scotland: access, marketing and skills. It might appear to be a statement of the obvious to argue that the growth of tourist numbers requires increased access for visitors to Scotland by land, sea and air, but everything that the Government has done so far suggests that the objective of improved access is not a given. Air travel in particular does not appear to figure in the Scottish National Party's plans for growing tourist numbers or for growing the economy. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry produced a concise response to "The Tourism Prospectus: Investing for Growth" in September. The SCDI's paper put a good deal of emphasis on access, including access to Scotland by air. It highlighted the fact that "One particular success story over the last few years" has been the route development fund, which Jack McConnell mentioned. It also highlighted the importance of integrating airports into the rest of Scotland's transport infrastructure and called for support for plans to make that happen. The SNP has rejected the Edinburgh airport rail link and with it the idea of connecting Edinburgh airport to the strategic rail network around Scotland. The SNP motion proposes Scotland as a sustainable destination, yet the SNP prefers that visitors arriving by air should not have the easy access to Scotland's entire rail system that EARL would have given.

I am indeed, Presiding Officer. I am suggesting that if we are to achieve a 50 per cent increase in tourism revenue, there needs to be an increased number of visitors by every mode of transport. Of course, the more who arrive by sustainable means, the better. If Mr Gibson is confirming by the tone of his question that the SNP's policy is that we do not want more travellers coming to Scotland by air, that confirms my point.  Of course, it is not only about air travel. It is important to ensure that sea ports provide integrated services for people who arrive by ferry from abroad and people who travel by ferry within Scotland. It is important to integrate ferry services with the road and rail network. Efficient access means access by all modes and easy transfer from one mode of travel to another. Of course, that includes access by road and rail. I wonder whether Rob Gibson is about to intervene and say that he does not want more tourists coming by road. If so, he is welcome to do so.

I am delighted that Mr Gibson supports tourism by road and by rail. That is encouraging. However, I hope that, come decision time, we will have a vote that says that tourists arriving by air are also good for the Scottish economy. Access by road and rail is important. If tourists who come here are to have certainty about their journeys and about the quality of Scotland's transport infrastructure, there needs to be a degree of certainty over projects such as the M74 extension, which is threatened with delay, and the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which is already a victim of delay. Those delays and uncertainties should concern us all.

I am very acquainted with that road. I hope that the range of strategic transport projects that have been carried forward from the previous Administration will have a degree of certainty under the current one. Another project for which I had responsibility when it was introduced about five years ago is the route development fund. I, for one, am proud of the difference that the fund has made to Scottish tourism. Visitors can now fly direct to Scotland who previously would have had no choice, if coming by that mode, but to transfer at Heathrow or another hub airport. That is just what we need in the era of short breaks and city breaks, which will be the growth business of the future.

I certainly agree with Mr Mather if his point is that the SNP did not think of the route development fund. There is nothing sustainable about air visitors to Scotland taking two planes rather than one, so direct flights and routes into Scotland are a good thing. As Jim Mather said, ministers have concluded that the route development fund cannot continue in its current form and have pinned the blame for that on European rules. However, they cannot blame the European Union for their failure to come up with an alternative. It is one thing to say that an existing scheme that has served us well for five years must be set aside for reasons that are beyond ministers' control, but it is quite another to say that it is beyond the collective imagination of Scotland's devolved Government to come up with an alternative scheme for marketing Scottish destinations. Surely there are ways in which to make progress—a scheme for marketing Scottish destinations could be operated separately from airlines' marketing schemes for direct routes. If ministers were committed to building on the success of the route development fund, they could readily transfer the equivalent sum to a destination marketing scheme and ask VisitScotland to run that in partnership with, and with investment by, airlines and airports.

That is not a question for me—it is clearly one for ministers. However, there is a question for all of us. If we think that the route development fund has been a success, rather than simply say—as Alex Neil appears to do—that we can do nothing because there is a question about the fund's compliance with European rules, the constructive and positive response would be to use the collective imagination to find a way to put in place a scheme. That has not happened, which is the focus of our amendment. Jim Mather said that the tourism seminars failed to identify concern in the tourism sector about the loss of the route development fund. I am afraid that that says less about the importance of the fund than it does about the effectiveness or otherwise of the seminars in flushing out the key issues. Mr Mather will have seen the briefing this week from the British Hospitality Association, which highlighted the route development fund and the need for the Government to come up with an  alternative to the scheme as a key issue for the future of Scottish tourism. VisitScotland exists to market Scotland, which is why previous Administrations doubled the funds that were available to it for marketing. That is why the decision not to increase further VisitScotland's core marketing budget in real terms must concern all those who share the objectives that we are discussing today.

Along with me, Mr Brown attended yesterday's meeting of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, so he will recall that the visitor engagement line in the VisitScotland budget that was presented to the committee showed that the current year's funding for visitor engagement is £45 million and the intended funding in the third year of the spending review period is £45.3 million. No matter how optimistic Mr Brown may be about inflation, he must accept that that is a real-terms reduction. I put that point to VisitScotland's chief executive at yesterday's committee meeting and he did not dispute that he was facing a real-terms reduction in funding for the task of marketing Scotland. Although specific funds will be provided for specific purposes, it is not good enough to say that events such as the Ryder cup and the year of homecoming should be funded on an ad hoc basis. We need VisitScotland to make a core marketing effort that is funded by Government, but we have seen no evidence at all that that is intended in the spending review period. If we are to grow tourism in Scotland, we must get our market positioning right, which means, above all, an emphasis on quality and promoting Scotland as a quality brand, which in turn means that we must ensure that the workforce has the right skills. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, which will consider these matters in the next few months, will pay a lot of attention to standards and skills. I hope that the Scottish Government will accept its responsibilities on that. It was clear from the evidence that the committee heard yesterday that the enterprise networks have in the past been critical to ensuring a supply of training to match the sector's demands and that VisitScotland has worked closely with the networks to achieve that. The replacement of the enterprise networks with a new skills agency must not be allowed to stop that happening. We share the concerns of others about the impact on tourism of the drastic cuts in funding for the enterprise networks. In real terms, funding is being cut by more than 14 per cent for Scottish  Enterprise and by more than 20 per cent for Highlands and Islands Enterprise in the next three years—and that is before the separating out of the skills agency and the transfer of the business gateway. Those cuts are serious and must at least present a significant degree of risk to the future support for tourism businesses throughout Scotland. The Scottish Government's decisions in recent weeks have serious implications for Scotland's ability to meet the challenging targets that the previous Administration supported. Opportunities to improve the integration of our transport system and visitor access to Scotland have been rejected. A successful scheme to promote direct flights to Scotland has been abandoned and has not been replaced. VisitScotland's core marketing budget is to decline for the first time in years. The training and skills challenge has not been met. The enterprise networks are facing serious budget reductions, with all that that implies for the future growth of tourism businesses. By way of new thinking, we have been offered a tourism minister who is not in the Cabinet and a bold new slogan—"Welcome to Scotland". If tourism revenue is to grow by 50 per cent by 2015, the Scottish Government will have to do better than that. I move amendment S3M-945.2, to insert after "destinations": "recognises the importance to tourism of improved access for visitors to Scotland by land, sea and air; notes with concern the Scottish Government's failure to propose an alternative to the Route Development Fund or to increase the marketing budget of VisitScotland over the next three years; believes that improved skills and training are the key to achieving higher standards".

Does Mr Mather recognise that the opportunity to gain benefit not only from the Commonwealth  games but from the Olympics in London in 2012 will be lost unless matters are resolved quickly? Will he or his colleague Mr Maxwell now take the initiative and bring together sportscotland and local partners in order to ensure that the new pool is built in time?

Will the member take an intervention?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the guidance issued by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on 11 October 2007 imposed any new requirements on local authorities in relation to the closure of inner-city schools. (S3O-1155)

Does the minister agree that any efforts of her Government to reduce class sizes to 18 in primaries 1, 2 and 3 will mean that cities such as Aberdeen will need more primary schools rather than fewer? Will she reassure parents of children at schools that are under threat in my constituency that current underutilisation of capacity will not be accepted as an excuse for school closures?

To ask the Scottish Executive what account it took of the views of Aberdeen prison visiting committee in making its decision on the closure of Aberdeen prison. (S3O-1058)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary recognises that serious issues are involved. Will he urge the First Minister to agree to meet Aberdeen prison visiting committee, which asked for a meeting four weeks ago, to address its concerns about the impact of the closure of Aberdeen prison on the rehabilitation of those held in prison? Will he also acknowledge the concerns about remand prisoners travelling 40 miles each way every time they attend court in Scotland's third largest city? In that context, will he consider sympathetically the case that has been made by the visiting committee for a modern, purpose-built remand centre in the city of Aberdeen?

I remind members that, in February, the then Scottish Government considered whether we should join the action on the basis of a petition from Argyll and Bute Council. In March, we again considered whether we should join the action on the basis of the responses of the ombudsman. On both occasions,  we decided not to do so for the time being, on the basis of the arguments that were being made.

Does Margaret Curran agree that that is entirely different from the decision by SNP ministers to decline to make submissions when they were invited to do so?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

rose—

Given the comments of the cabinet secretary and Mary Scanlon, it is important, for the removal of doubt, to make it clear on the record that at no point did ministers in the previous Administration decline a request to give evidence at the hearing, nor did we at any point commit any incoming Administration to refuse any such request.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it believes that reducing the number of primary schools is compatible with reducing class sizes in primaries 1 to 3. (S3O-883)

I am sorry that the minister did not give a direct answer to my question, but she will be aware of the decision that her Scottish National Party colleagues pushed through Aberdeen City Council earlier this week, to consider for closure up to 22 schools in the city on the ground that they currently have underutilised classroom capacity. Is she aware of the concerns that the decision has caused among parents whose children attend primary schools such as St Machar's, Donbank, Seaton, Kittybrewster, Sunnybank and Causewayend in my constituency? Will she urgently seek to meet her SNP colleagues on Aberdeen City Council to point out to them that her Government's policy will require a 25 per cent increase in classroom capacity in primaries 1 to 3, as opposed to school closures? Will she join me in calling on the council to abandon those closure proposals?

Last week, the health ministers announced that the Government will end the provision of cleft-lip and palate surgery in Aberdeen and centralise those services in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Given that loss of local access and the commitments that the First Minister has made on such matters, how will those changes lead to better services for the 220 patients and their families in Aberdeen and the north-east?

The minister will be aware that oilfields in the northern and central sectors of the North Sea, such as Brent, Forties and Ninian, have produced substantial petroleum tax and royalty revenues in the past. I hope that he is also aware that, when those fields come to be decommissioned, they will expose the UK Government to liabilities amounting to perhaps tens of millions of pounds per field. In his discussions with Mr Hutton, will Mr Mather ask that the Scottish Government take over those liabilities on the same basis as he will ask to take over the revenues?

On 30 June 2007, Alex Salmond told the Aberdeen  Evening Express : "I can tell you that the bypass will definitely be built, subject to the public inquiry." In light of what the minister has said about the SNP's commitment to the road, what does that qualifying phrase "subject to the public inquiry" really mean?

Is Patrick Harvie's suggestion that Edinburgh is not a successful city, or that the Edinburgh bypass is a figment of the collective imagination?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing this debate and on his persistence in pursuing, along with Labour colleagues, some of the questions to which we eagerly await answers from the minister later this evening. It is nearly five years since the then Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning and his deputy sat down with council leaders from Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to agree the details of how the western peripheral route would be funded. Iain Gray and I were that ministerial team; Len Ironside and Alison McInnes were present on behalf of their respective councils. The agreement that we reached reflected the priority that both national and local government gave to the WPR at the time. The WPR still offers many benefits. It would remove traffic from busy city streets, improve access from rural Aberdeenshire to markets to the south and secure for Scotland the benefits of a world-class city region, with the infrastructure to match. Of course, demand for an Aberdeen bypass was nothing new in 2003, but two things made the WPR proposal different from previous proposals. First, what was proposed was not a bypass in the conventional sense but a peripheral route—a fast road around the edge of the urban area to take commuter traffic away from King Street and St Machar Drive and to allow people to travel from one suburban area to another without going through the middle of town. Secondly, the proposal was not just about local councils saying  that central Government should build them a new road. It was championed effectively by Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce and by Scottish Enterprise Grampian, as well as by Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council. Even more importantly, the AWPR was proposed not in isolation but as part of a wider package for a modern transport system that was endorsed by all partners, in the interests of the wider city region. Today, that remains its greatest strength. Earlier this year, ministers received from local partners in the north east of Scotland transport partnership a finalised regional transport strategy, which carries forward to 2021 the modern transport system that I have described. Once it has been approved, the strategy will have statutory force. Central to it is the commitment to seek to reduce car commuting, which is the key to sustainable transport in the future. The WPR should be a platform for a much-enhanced park-and-ride network, so that people who have to drive for part of their journey to work can leave their cars outside the city limits. It should be complemented by the development of Aberdeen crossrail and new railway stations in the city and beyond, to improve the public transport options for travellers.

It is one of the bizarre ironies of modern Scottish politics that a party that describes itself as the Scottish National Party spends most of its time trying to set one region of Scotland against another. Promoting public transport in Edinburgh and promoting public transport in Aberdeen go together. That is exactly what we in the Parliament should be seeking to do. Bus priority measures, car-sharing schemes and safe walking and cycling routes to work and school are not optional extras. No city or city region can hope to compete in the modern world unless it has high-quality roads, high-quality public transport and city centre public spaces that are safe and comfortable for residents and visitors alike. I hope that ministers will approve the regional transport strategy and that Aberdeenshire Council and Aberdeen City Council will give it practical effect. I hope, too, that the minister will give a stronger commitment to the WPR, in contrast to the First Minister's apparent willingness to be  driven by the outcome of the public inquiry, regardless of what that might be. In the context of a progressive regional transport strategy, the WPR will deliver benefits far beyond those of a simple bypass and will allow Aberdeen to continue to succeed as a dynamic city region, to the benefit of Scotland as a whole.

Further to Richard Baker's question, I give the minister a third opportunity to say to what extent the additional costs of the project will be borne by local council tax payers. What part of the envelope of £295 million to £395 million will now be paid by council tax payers in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire?

In her intervention during my speech in this morning's schools debate, Maureen Watt suggested that all parents want their children to be educated at their local schools. Is abolition of parental choice SNP policy, or is it an unintended consequence of its policy on class sizes?

The SNP said in its manifesto that it wanted to  reduce class sizes to 18 or less in primary classes 1 to 3. It did not say that it wanted to end parental choice in Scotland's schools, but that is precisely what will happen. Ministers tell councils that they must cut an average class size of 24 to a maximum class size of 18, but offer no significant new resources to meet that objective. I am glad that the Minister for Schools and Skills, Maureen Watt, is in the chamber. She hails from the north-east and I hope that she shares my astonishment at how quickly the consequences of the policy on class sizes have been felt in Aberdeen—I am sure that they will be felt elsewhere soon. In my constituency, families are already being told that Aberdeen City Council will put an end to out-of-zone placings for primary 1 pupils as a consequence of the SNP Government's policy. That is what happens when a party makes rash promises in opposition in an attempt to get elected, and then tries to deliver those promises although they were not costed or thought through. Aberdeen City Council can hardly be accused of seeking to undermine SNP Government policy—the council's convener of education is an SNP councillor. However, the impact of SNP Government priorities is being felt by councils whatever their political colour, as Elizabeth Smith said. What Aberdeen City Council is telling me is unambiguous. The council's chief executive wrote to me on 4 September, to spell out the implications of ministers' commitment to class sizes of 18 or less in P1 to P3. He wrote: "The potential impact of this policy on schools, recognised by all local authorities, is that parents may not be able to enrol their children at preferred schools and local authorities will have to robustly pursue their policies of local schools for local children ... It is therefore essential we maintain high standards of education by allowing the 'out of zone' population to decrease naturally. It would therefore be extremely irresponsible of the Authority to continue to take out of zone pupils." The chief executive went on to refer to an excellent primary school in my constituency. He wrote: "each year's P1 forecast at Mile-End (which previously included 8 parental choice places), must now have these removed from the equation due to the required reduction in class sizes." He concluded: "It would be irresponsible of the Council to continue to admit 'out of zone' pupils to the educational and physical detriment of those already in attendance." Never mind that Mile-End primary school is about to be replaced by a brand new school, thanks in large part to the positive commitment to new school building of Labour and Lib Dem ministers in the previous Scottish Administration. That new school is being built, but it will accommodate only  the forecast in-zone population from the immediate vicinity. Even if the school building programme can increase capacity to accommodate classes of 18, as SNP ministers demand, the commitment can be met only by sacrificing the interests of families who already have a child at the school but who live out of the zone. Parental choice in Aberdeen is dead and SNP ministers killed it. That is the clear view of a council in which education policy is the responsibility of an SNP convener.

That is very interesting. In her last phrase, Maureen Watt seemed to acknowledge that SNP policy is to abolish parental choice. It is funny that that was not in the manifesto, yet that is the consequence of her proposals. I know what parents in my constituency want—they want to have an element of choice. When one sibling is at a certain school, they want to be able to send the other sibling to that school. In the past few weeks, I have been told on their behalf that that choice is no longer available, as a consequence of the policy of SNP ministers. That is not the end of the tale, as that same council, Aberdeen City Council, will consider next month a recommendation from officials not to expand the schools estate but to reduce it. Ministers are saying that class sizes should be reduced, and that we will need on average four classrooms for every three current primary school classrooms, yet that local authority is talking about closing schools, not opening them. It is talking about cutting the school week to four and a half days, not about improving the quality of teaching time. It has taken the SNP only four and a half months to bring that chaos to Scotland's schools. Ministers are insisting on cutting the number of children in each classroom, yet councils are forced to consider cutting the number of classrooms. Ministers have simply failed to provide the resources to pay for smaller class sizes. A figure of £40 million throughout Scotland has been cited, and only £2 million for a council the size of Aberdeen City Council—not even enough to restore spending to last year's levels in real terms. When even local authorities that are led by the SNP are planning to cut classroom time, to close or merge schools and to abolish parental choice, it is time SNP ministers woke up to the consequences of their uncosted commitments.  Too many of my constituents are already paying a price by losing the element of choice they have enjoyed in the past. Many more will pay the price of ministers' failing to resource their plans in my constituency and throughout Scotland. That is a shocking indictment of only four and a half months of SNP Government. As Hugh Henry said, it is already time for a change.

I, too, will be brief. I congratulate David Stewart on securing this debate and echo what he and other members have said about the importance of raising awareness of diabetes; of tackling ignorance and discrimination; and of detecting and treating diabetes as early as possible. Like other members, I have experience of diabetes in my extended family, and I am very aware of the difference that is made by early detection and the increasing availability of user-friendly treatments. Indeed, the latter aspect is particularly important for young people who have to face the shock of such a diagnosis. I also pay tribute to David Stewart for leading an all-party approach to this issue during his eight years in another place—and to the all-party approach that has been taken and referred to by the members who have spoken in the debate. It is worth noting the point about wider UK engagement. With diabetes, as with other long-term conditions, we must join up the work being carried out in Scotland with UK research and diagnosis initiatives. David Stewart highlighted the importance of screening. As he said, the previous Administration introduced a number of helpful initiatives such as retinopathy screening for those who have already been diagnosed as having diabetes, but the issue must be addressed in the wider context of the NHS's general management of long-term conditions. I hope that, in her response, the minister will relate her comments on diabetes to the bigger picture of how the NHS can shift its focus from the traditional emphasis on acute hospital care as the health service's main activity to a greater emphasis on detection, early intervention and support for those who have to live with long-term conditions. Indeed, as Mary Scanlon said, that is what delivering for health is  all about. Further development of that approach will command very broad support. As has been said, the issues that are raised by the growing incidence of diabetes relate to some of the wider issues of health and well-being in our population. Those issues are not always related to deprivation—sometimes they are to do with lifestyle. It is clear that there are important matters for the health service in Scotland and elsewhere to address and that that must be done in the context of the way in which we approach long-term conditions.

To ask the First Minister whether the Executive believes that voluntary sector organisations play a valuable role in the provision of social care services. (S3F-109)

Does the First Minister acknowledge the experience of many of my constituents in Aberdeen, where council funding decisions made earlier this year resulted in the voluntary sector's withdrawal from the provision of a number of services to vulnerable people? Many vulnerable people faced a change in their care provider at very short notice and the terms and  conditions of care workers were driven down to national minimum levels. Will the First Minister join me in urging Aberdeen City Council not to repeat the exercise with other services that the voluntary sector provides to vulnerable people, and will he commend long-term funding arrangements as the way forward, as John Swinney did this morning?

Am I to understand that the minister is not working with COSLA on the level of resources and their distribution to local authorities?

I add my congratulations to those members who have made their maiden speeches, whether for the first or the second time. We have had a lively and full debate in which we have heard about the benefits of free personal care and the ways in which it supports people at an age and stage in life when they are particularly vulnerable. The policy removes financial pressures and concerns from them and their families when there are other matters that need their attention and, importantly, it supports the integration of health and social care services while putting the service user at the centre. For all those reasons, all the parties in the Parliament are committed to making free personal care work. We have also heard about the problems of implementing the policy in ways that benefit vulnerable older people as and when they need personal and nursing care services. The decision to implement the policy in partnership with local councils had broad support in the Parliament. The principle of local discretion in delivering services should not be set aside lightly. Nonetheless, the  policy is a national one that should, broadly, deliver benefits equitably throughout Scotland. It is entirely appropriate to consider evidence and to act to put right any problems that local delivery partners have in making that happen. Equally, it is perfectly in order to review the financial mechanisms and funding formulas that are used to allow councils to deliver free personal care, and it makes good sense to do so in the context of preparing for a spending review. Members on the Labour benches have no difficulty with the proposition of a review of how best to deliver personal care. We welcome such a review in principle. However, how will that review be conducted? When will it be completed? What will it seek to achieve? We and other stakeholders want to hear the answers to those questions. It is a pity that Nicola Sturgeon did not make a statement to Parliament today; indeed, her intervention during my opening speech bore out that point. There is a reason why ministers should make new policy announcements in the form of a statement, and there are good reasons for the convention of sharing that statement with other parties an hour before the statement is made. That was the approach taken by previous Administrations and I hope that this Administration will return to that approach in future—not to place ministers at a disadvantage, but to allow for detailed questions and answers and informed examination of what is proposed.

That is a fair point, and it was entirely open to the Executive to use its time to provide both a statement and a debate if it considered the issue a priority and important to the people of Scotland. The Administration may wish to find another opportunity to allow us to address these matters. When the minister closes the debate, I ask her to tell us a little more about the proposed review, given the amount of work that the Scottish Executive Health Department had already done to assess costs and address implementation issues. We need to hear more about what value will be added by the additional inquiry that is proposed. What other evidence does the minister believe remains to be found? When will she reveal who will serve on the review? Who will represent the interests of older people and carers? Which representative organisations of service users will be consulted in finalising the review's remit?  The cabinet secretary's announcement was trailed very well in the press, as members know. However, what was not trailed was the length of time that she intends the inquiry to take. As has been said, it should now be possible to resolve issues that have already been examined in detail. Members will know that the previous Administration had undertaken to seek to resolve those issues in the context of the forthcoming spending review. The cabinet secretary said that she expected an interim report in September but did not expect a fuller report until next year. She also said that the focus of the work would be exclusively on resources. How will the findings of the Sutherland review be included in the wider consideration of the spending review? Why does the cabinet secretary believe that it will take nine months to review the issues when so much work has already been done? I have already said that resolution of these important and complex issues should not be postponed or delayed and that implementation issues should be considered alongside funding issues rather than being considered separately. The cabinet secretary expects her inquiry to report to ministers in two stages. It is important that she takes the opportunity to come to Parliament before the summer recess to allow a debate and a vote. If she has the time, I invite her to do so; she will want to tell members about the inquiry's remit and about the people whom she intends to be on the inquiry team. That might offer the opportunity for the debate that Christine Grahame rightly suggested we should have—a debate during which members could express views on the remit and on the cabinet secretary's proposals. I hope that the minister will be able to confirm today that the review of these serious issues will not get bogged down in endless debate over the reserved issue of attendance allowances for people in care homes. Members who are accustomed to negotiating difficult issues will know that reopening a closed negotiation usually requires new evidence, a new argument or a new offer. I hope that ministers really have something new and substantial to discuss with the Department for Work and Pensions. I would like to hear what that might be. It would be wrong to open such discussions if there were no prospect of making progress. It would be even more wrong to fail to make progress on the critical issues involved in free personal care just because of failure to make progress on relatively marginal issues. I remind the ministers that £23 million a year is less than 10 per cent of the total cost of the policy. From the beginning, that £23 million—or the equivalent sum—was fully funded from the Scottish Executive's own budget. In view of the budgetary provision that has been made since the  introduction of free personal care, and in view of the very significant increase in the total funding for the Scottish Executive, I would be astonished if this Administration were saying that it could not manage to fund free personal care from its own resources, as has been done in the past. If new funding formulas are to be agreed, if changes in the law are required to resolve outstanding issues—we have heard about some of those this afternoon—and if more resources are to be found, those matters should go forward together in the interests of service users, carers and older people in Scotland. That should happen in the context of the spending review because separating the financial and implementation issues will simply not do.

I am pleased to take my first formal opportunity to welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and the Minister for Public Health to their new roles. Over the past couple of years, Shona Robison and I have had some full and frank exchanges in the Health Committee, of which I will say more in a moment. I look forward to such constructive, if robust, exchanges continuing in the Health and Sport Committee this time round. I welcome the cabinet secretary's recognition of the success of free personal care and acknowledge the importance of resolving some of the difficult issues to which she referred. I welcome some of the announcements she has made although, given the substance of some of them, it is perhaps a pity that she did not bring them to Parliament in the form of a statement rather than simply set them out as pieces of information in a subject debate. The cabinet secretary's deputy was a member of the Health Committee that undertook post-legislative scrutiny of free personal care and published its inquiry report a year ago this week, so ministers will be familiar with the response of the then Executive to that inquiry—indeed, Nicola Sturgeon referred to it. They will also be familiar with the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's report on free personal care in Scotland, which was published last year. Shona Robison will recall scrutinising "Evaluation of the Operation and  Impact of Free Personal Care", which was commissioned by the former Administration in response to the Health Committee's report and published in March this year. As Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed, ministers are aware of all those reports and evaluations from the past year or so, as well as of the steps that have been taken and the measures that have been set in train to respond to them. We look to ministers to do more than simply set up another inquiry; we look to them to act to resolve some of the difficult issues. The cabinet secretary has indicated how she intends to do that in one or two cases, but there are other areas that give me some cause for concern.

I am happy so to do. I welcome the clarification that the forthcoming Sutherland inquiry will be about those resource issues alone. I have no doubt that, in her speech, Nicola Sturgeon—

It is a shame that a statement was not made available prior to Nicola Sturgeon making her speech—all members could have benefited from knowing the content of what she had to announce today. I was pleased to listen to Nicola Sturgeon's speech, and I noted some of its content, although I also noted one or two things that were not there. She acknowledged, as did the Rowntree Foundation report and the Health Committee, that free personal care has been very successful in supporting, in particular, "People with conditions such as dementia and people of modest means". It has not resulted in "a reduction in informal care". Furthermore, "Free personal care may have supported increases in care at home." That is all in line with wider health and care policy objectives, and the policy might also have helped to reduce delayed discharges from hospitals. I  welcome the confirmation of the new Administration's support for that broad approach. The previous session's Health Committee raised several issues and made a number of recommendations. In the context of what Nicola Sturgeon has said today, one of those stands out: the recommendation that "The Scottish Executive should undertake a thorough review ... of the resources required by local authorities ... to ... finance free personal care. This may require an increase in funding, or more equitable distribution amongst local authorities." I remind Nicola Sturgeon that ministers in the previous Administration accepted that recommendation. Although her review is welcome, it is in the context of delivering on something that we undertook to do—to follow the recommendation of the Health Committee and review the working of free personal care. As Nicola Sturgeon knows, we undertook to work, with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, to address funding and other implementation issues. I welcome her confirmation that that work is continuing. As Nicola Sturgeon is setting up an inquiry that, she tells us, will take almost a year to consider the issue of resources, it is worth saying—as was set out in the papers that the minister and her colleagues would have seen in preparation for the Health Committee meeting of 6 March this year—that the work that we had undertaken on resources was carried forward to the point where it could be made available to committee members. The outcome of that work was not kept secret; it was included in the Executive's evidence to the Health Committee, which the committee considered on 6 March. For the removal of doubt, I will remind ministers what the review of funding showed. In the first full year of funding the new policy, 2003-04, local authorities spent £197 million on free personal and nursing care, and they were allocated upwards of £219 million. In 2004-05, expenditure was of the order of £222 million, and grant-aided expenditure was upward of £229 million. Total GAE, between existing support for free personal care at home and new funding provided under the policy for free personal and nursing care, went up from £219 million in the first full year to £254 million in 2006-07, which is an increase of £35 million, or 16 per cent, over four years. The comments that the cabinet secretary made about the need to keep individual payments up to the level of inflation should be set in the context of those figures. I detail those figures for the record, and to demonstrate that some of the work of the review of funding for free personal care has already been done or was under way during the previous session of Parliament. If ministers are serious  about improving and strengthening the policy, they will focus on the issues on which a need for further progress has been identified, rather than go back over old ground. There are some pretty clear pointers about what needs to be done on funding, including some from the work that the previous Executive undertook. Funding for free personal care has risen above the rate of inflation in the past four years, but the level of demand has risen rapidly as well. Ministers do not need an inquiry to tell them that local councils will have a strong case for increased allocations in the forthcoming spending review. I certainly approve of the cabinet secretary's aspiration that, for the spending review, there should be as many accurate statistical data as possible on which to base decisions on future funding.

I understand Mike Rumbles's point entirely—his intervention is timely. Shona Robison will be aware that, in an exchange that she and I had in the Health Committee on 6 March, it became apparent that, at that time, work was in hand to examine whether the payments made to care home residents of £145 per week for personal care and £65 for nursing care were enough to meet the needs that they were intended to address. I told Shona Robison that "the element for personal care has perhaps been greater than the actual spend ... and the element for nursing care has perhaps been less than actual spend."—[ Official Report , Health Committee , 6 March 2007; c 3458.] I said that the two elements together were fairly close to balancing out. Mike Rumbles has paid close attention to those matters over the years, so I am sure that he will be aware of that. Perhaps the minister will tell us in her closing speech whether that earlier work has continued and whether the emerging findings to which I referred in the Health Committee have been borne out in the continuing work. Perhaps she will also say whether she agrees with the previous Administration that the right time at which to consider whether to uprate those elements is the forthcoming spending review. The cabinet secretary announced an intention to uprate, although Mike Rumbles challenged her on whether that will acknowledge any possible potential for underresourcing in the previous period. My view is that there has been no such underresourcing, but work was being undertaken  in the Health Department to examine the matter during the previous session of Parliament, so I am interested in hearing whether that work has been completed. I commend to ministers the conclusions and recommendations of the evaluation to which Nicola Sturgeon referred. As she acknowledged, it made recommendations on issues such as funding, waiting and assistance with the preparation of food. I am pleased that that work is continuing. I hope that ministers, in seeking to strengthen free personal care, will do so by building on the solid foundations of the work that has already been done. I hope that they will do so in partnership with local government, as Nicola Sturgeon said, but also using the expertise of the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care and voluntary organisations such as Age Concern Scotland and Alzheimer Scotland. I hope that ministers will acknowledge that it makes no sense to separate implementation issues from funding ones or to postpone reform of or improvements to the detail of the policy to a time beyond the conclusions of the spending review. It is critical that the implementation and financial issues are joined up. I hope that the debate will not focus on external funding that might be attracted from funding streams that are reserved to Whitehall departments. In the cabinet secretary's opening remarks, we heard no new argument or evidence about reopening those issues that seems likely to be persuasive. Instead, I hope that the debate will focus on what the Scottish ministers, the Scottish Parliament, Scottish local authorities and other stakeholders can do to improve the delivery of free personal care in Scotland.

The minister will recall that the clear and successful energy policy of the previous Executive was informed not only by ITI Energy, which we established, but the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, which we also established, and the UK-wide oil and gas Government/industry task force, PILOT, in which we Scottish ministers played an active role alongside UK ministers. Will the minister continue to engage with the energy industries through joint bodies such as FREDS and PILOT? Will he listen to what the energy industry collectively has to say about the importance of promoting onshore as well as offshore wind power and of promoting Scotland as a centre for excellence for energy science within the UK as a whole?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with management and unions at Remploy regarding the company's future plans in Aberdeen and elsewhere in Scotland. (S3O-60)

I understand the nature of that answer and do not dispute the point that Jim Mather correctly makes, but the Scottish ministers and the agencies that are accountable to them place a significant number of contracts for the type of work that is undertaken by Remploy factories. I urge the minister to agree that ministers will meet the management and unions at Remploy to discuss what the agencies that are accountable to the Scottish ministers can do to keep open the option for disabled people of access to supported, as well as mainstream, employment.

First, I must thank Sylvia Jackson, who is absent, and Elaine Smith for giving Parliament this opportunity to focus on the impact of Duchenne muscular dystrophy on people's lives, including those of family members. I acknowledge the points that have been made by members across the chamber. The case has been made that enhanced medical research, better support services, better equipment and adapted housing can make a major difference to the quality of life of people with DMD and, indeed, can help to extend their lives. I want to respond positively on that range of issues. We, too, want to ensure that people in Scotland with this condition can live as well as possible and enjoy the best possible quality of life. Elaine Smith was right to highlight the important question of why the life expectancy of those with DMD in Scotland has been poorer than that elsewhere. As the commonest cause of death in such cases is respiratory failure, aggravated by scoliosis of the spine, our focus in improving survival rates must be on spinal and respiratory care. Through the Scottish molecular genetics consortium and local genetic counselling services,  all affected Scottish families now have access to the necessary molecular genetic tests, which are essential to allow diagnosis to take place as soon as possible. We have carried out a review of genetic services to consider how we might improve access to highly specialised expertise and ways in which we can supplement the voluntary sector in providing user-friendly information and resources, such as family care advisers. A key recommendation of the review was on the appointment of a clinical geneticist and a physiotherapist with expertise in genetic neuromuscular disorders. We have now approved funding for those posts as part of a two-year demonstration project in the first instance, and we hope to make appointments this year. The posts will have a pan-Scotland remit to standardise patient care protocols and improve equity of access to diagnosis and treatment. Elaine Smith mentioned the importance of the Scottish muscle network in improving treatment. Although there is still much to do, it is worth acknowledging the positive impact that the network has had since its inception in 1999. The network aims to improve the care of everyone in Scotland with a neuromuscular condition regardless of where they live by ensuring that they have access to local health, social care and education professionals who know about their condition and its complications. The network has also been working with respiratory physicians to develop a respiratory care strategy for muscular dystrophy that is standardised and equitable throughout Scotland. There has also been significant investment in the national service for the treatment of scoliosis, which has helped to increase capacity and reduce waiting times for the service and which is a start in reducing the impact of scoliosis on those with DMD. Improvements have been achieved. One or two members mentioned that, since the establishment of the Scottish muscle network in 1999, the death rate has halved, which is significant, and the rate of survival beyond the age of 18 has increased threefold. That is not to say that we are complacent—far from it. Significant further improvement is required if Scotland is to achieve survival rates and quality of life that are comparable with those in other places. However, progress has been made and we want to continue in that direction. People with muscular dystrophy of all types will benefit from the approach to the management of long-term conditions that we set out in "Delivering for Health", which describes a model of care in which services are provided as locally as possible and which regards patients and their carers as partners in the delivery of their care. Several members highlighted the issue of whether people with DMD will be able to stay at home. Clearly, the  direction of travel that we set in "Delivering for Health" is that we want to enable people to do that wherever possible. As a consequence of the changes in priorities in the health service that arise from "Delivering for Health", we want people to have an increased ability to remain at home. Community health partnerships have a role in ensuring that NHS services are offered and delivered in an integrated way that responds to the individual's needs. Those with complex and frequently changing needs should have a key person who is charged with actively managing and co-ordinating all their care needs. A single shared assessment can help to co-ordinate a package of equipment and adaptations—members have mentioned that issue—which may come from health, housing and social care services. In that context, consideration of the person's home environment should become a routine part of the assessment process. "Getting it Right for Every Child" aims to ensure that children and young people and their families obtain support when they need it, through integrated working, joint assessments and better information sharing among agencies. That has a clear and direct relevance to the conditions that we are discussing. Last month, we published the rehabilitation framework, which aims to help to equip patients and their carers with the skills that they need to manage their condition more effectively. For example, children with DMD can access community rehabilitation teams—specifically, physiotherapy services—either in specialist or in mainstream schools. For young adults with DMD, the rehabilitation framework should ensure that those services can be accessed at home. I hope that the framework's promotion of the use of assistive technologies will make them more readily available to people in future. One or two members asked about the Housing (Scotland) Act 2006. The act will give all disabled people in Scotland a right to mandatory assistance for adaptations to their principal home and will allow ministers to specify the circumstances in which assistance must be in the form of grant. It removes the current statutory cost limit, allowing local authorities more freedom to assess the level of assistance that is needed. I hope that that produces benefits for many people. Equipment has an important role to play. Some members mentioned that a review of national health service wheelchair and seating services has been carried out, to which the Executive responded formally in January. One of the key recommendations is that the wheelchair assessment process should clearly document the optimum rather than the minimum equipment requirements, to ensure that user and carer needs are met. I was pleased that, as Nanette Milne  mentioned, we were recently able to provide some short-term interim funding to assist the wheelchair services. I can confirm that the wider recommendations in the review, with their larger financial implications, will be subject to the spending review later this year. I expect that they will be given full consideration in that context. However, it is not simply a case of waiting until those large-scale financial decisions are made. There are ways in which local services can respond quickly to the review—I look to them to do that. We are working hard to ensure that services for people with a neuromuscular disorder are properly integrated; delivered by a multidisciplinary team; provided as close to people's homes as possible; and delivered in a way that is responsive to each person's needs. There is further encouragement to be had from the medical and genetic research that is under way internationally, giving hope to the families concerned.  Meeting closed at 17:51.

NHS Scotland's focus on patient focus and public involvement, including in particular the establishment of public partnership forums, has ensured the routine involvement of local people in influencing local priorities and improving the design and delivery of the health services that they use. We have also established a patient experience programme, which will ask patients and carers directly about their experience of the health service and make better use of the information that we already collect from patients. The lessons that emerge from the programme will be used by national health service boards, supported by NHS Quality Improvement Scotland and the Scottish health council, to drive forward year-on-year improvements in the quality of the patient experience.

I am happy to give Malcolm Chisholm assurances on all those areas. I pay tribute to the work of the cancer care research centre at the University of Stirling, which has, to a substantial degree, scoped out and informed the patient experience programme that we are introducing. The purpose of the programme is to build on the centre's work, to extend it beyond cancer to the whole range of patient experiences, to go beyond—as Mr Chisholm suggests—patient satisfaction surveys or complaints processes to gather as wide a range of qualitative information as we can about patient experience, and to ensure that that information is used to drive up the quality of patients' experience in future.

Again, I am happy to assure Linda Fabiani about the extent of our engagement with the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, which was created partly in response to  propositions from the Health Department on shifting the balance of care, increasing support for those with long-term conditions, and bringing together the experience of different patient groups in order to inform the NHS. Ministers have met the alliance regularly and responded to its requests for meetings. At our request, the alliance has met the chief medical officer to address some of its issues of concern.

As far as the impact of this proposal on pharmacies is concerned, the Office of Fair Trading is currently considering whether the proposal by Pfizer is uncompetitive. As regards the impact on patients, we have contacted Pfizer to express our concerns, including specific concerns in relation to patients in remote and rural areas.

As I said, we have raised our concerns with Pfizer—and we have had an initial response. We are continuing to have a dialogue with Pfizer to ensure that it fully understands the concern of those involved in the provision of medicines at a local level, and others, that patients should not be disadvantaged by any changes that are made for commercial reasons.

The concerns to which John Scott refers have been raised directly with ministers by Maureen Macmillan and other members. I assure John Scott that we will reflect those concerns in our continuing discussions with Pfizer.

It is certainly our intention that there should be no loss of income as a consequence of the changes. We will continue to monitor the situation closely with a view to ensuring that NHS patients continue to receive the services and medicines that they require. Any commercial changes that are made in the marketplace will be taken into account in future reviews.

Some 92 per cent of prescriptions are dispensed free of charge, including all those for patients with one of a number of specified chronic conditions. For those patients with other chronic conditions who pay prescription charges, a pre-payment certificate will cover the costs of all the medicines that they need for up to a 12-month period. The cost of the annual certificate will increase from £95.30 to £98.70 from 1 April this year.

Clearly, the matter is too serious to play political games with. If there were glib and simple answers to the questions raised, they would no doubt have been heard by now. We are seeking to take into account all the responses to the consultation—we have indeed carried out the review to which Mr Fox referred—and we will continue to consider those responses carefully. We will publish our response in the near future.

I am sorry to hear that Shona Robison is disillusioned, but I can tell her that we are seeking not to disillusion others. We want to provide an informed and thoughtful response to the consultation and we intend to do that as soon as we can.

We are currently considering responses to our recent consultation on prescription charge and exemption arrangements and we will announce our conclusions in the near future.

I appreciate the points that Margo MacDonald makes. A number of the responses to the consultation reflected such concerns from people with asthma. With the recent launch of personal asthma action plans, we have endeavoured to respond to some of those concerns. In addition, we have provided nurses with specific training on the condition. I am pleased to say that, when some of the campaigners on asthma were in the Parliament yesterday, it was clear that they got a positive response from members of all parties. We are carefully considering prescription charges and we will respond as soon as we can.

There have been more than 2,000 births at St John's hospital in each of the past five years. The number of births has increased from 2,372 in 2001 to 2,761 in 2005, which is a 16 per cent gain over the five years.

Absolutely. Mr Muldoon will be well aware of the recent appointments of obstetricians and paediatricians, which indicate the continuing important role that St John's will play in providing maternity and child services in Lothian. He may also be aware of the consultation on medical catchment areas in West Lothian and the west of Edinburgh that recently got under way, which has reflected the continuing importance that St John's is likely to have for an even wider population in the years to come.

Absolutely. As I said in reply to Mr Muldoon's question, St John's will continue to play a key role in that field. I hope that Fiona Hyslop will join Bristow Muldoon and ministers in reassuring people in West Lothian and the west of Edinburgh about that. The hospital has an important future in providing those services and a range of other consultant-led services, which will continue to bring benefits to what Bristow Muldoon rightly described as a young and growing population in that part of Scotland.

I am happy to deal with the questions in that context. The new services that we are putting in place throughout Scotland for mothers with post-natal depression include new dedicated services in the west and the east of Scotland. In December, I was delighted to open the new unit at St John's for mothers who are suffering from post-natal depression and their babies. That service will be well used. When I opened the unit, I was delighted to hear from users of post-natal depression services in West Lothian, who told me about how much they had influenced the design of the new centre. Similar provision has been put in place elsewhere in Scotland at the regional and local levels. That provision points to the importance that we attach to such services.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council automatically adjusts student recruitment figures on the basis of drop-out rates over the previous three years. We expect the number of people who complete the dental degree course to continue to rise. Discussions with the funding council on student recruitment in the next academic year are still continuing.

I am pleased to assure Mike Rumbles that although I am sure the figures he quoted are correct, they reflect the consequences of the Conservative Government's decision to close the dental school in Edinburgh some 10 or 11 years ago. That is why there has been a reduction in the number of people qualifying from our dental schools. I am delighted to reassure him that the number is now increasing and that we expect it to continue to increase. On current plans, in 2009, 2010 and 2011, we expect once again to be producing more than 150 dental graduates a year. Mr Rumbles also asked about the consultation on the provision of a new dental school. As he will know from answers to previous oral questions, the dental outreach centre at Aberdeen has been up and running for a number of months. I have given a commitment to consult, about a year from now, on extending that dental outreach centre on the basis of the experience that it has gained over those 12 months. I am confident that ministers will carry forward that consultation in accord with the commitments that have already been given.

I acknowledge the importance of the issue that has been brought for debate by Tricia Marwick and I acknowledge the interest in the issue of many people who live with multiple sclerosis. Like many people in Scotland, I have a number of friends and acquaintances who live with MS. I take the opportunity to underline the Executive's commitment to people who have MS—as part of our work on long-term conditions—and to those who provide care, either professionally or as friends and family. As has been said, there is a high incidence of multiple sclerosis in Scotland. We do not know the reason for that, but research continues into its causes as well as into treatments. MS is a complicated condition that can have devastating consequences. It affects people in complex ways and its effects need to be considered in the context of the particular circumstances of each individual who has the condition. Accordingly, management of individual patients requires a tailored package of care. Professionals and carers work with people who have the condition to ensure that they can, as far as possible, live the lives they want to live. One part of that care package is the provision of drug treatments, which is the subject of this evening's debate. The taking of decisions on new drugs is a demanding and painstaking process in which many factors have to be taken into account, including the benefits that a medicine will provide, its side effects, the alternative treatments that are available and the relationship between benefits and costs. The key questions are whether a drug will offer worthwhile benefits to patients and whether those benefits can be achieved effectively and at proportionate cost. Decisions have to be made on the basis of the best available evidence, but the evidence that is available might be limited in the early stages of the development of a new drug.

The point that Jim Wallace makes is correct. However, he will be aware that the FDA did not take that view at first because of some of the drug's serious side effects, and that it came to that judgment only at a later stage. It is also important to bear it in mind that the drug is licensed for use in the United Kingdom and that the decision that the SMC has to take is different from the one that the FDA had to take because there is no national health service as such in the United States. That lack may be a matter for regret, but it is not one over which we have any say. The SMC considers not whether the drug should be licensed: it considers only whether it is appropriate for use in the national health service, which is a different question. The SMC provides a tried and tested method of assessing drugs, which we consider to be robust for Scotland. It is intentionally separate from the Scottish ministers and the Health Department and provides an informed and expert scientific assessment of the available evidence that manufacturers present on new drugs for use in the NHS. It is worth recording that, in its recent report "The Pharmaceutical Price Regulation Scheme: An OFT market study", which was published in February this year, the Office of Fair Trading commented: "the bodies that carry out health technology assessments in the UK, particularly NICE and SMC, are among the most respected in the world." We share that view and believe that it is entirely appropriate that such decisions are made by those who have professional and clinical expertise, not by ministers. A number of members have asked about the process that the SMC follows. It is important to state that, once a recommendation has been made, a manufacturer can make a complaint, request an independent review panel or resubmit if new evidence is available. If a company feels that there has been significant deviation from due process, it can express that concern and a process would then be followed. In the rare event of a disagreement on the science, a request for review should be submitted to the chairman of the SMC, who will discuss it and take it forward if it is appropriate. If it is agreed that there is a substantial change in the data, that a reanalysis of the data is necessary or that there is a change to the drug positioning, the case will be treated as a new one, and there is a process for resubmission in such circumstances. In the event that there is a scientific disagreement that cannot be resolved and there are no new data, the chairman of the SMC will, at the request of the manufacturer, report the facts to the next meeting of the SMC and establish a group to carry out an independent review of the science.

There is the opportunity for a patient submission in the earlier consideration. If there is significant new evidence or a new approach to the evidence, a resubmission is counted as a new process and there is again an opportunity for a patient submission.

I am glad that Christine Grahame gives me the opportunity to put on record the fact that the SMC does not make judgments on the basis of cost alone. It is important to make that point because a number of members have suggested that the SMC's decision on Tysabri is simply a cost judgment. However, the SMC has previously approved treatments that cost more per patient or that have a higher total cost to the NHS. It is important to be clear about that. Instead of being driven by costs, the main work that the SMC does in considering a submission is to try to establish how many patients would feel better and by how much. In other words, it is not a crude calculation but a judgment on the treatment's value to the national health service and to patients. The SMC's view is that the manufacturer of Tysabri has failed to make that case and the SMC has issued its guidance because of that judgment. It found that Tysabri indeed brings clinical benefit, particularly to MS patients with more severe symptoms, but the SMC's point of view is that the evidence on the degree of clinical benefit and the cost benefit is simply not sufficiently clear to make the judgment that it should be used in the national health service. In other words, the SMC concluded that the evidence that had been submitted by the manufacturer did not provide a sufficient basis to support the use of the drug.

In the process of assessment, the evidence that is submitted is subjected to rigorous examination by clinical and professional experts in the areas concerned. Clearly, they have not been satisfied in this case. It is not for me, any more than it is for other members, to second-guess that scientific assessment, but we would expect the SMC to apply the same criteria and judgment in all such cases. If it has a judged that the evidence that has been provided to it is not sufficient to reach the conclusions that Tricia Marwick suggests it should reach, that puts the ball firmly in the manufacturer's court. It is not a small company; it is a significant pharmacological company, which certainly has the resources to respond readily. It is up to the company to resubmit if it believes that the representation and analysis of its evidence has not been fair. It is not appropriate for us to second-guess such judgments, as I said. We expect the SMC to make its judgments professionally and responsibly—it certainly has the expertise to do that.

Its conclusions are in the public domain, as Christine Grahame will be aware, as is the basis on which it reaches its conclusions. That is perhaps what Christine Grahame wishes to see. I emphasise the significant range of expertise that the SMC brings together. The chair and vice-chair are clinicians, as are the majority of its members, in one respect or another: they are members of clinical professions and include general practitioners and nurses as well as people who are otherwise involved in medicine or pharmacy. The SMC makes judgments—that is what we task it to do. Following the SMC's judgment in this case, we would expect the manufacturer, if it feels that it has more evidence or that the evidence that it presented was not fully considered, to use the processes that are in place to return to the issues. Although this evening's focus has been on drug interventions in relation to MS, there are wider considerations for the management of long-term conditions. I join other members in acknowledging the contribution of the MS Society and I emphasise its potential to influence the Long-term Medical Conditions Alliance in Scotland, which is  crucial to our work on long-term conditions including MS. The chief medical officer is in the process of developing our national strategy for long-term conditions; clearly, we would look to the MS Society to play a part in that work. We all agree that we want to provide the most effective treatments, including drug interventions, where it can be demonstrated that they will have the best outcomes for MS patients. Clearly, we want to do that in parallel with other processes, such as research into causology and treatment. We look forward to the MS Society continuing to play an important role in that work.   Meeting closed at 17:50.

We are taking forward work on the four agreed strategic priorities of respite for carers, young carers, carer health and carer training. We have put in place, among other things, new incentives for general practitioners to identify carers and refer them for relevant support, and carer information strategies will be put in place at health board level throughout the national health service from April.

As part of our response to the care 21 report, "The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland", we have established a task group that is considering a number of issues around respite care. The group is pooling evidence on provision—to which Cathy Peattie referred—and demand, along with evidence of the value of respite care to carers and those for whom they care. Work is going forward in those areas. We expect local authorities to make their own judgments about how they allocate and spend the sums that are provided to them under the usual conditions of grant-aided expenditure: that is, we do not provide the funding as a direct budget, but we tell councils the sort of sums that we are providing to them for specific purposes. In taking forward the respite strategy, it is important that local authorities work with local health boards and voluntary organisations, which often work with them in developing services in this area.

Euan Robson makes a valid  point. Carers centres provide a valuable part of the support that exists, and we expect local authorities to work with the voluntary sector, in particular, which is responsible for providing much of that support. Since 1999, we have quadrupled the amount of funding that we provide to local authorities to more than £20 million in support for respite care and for carers in general. We expect local authorities to include within that support for carers centres, where appropriate. Of course, we also provide funds at our own hand to voluntary organisations that are involved in providing such support.

That is something that we want to see. We are working with local authorities and health boards; we are encouraging them to co-ordinate provision of services and to carry out assessments on an agreed basis. We think that that offers the best way forward.

We intend  to publish a report on the review in the near future.

That is certainly the first time I have heard Colin Fox pretend to speak on behalf of the medical profession. However, the medical profession and other respondents to the consultation have given a mixture of messages. For that reason, he is wrong—although Colin Fox takes the view that there is a single, simple solution to this complex question. As we heard just a moment ago, Colin Fox's party would provide for free school meals as well as free prescriptions. Indeed, his party appears to be intent on promising a wide range of free provision to the Scottish people. We, on the other hand, will take a responsible approach to these complex matters. We will ensure that we reflect the range of opinion and expert advice that we have received and we will respond accordingly.

The point of devolution is, of course, to find our own solutions. Shona Robson will present her party's proposals at the election; she may rest assured that we will do the same.

We are working to improve children's health in all those settings, for example, through parents and children together teams in Glasgow, which provide intensive support to families at home; the Schools (Nutrition and Health Promotion) (Scotland) Bill, which will establish nutritional standards for food and drink in schools and ensure that all schools are health-promoting environments; and the tooth  brushing initiative in nursery and primary schools, which has helped to deliver the best dental health among Scotland's children since records began.

Gordon Jackson is right to highlight the importance of those substances. A considerable amount of work is under way in respect of both alcohol and tobacco. We are in the midst of consultation on the recommendations in the report of our expert group on smoking prevention, which focuses particularly on young people because it recognises that most smokers start smoking in their teens, regret it and seek to stop thereafter. It is critical that we break the habit of cigarette smoking in that age group. One of the report's recommendations is that we should raise from 16 to 18 the age at which people may buy tobacco. There are several other recommendations on the sale of tobacco products to young people and on enforcement. We are seeking opinions on all those matters. We are certainly minded to support more effective enforcement, in respect of use of both alcohol and tobacco. Andy Kerr today announced the roll-out of test purchasing of alcohol by under-18s throughout Scotland, following the successful pilot in Fife in recent months. A similar test-purchasing approach has been taken to tobacco, which has helped us to improve the effectiveness of enforcement in that area, too.

Over the past few years, we have brought forward new legislation to protect mentally ill people, adults with incapacity and, most recently, other adults who for other reasons are unable to safeguard their own interests and are at risk of harm. Last week, members unanimously supported the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill, which gives local councils the duty to act in such cases and provides a statutory basis for multi-agency adult protection committees that cover every local authority area.

I am happy to assure the member that as designed and drafted—and as approved by Parliament—the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill will remove any doubt about the duty on local authorities to act in such matters and give them a proper basis on which to do so. The detail of how that will be done will be directed by a code of practice, under which authorities will be allowed to consult users, practitioners and the voluntary sector to ensure that any action that is taken is appropriate to the particular level of need.

It is for Moray Council and NHS Grampian to determine the level of provision required to meet the needs of older people and to arrange an appropriate range of services. In consultation with local authority and national health service partnerships, we have set challenging new delayed discharge targets to free up valuable hospital beds and I expect all partnerships to work together to achieve them.

We expect local partnerships to do their best to prevent delayed discharge through avoiding unnecessary use of hospital beds; seeking appropriate places to which people in hospital can be discharged is certainly a key part of any such approach. We also expect partnerships to work together to take and maintain that approach in every local area and to ensure that the individual's interests are fully taken into account.

We have reached the conclusion of the parliamentary consideration of the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill. The process has worked as it should. Members, ministers and the Health Committee have sought ways to improve the bill and have achieved a high level of agreement on how to do so. I welcome the support for the bill from all those who have spoken this afternoon. Euan Robson was right to emphasise that the ability to improve legislation as we learn from experience and practice is one of the dividends of devolution. The parliamentary process exists to enable legislation to be improved before it is enacted as well as after it has been in operation for some years. Rather than seeing the improvement of legislation by the parliamentary process as a failure of Government, we should see it as a success of Parliament and as a good example of how the Scottish Parliament was always intended to work. The bill puts in place a range of measures to address the needs of many of those people who most need protection from harm. As has been said, the sensitive nature of the personal circumstances that give rise to harm or abuse has understandably resulted in a wide range of views about when it is appropriate for the state to intervene in an adult's affairs. We have sought to clarify the boundary between the reach of the state and the right of the individual to choice and privacy. Above all, though, we have sought to be on the side of individuals who, for a variety of reasons, are unable to exercise choice. The parliamentary process has highlighted the need for agencies to work closely and thoroughly in identifying, assessing and responding to risk. Throughout that process we have sought to emphasise the rights of the adult at risk: the right to exercise choice and the right to be safe. As a number of members have said, the legislation must now be backed up with a code of practice to provide clarity and consistency for those agencies with duties to act, and for those who will rely on such action. The code of practice will need to be very clear about the application of protection orders. In particular—a point that has been made in the debate—it will need to emphasise how the most restrictive actions should be taken only in the last resort, when there is a risk of serious harm and when all other options have been exhausted. The code of practice will provide an opportunity to set out an overview of the links between this bill, and existing legislation that supports and protects adults. In particular, it can offer signposts to  relevant provisions in the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, both of which have been referred to in the debate. Both of those acts have been amended by this bill to ensure that their provisions deliver what they set out to do. The code of practice will also provide a steer for the development of adult protection committees, so that due consideration is given to ensuring that the right people are at the table. It is expected that those committees will include service user and voluntary sector representation. We do not wish to place an onerous duty on the committees before they begin to function, but it is reasonable to expect that the broad range of service users will be represented on them. More detailed guidance about the structure and operation of the committees will be provided in the code of practice. There will be a convener, independent of the council, in each case, and there will be sufficient flexibility to build on existing practice, and to share expertise with child protection committees where that is appropriate. The code of practice will be the framework of the general principles on which decisions should be founded. In relation to protection orders, the principles of the bill are that intervention should always be the least restrictive to the adult and that the decision to override an adult's consent should always be taken when other steps have been exhausted. Of course, in every case the authorisation of a sheriff is required. It will be for the sheriff to weigh up the interests of the adult at risk when considering when to allow an intervention. The sheriff may make or refuse a protection order. We will still give adults at risk, subject to a removal order, the full guarantee under article 6 of the ECHR. Before a removal order may be granted, a hearing must take place before an independent and impartial sheriff or JP, who must be satisfied that the adult is at risk of harm. A number of members mentioned the importance of monitoring and being aware of how the bill operates in practice. Adult protection committees will be asked to review the use of all protection orders and to report their findings in their biannual reports to ministers. That will give us the necessary evidence of how the bill is operating. One issue that has been debated throughout is the role of the professional. I have distributed a draft of the order restricting the definition of council officer under the bill and I assure members that we will consult further on that order before we bring it back to Parliament. The next steps will include development of any other orders that need to be in place for the bill's commencement. However, I believe that the definition that is in the draft order  strikes the right balance and provides the right guarantees that the appropriate professionals will act under the bill and implement the measures that we have put in place. From the initial consultation on protecting vulnerable adults until today, our work has involved discussion with the people whom the bill sets out to support and with their representatives. We are committed to ensuring that that engagement continues as we consider the need for guidance and information not only for professionals, but for adults at risk who need to know about their rights and responsibilities under the bill. We already have a commitment from our bill steering group members that they will continue to provide support for the implementation of the bill and we will actively seek input from people who have appropriate skills and knowledge as we consider future training and service development needs. Work is already well under way to develop risk assessment tools in Scotland. A project supported by the Executive's joint improvement team has taken a multi-agency approach to the identification of risk. We will build on that work to provide practitioners with practical guidance and set the bill's provisions within the context of a wider range of options for managing risk. Adult protection committees will have a key role in developing the skills and knowledge of practitioners at local level. Their reports to ministers will allow implementation to be monitored and ensure uniformity of delivery throughout Scotland. The bill does not stand alone in supporting those who fall within the definition of adults at risk from harm; it stands with existing legislation and existing policy. People are influencing more and more the design and delivery of the services that they use. With an increase in the take-up of self-directed care, people will be ever more able to exercise choice and control in finding support that suits their individual needs.

There is, in the sense that the Social Work Inspection Agency has a role across the range of policies in any case. I expect that, when it considers a local authority's actions in fulfilling its social work responsibilities, the agency will consider how the authority has fulfilled its adult protection duties under the bill. Advocacy was mentioned in the debate. It has an important role in helping people to have their say. We will consider carefully how advocacy  resources can be made available to people who are at risk of harm when they need such support The bill will not eradicate the risk of harm, but it will reduce it, bring adult protection in Scotland in line with child protection and take a lead on adult protection in the United Kingdom. It will also demonstrate our refusal to tolerate harm and the risk of harm to our most vulnerable citizens. We recognise that adult protection is a sensitive issue, as it concerns the circumstances of vulnerable individuals. Therefore, it is important for the implementation to be sensitive, and we will seek to achieve that as we implement this important new legislation.

I am delighted to move the motion in support of such an important bill. It is important because it sends a clear message that abuse or neglect of the most vulnerable in our society is not acceptable. It is also important because it will mean that adults can benefit from similar levels of protection to those that are currently afforded to children when they require that protection. Above all, it is important for people in our communities who are at risk of harm—intentional or otherwise—and who are unable, for whatever reason, to safeguard themselves or their interests. The road to this point has been a long one. Back in 1993, the Scottish Law Commission published a report that highlighted an increasing awareness of the abuse, deprivation and exploitation that can be experienced by some vulnerable adults and a lack of appropriate legislation to tackle those things effectively. That report was followed, in 1997, by a draft bill that sought to provide solutions to the concerns that were raised in the report. Since then, there has been significant legislative action by the Scottish Parliament in the form of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. Those ground-breaking pieces of legislation have improved the lives of some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland. However, gaps in legislative provision remain. Although the existing legislative framework achieves much, it does not offer any additional protection for those who are mentally well and who are capable, but who are, nonetheless, frail and at risk of harm. The bill is designed to address that gap in protection; to complete the suite of legislation to support the most vulnerable in our society; and to remove any uncertainties about the duty to act when an adult may be at risk of harm. It signals a step change in the way in which we view adult protection. Sadly, we know all too well that abuse can and does happen. It can happen in regulated care settings, such as care homes, but it can also happen in family homes. It can happen in relationships of trust, when it can be difficult for those who are suffering harm to speak out and get  the help that they need to improve their situation. In such circumstances, individuals can feel pressurised into retracting allegations of abuse, harm or neglect—sometimes because they rely on the person who is harming them to provide for their everyday needs; and sometimes because of fear of reprisal or a fear that they will not be believed. The bill brings together a range of measures that will complement the existing legislation. It clarifies roles and responsibilities, and it removes uncertainties about the duty to act. That means that, if harm or abuse is suspected, practitioners will have a means of getting through the door to assess the reality of an individual's situation. The bill will help practitioners to investigate circumstances in which individuals may have capacity to choose but, for a variety of reasons, are unable to exercise that choice. Moreover, it will mean that, if carers are under stress, their needs will be recognised and they will be supported. More widely, the legislation creates obligations on public bodies to co-operate and provides a statutory basis for adult protection committees across Scotland. The sensitive nature of adult protection has been highlighted throughout the passage of the bill, which seeks to strike a difficult balance between respecting the rights of individuals to choose how they want to live and offering appropriate support and protection to those who need them most. Although it will not turn difficult decisions faced by practitioners into easy ones, the legislation will give them, for the first time, a full range of options to take appropriate action to protect those who are at risk of being harmed. Local authority interventions will not always be made in the form of the various orders that can be made under the bill. However, in the few cases that require more robust action, the local authority will be able to take it, subject always to the safeguards that are built into the bill. I expect that the very fact that the powers in the bill are available will ensure that, in the majority of cases, they will not need to be used. The bill's helpful amendments to the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) Act 2003 and the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, some of which were agreed to this afternoon, will enhance the operation of those pieces of legislation and, in many cases, will clarify and confirm original policy intentions. For example, one of the amendments to the 1968 act clarifies the rules on ordinary residence. In parallel, we are working with colleagues in the United Kingdom Government and in Wales and Northern Ireland on regulations and revised guidance on cross-border placements.  Although the bill's firm focus is on the needs and safety of victims of harm or abuse, it complements the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill, which is currently going through Parliament and is directed at keeping unsuitable people out of the care workforce. That will further strengthen our overall commitment to appropriate protection for adults. I thank all those who helped to shape the bill in its early stages and throughout its parliamentary passage, including the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill steering group, which worked with Executive officials and guided the bill team from the outset; the many organisations and individuals who took time to work with the Executive through consultations and meetings, in particular service users who contributed through existing national policy groups; and members of committees, particularly the Health Committee, which carefully scrutinised and considered the bill and recognised the sensitivities inherent in legislation that seeks to balance rights and protection. I also acknowledge the hard work of Executive's bill team and of the committee and parliamentary clerks, who enabled members to consider the issues and to have the background information that they required. The bill as a whole has greatly benefited from that combined input and will now achieve its intentions in a balanced and proportionate way. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill be passed.

These are technical amendments relating to part 2, which deals with adults with incapacity, and part 3A, which deals with mental health. They relate, first, to  amendment 16, which clarifies the powers of local authorities. The amendments bring that provision into effect on the day after the bill receives royal assent, to ensure that any doubts about the extent of local authorities' powers are removed as soon as possible. Secondly, they relate to two stage 2 amendments to the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, on the discharge of patients from compulsion. It is considered advisable that these amendments should be introduced as soon as is practical. I move amendment 21 Amendment 21 agreed to.  Amendment 22 moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to.

The amendments in the group again relate to adults with incapacity and are technical amendments to new part 3 of the 2000 act. Amendment 10 provides for a seven-day time limit for notifying the public guardian of a change of address of the adult or the withdrawer. Amendment 11 provides that the register that is maintained by the public guardian must be updated when the authority of the withdrawer is suspended or terminated. Amendment 12 provides that the public guardian may specify a time limit for the validity of certificates of authority to provide information about funds, open a bank account and transfer specified sums. That will provide certainty and remove the possibility of open-ended authority. The amendment provides that the public guardian can cancel certificates of authority and that, if she does so, she must notify the appropriate person. I move amendment 10.  Amendment 10 agreed to.  Amendments 11 and 12 moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to.

Amendment 15 reflects the purpose of an amendment that Nanette Milne lodged at stage 2. The bill contains a provision that requires all transitional guardians—that is, pre-2000 act curators, tutors dative and tutors at law—to renew their guardianships under the 2000 act, if appropriate, within two years of the provision coming into effect or within two years of the person attaining the age of 16, whichever is the later. Without such a renewal, their authority to act as a guardian will cease. Nanette Milne's amendment at stage 2 sought to avoid the risk that some adults would lose their guardians because the requirement to renew was not specifically drawn to the guardian's attention. Amendment 15 requires the public guardian and the local authority to take reasonable steps to notify transitional guardians of the requirement to renew their guardianships. It therefore meets the objective that was discussed at stage 2. I move amendment 15.

Amendment 16 clarifies local authorities' powers in relation to the provision of services to adults with incapacity under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968. The amendment aims to address an issue about the use of court orders under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. I explained the background to and rationale for the amendment in my letter of 7 February to the convener of the Health Committee, and copies of that letter are available to members today. Practice in applying for orders under the 2000 act varies among local authorities. We do not believe that it is always necessary to obtain a guardianship order when an adult with incapacity is to be moved to residential accommodation. For example, it would not be necessary in a case in which there was no disagreement about the service to be provided, if the adult appeared to be content with the move and there was no question of their being deprived of their liberty. Our policy is to ensure that community care services are provided as quickly as possible after an assessment and without the case going to court unless that is necessary.  However, it has become clear from the consultation on the draft guidance that, because some local authorities have doubts about the extent of their legal powers, they seek a court order in every case. Clearly, a consequence of that can be that an adult who lacks capacity has to wait unnecessarily in a hospital bed for which they no longer have any clinical need when a suitable place is available for them in a more appropriate care setting. Having consulted on this issue, we have come to the conclusion that clarification of the law would be helpful. Amendment 16 therefore seeks to clarify the powers of local authorities in relation to the provision of community care services to adults with incapacity. It also seeks to ensure that the principles of the 2000 act are applied when a local authority takes any steps using the powers. Of course, local authorities, as public authorities, must comply with the European convention on human rights. The power under the 1968 act does not allow local authorities to take steps that would deprive the adult of his or her liberty. Local authorities will still have to judge when it is appropriate for the power under the 1968 act to be used. We will therefore issue guidance to help local authorities make such judgments. Clear guidelines will be set out as to when it may be appropriate to use the power. By clarifying the legal position, amendment 16 will assist local authorities. Nanette Milne's amendment 16A seeks to add an additional provision to amendment 16, to prevent a local authority from taking steps under the 1968 act if it is aware that an application for an intervention or guardianship order, which would cover the steps in question, is likely to be made. Amendment 16 already provides that the power under the 1968 act cannot be used when a proxy is already in place with the power to take the decision in question, or when an application for an intervention or guardianship order is currently before the courts. Those provisions impose clear restrictions on the use of the power. I therefore do not believe that amendment 16A is necessary. Amendment 16A also risks introducing the unintended consequence of preventing a local authority from using the power in the 1968 act when it is aware that an application is likely to be made but has no control of when that application will be made. In such circumstances, there would clearly be a risk that the application would not progress. We have already issued draft guidance to assist local authorities in deciding when it is appropriate for an application to be made for an order under part 6 of the 2000 act, and when it may be appropriate to use its power under the 1968 act. The guidance makes it clear that certain criteria  must be met before the power under the 1968 act is used. One of those criteria would relate to a court application being made in the first place, which would clearly indicate that there was no agreement on the proper course of action. In such circumstances, the local authority should act accordingly. We intend to make all such points clear in the final version of the guidance. I hope that what I have said gives Nanette Milne the reassurance that I know she is looking for and that she will not move amendment 16A. I move amendment 16.

This group of amendments and the following two groups deal with the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, which will be amended by the bill. Criminal justice and mental health legislation already makes provision for the protection of the public from those who, by reason of a mental illness, may pose a risk of further serious offending. The legislation does so by allowing a court to impose a compulsion order, or a compulsion order together with a restriction order. A compulsion order allows for the detention in hospital of a patient and for the provision of treatment. When a compulsion order is imposed together with a restriction order, the period of detention may be without limit of time and Scottish ministers are given powers in respect of the care and treatment of the patient. Decisions in respect of discharge are reserved to the Mental Health Tribunal for Scotland, but Scottish ministers are party to the consideration of such cases and may lead and challenge evidence. The restriction of liberty in this way for an indeterminate period of time is limited to circumstances in which such restriction is necessary.  Amendment 17 adds an additional test to the criteria for the revocation of a compulsion order when that order is in place in combination with a restriction order. The additional test is that the tribunal is not satisfied that it continues to be necessary for the patient to be subject to the compulsion order. In practice, that means that, if the tribunal does not consider that the order continues to be necessary, it may discharge the order. In such cases, the patient will then become a voluntary patient. I should emphasise that discharge follows treatment, testing out and, when on-going care and treatment are required, the creation of a robust and established care regime. It is not a step that is lightly taken. In considering the position that they wish to adopt in individual cases, Scottish ministers will consider reports from clinicians, the police and others as appropriate and will oppose discharge when they consider that the protection of the public warrants that approach. That change means that the tests for imposing and lifting the order will be the same. That will satisfy the expectation that the restriction of liberty continues when it is necessary, but not when it is not necessary. There will now be consistency between the criteria in part 10 for the lifting of compulsion and restriction orders and those in part 9 for the lifting of compulsion orders, in so far as both parts of the 2003 act will now refer to the necessity test. Amendment 17 ties in with amendments that were agreed to by the Health Committee at stage 2. Those amendments introduced a necessity test in relation to the criteria for the discharge of prisoners who are transferred to hospital for treatment of a mental disorder. Amendment 17 makes no change to the arrangements that are in place for patients suffering from a mental disorder who are detained in order to protect any other person from serious harm. In such cases, the tribunal has no power to order discharge from the compulsion order. If, following discharge, the patient's mental health deteriorates, the power is available to detain them under the civil provisions of the 2003 act. Amendment 17 is supported by the Mental Welfare Commission and the Royal College of Psychiatrists. Amendment 18 relates to applications to the Mental Health Tribunal. It will apply when the tribunal is considering whether it is under a duty to carry out a two-year review of certain types of order. It will also apply when Scottish ministers are considering whether to refer a case to the tribunal for a two-year review. One of the conditions for such reviews is that no application has been made in the relevant period  to revoke or vary the order. The amendment will ensure that any applications that are made in the relevant period but are subsequently withdrawn are treated as never having being made. That will ensure that the tribunal will review and make a determination in all cases in line with the policy that cases should be reviewed at least once every two years. Without the amendment, there is a risk that, as a consequence of withdrawn applications, the tribunal might not review a case for a period of time in excess of two years, so defeating the intention of Parliament. Amendment number 20 is a technical amendment. I move amendment 17.  Amendment 17 agreed to.

Amendment 19 repeals, for Scotland, section 142 of the Mental Health Act 1983, which has already been repealed for England and Wales. Section 142 relates to the payment of a mentally disordered person's salary and pensions directly out of moneys provided by Parliament or the consolidated fund. The paying authority can distribute the person's pay or pension as it thinks fit, which offers the funds no formal protection. The mechanisms that are available under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 are now available for any future cases that might arise and we consider that the section should, therefore, be repealed. I move amendment 19.  Amendment 19 agreed to.

I agree with Scott Barrie that the intentions behind Jean Turner's amendment 4 are favourable, but the Executive's position is to resist it, because the approach that is set out in the draft regulations that I have circulated, which recognise that different functions are involved, is the right one. Council officers who perform functions that relate solely to visits may include, for example, day care managers who are also skilled and qualified people. However, a qualified social worker will be required to pursue a protection order. Therefore, the draft regulations will further limit the group of officers who are permitted to carry out those functions. The views of social work professionals and colleagues in the Scottish Social Services Council were sought on the draft regulations. The proposed approach will provide some flexibility with regard to persons who may carry out more basic functions, but it will ensure that only  appropriately qualified and trained persons are authorised to perform roles that relate to assessment and removal. However, the detail of the draft regulations still needs to be worked through with the Association of Directors of Social Work, and therefore will be subject to wider consultation. On the basis of that approach, we will resist amendment 4.

The amendments in this group relate to part 2 of the bill, which amends the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. Members of the Health Committee will recall that, at stage 2, I accepted two amendments in the name of Shona Robison, which stated that the sheriff must take account of any views that are  expressed on an adult's behalf by someone who provides independent advocacy services. On reflection, I realised that Ms Robison's amendments applied only to applications for intervention or guardianship orders and that it would be more desirable to ensure that the sheriff should take the views of the adult concerned into account in any kind of proceedings under the 2000 act. Those could include applications for renewal of a guardianship order or replacement of a guardian. Having accepted Shona Robison's point, it is appropriate to broaden the provision into a general one, for the avoidance of any doubt. Amendments 9, 13 and 14 will ensure that the sheriff must take views that an independent advocate expresses on behalf of the adult into account in any type of proceedings under the 2000 act. Amendment 27, in the name of Nanette Milne, relates to an application for guardianship under the 2000 act and is intended to ensure that the sheriff considers not only whether other lesser measures under the act would be sufficient to enable the protection of the adult's interests, but whether other existing legislative provisions would be sufficient to do so. Amendment 27 is unnecessary. Of course we want the sheriff to take account of the powers that are available to the local authority under, for example, the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, but the sheriff already has discretion. The provision that Nanette Milne seeks to amend already ensures that the sheriff will have to be satisfied that there are no means under the 2000 act by which the local authority can act, but they will also be bound by the general principles in section 1 of the 2000 act and will have to be satisfied that the benefit for the adult that is being sought can be achieved only by way of an intervention under that act. Nanette Milne's amendment 27 might also restrict the sheriff's discretion, so we ask her not to move it. I move amendment 9.

The Executive does not support amendments 23 to 26. As members will recall, amendments were passed at stage 2 to clarify the definition of "solicitor" for the purposes of sections 15 and 16 of the 2000 act. We lodged those amendments following consultation with the relevant interests on whether the definition should be limited to a solicitor practising in Scotland. That proposal found support, therefore only practising solicitors, practising advocates and registered medical practitioners can currently give the certificates that are required under sections 15 and 16 of the 2000 act. They are members of professions that are subject to professional regulation and they carry professional indemnity cover, which is necessary and appropriate protection for people who grant powers of attorney. Broadening out the class to include foreign solicitors would raise questions as to how such professional regulation and protection could be assured. Of course, we are dealing with legal mechanisms under Scots law, and there is the important question whether a foreign solicitor could properly advise a person who is granting power of attorney about its effect under Scots law. Accordingly, I ask Nanette Milne to withdraw amendment 23 and not to move amendments 24 to 26.

Part 1 will introduce new measures to protect adults who are at risk of harm. For stage 3, we have lodged only two amendments to part 1, after significant changes were made at stage 2. Part 1 will place a duty on relevant bodies to co-operate in investigating and responding to harm and will also provide rights of entry to allow that to happen. [ Interruption. ]

At stage 2, Nanette Milne submitted an amendment that sought to strengthen individuals' rights during interviews or medical examinations by ensuring that they would be made aware of their right to refuse to participate prior to any proceedings taking place. At that stage, I offered to come back with an amendment on medical examinations that was consistent with the provisions on interviews that we introduced at stage 2. Along with those provisions, amendment 2 will make it clear that action under the bill is intended to support adults, by ensuring that they are fully informed of their right to refuse consent to either an interview or a medical examination before it takes place. Amendment 2 responds to concerns that were raised in the Health Committee. I move amendment 2.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

Amendment 3 also responds to a point that the Health Committee discussed at stage 2. In this case, Shona Robison lodged an amendment on assessment orders and I offered to produce an Executive amendment at stage 3 that would be consistent with Euan Robson's amendment on removal orders, to which the committee had agreed. The intention behind amendment 3 is to ensure that a person who is the subject of an assessment  order is assessed in a place that is suitable and available for either an interview or a medical examination. The intention has always been that a person who is the subject of an assessment or removal order should be assessed in or removed to a suitable and available place. Amendment 3 will make that intention explicit in the bill. I move amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

Although I acknowledge the value of Jean Turner's experience and recognise that it will often be the case that a GP is an appropriate person to be involved, I share Euan Robson's reservations. As he said, at stage 2 the Health Committee considered whether a doctor should be present for all visits under section 6. Amendment 1 would require a GP to attend when a visit was prompted by concerns about a person's well-being and would mean that reasonable steps would have to be taken to ensure that the GP was from the adult's practice. Section 8 already provides that the primary person sent by the council may be a health professional and that no one other than a health professional can conduct a medical examination of an adult who may be at risk. It quite deliberately allows flexibility in the choice of who that health professional should be. On occasion, the best person will be the adult's GP or another GP who is registered at the same practice. However, in other cases the health professional with whom the adult is most familiar and who can most readily assist them will be a district nurse or mental health professional. In those circumstances, that person's presence would be more appropriate, therefore we should retain the flexibility that the bill currently provides. On that basis, I ask Dr Turner to seek leave to withdraw amendment 1.

Orkney Islands Council has made a number of representations to the Executive. I met council representatives and Jim Wallace in December to discuss those issues. George Lyon met council representatives earlier this month.

The meeting in December was constructive. I welcome the indication from Orkney Islands Council that it thinks that the joint improvement approach has potential and might help. I am pleased to report that officials have been able to work with the council and provide support in preparing a bid under the shared services approach, which is a significant step in the direction of greater joining up of the services that public agencies provide in Orkney. If the council wants to consider further measures, beyond that bid, it should work up proposals. Colleagues in local government are always receptive to innovative proposals and I am prepared to consider the potential for improving the delivery of services.

I congratulate Margo Macdonald on securing the debate and thank members for their contributions, which have effectively put across their personal experience, in the case of David Davidson, and the experience of other people who suffer from coeliac disease. On Andy Kerr's behalf, I acknowledge the information that was presented by Coeliac UK in its breakfast briefing and the display that was available to MSPs throughout the day. Earlier today I had the opportunity to speak briefly with Yvonne Murray and others, who ensured that I was provided with some of the wide range of information that they had available. I know that a number of my colleagues, including some of those who, due to prior engagements, were unable to stay for the debate, were pleased to receive that information and will make good use of it. This evening's debate is an opportunity to highlight the issues and raise awareness of the needs of those in Scotland who live with coeliac disease. I understand that people from throughout Scotland are in the public gallery to witness the debate and I hope that they agree that it reflected the concerns that they brought to the Parliament. In responding to the debate, I will put our approach to coeliac disease in the context of our wider approach to the management of long-term conditions, of which coeliac disease is one. The essence of our approach is to provide services that are fully responsive to people's needs, that are delivered locally wherever possible, and that  are properly integrated across health and social care. Anticipating diseases, trying to prevent them from starting and identifying them early enough to prevent complications are essential aspects of the long-term conditions model and are relevant to coeliac disease. We recognise the knowledge of people who live with a condition, even if they do not know what it is. That is central to our approach and we are keen to encourage health professionals to acknowledge and take seriously patients' expertise in how to live with long-term conditions. We have changed the delivery of health care in recent months and years, and community health partnerships are now key organisations in the management of long-term conditions. CHPs are intended to bring together the NHS and its local planning partners to be the point of contact for those who have long-term conditions and those who represent them. Recently, we issued each CHP with a long-term conditions toolkit that will allow them to assess the quality of the services that they provide for people with long-term conditions, including coeliac disease.

It is certainly my ambition to cover all the key areas. However, I need to put our approach to coeliac disease in the context of our wider approach to long-term conditions, because that is perhaps the key to the other issues that were identified in the debate.

I acknowledge those points, which reflect the points that Margo MacDonald made in her opening speech. Ministers will be happy to meet the organisation at the appropriate point. Margo MacDonald's point about the engagement of Coeliac UK with the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland is critical to progress.  Community health partnerships are responsible for delivering locally against a range of criteria in relation to long-term conditions. Coeliac UK can influence policy and delivery at the national level through the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland and through a meeting with us, but there is also an opportunity for the support groups that it represents throughout Scotland to influence community health partnerships and ensure that coeliac disease is given the priority that it deserves in the work that is done locally. Clearly, a point that has been made during the debate is about the importance of getting a firm diagnosis as early as possible and ensuring that the right interventions are made. As we have heard, those diagnoses and interventions are critical for both adults and children, and it is simply not acceptable that the NHS may not have been able to identify the symptoms and get to their root cause in every case. It is unacceptable for the individuals involved—we have heard about the consequences for them—and for the NHS. We want the service to use its resources effectively Part of that involves effective early diagnosis, intervention and treatment. The Primary Care Society for Gastroenterology last year revised and issued guidelines on the recognition, diagnosis and management of coeliac disease. They are designed to assist the NHS to achieve an earlier diagnosis and they include the latest information on the clinical features, diagnosis and management of the disease. GPs should make full use of those guidelines in every case. Raising awareness of the condition in the general population, as we have done tonight, is vital, but raising awareness among GPs is important as well, and I acknowledge the role of Coeliac UK in doing that. The prescription of gluten-free products has been mentioned, and such products are indeed available on prescription for people with coeliac disease. That can be helpful to many people. Food labelling is vital to people with any food allergy or intolerance or similar disease, and important work is being done by the Food Standards Agency across the United Kingdom with a wide range of interested parties to ensure that food labelling is accurate and effective. John Home Robertson and others mentioned screening. The Long-term Medical Conditions Alliance Scotland is the key to that process, and we have a national screening committee that considers such proposals. That would be a helpful way to take forward the issues that have been raised this evening. From the point of view of ministers and the NHS, we welcome the debate and support the objectives of Margo MacDonald and others in trying to raise awareness and ensure that people can be  diagnosed as early as possible and have the best possible quality of life. I look forward to continuing to work with colleagues from across the chamber in order to achieve those aims.

I acknowledge that we have had a mainly positive and constructive debate during which members have taken the opportunity to highlight how they believe that we could better continue to make the NHS local, and in the main, they have supported the central proposition of the Kerr report and our response in "Delivering for Health" that we should provide services as locally as possible but as specialised as necessary. It is important to emphasise that those aspirations are equally significant. When Parliament debated the Kerr report and "Delivering for Health", all parties recognised that  we need a new approach to the delivery of health care that recognises and responds to the challenges of an aging population and an increase in the number of people who have long-term conditions. We need an approach that aims to shift the balance of care towards preventive medicine, and to shift the location of services, so that more diagnostic and planned care procedures can be delivered within local communities.

I certainly can give that assurance to Duncan McNeil and to the other members whose constituencies will be involved in the second wave of the keep well pilot. Indeed, Duncan McNeil will recognise that I also have a bit of a constituency interest in that. Ministers have in place an arrangement whereby the expenditure of those funds is monitored by a group that meets every couple of months. I assure Duncan McNeil that the money that has been provided for the keep well initiative in all health boards will be spent on the keep well initiative in those communities where that expenditure is required.

What Phil Gallie has described was an action of the board, not an action of ministers. The point is that the Kerr report says that there are principles that should be applied across all services, but subject to a process of consultation. As we have heard this afternoon, the process of consultation and consideration by ministers will respond to the points made and do so in the most effective way. The Kerr report is not a prescription that says, "This will always happen in all circumstances." It recognises that there will be variety. It is also important to stress the fact that the BMA and Professor Kerr emphasise that the Kerr report cannot be taken in bits; it must be taken as a whole and as a complete strategy. That is what Parliament supported and we should continue to do that.

I am disappointed in that contribution from Shona Robison. It is entirely appropriate that anyone who responds to a consultation should make points as they see fit. The point at issue between her party and the Executive parties is not the detail of individual cases; it is the principle of how we take forward the health service and provide health care throughout Scotland. When we debated "Delivering for Health" in October 2005, Shona Robison agreed with the principle laid out by Professor Kerr of the separation of scheduled and unscheduled care, but we could not have deduced that from her contribution this afternoon, or those of the other members of her party. On unscheduled care services, Kerr said: "We believe that current configurations do not appropriately match supply with demand and that highly-trained consultants should focus more on true emergencies, based in well-staffed and resourced departments. ... 'Routine' injuries and ailments will be dealt with" elsewhere. That is precisely what underlies the proposals that we have endorsed where networks of community casualty units can take the majority of cases that currently go to A and E and deal with them as locally as possible. Under recently approved plans, community casualty units will be established in places where emergency services are not currently provided. That is precisely the direction in which we should move. We will allow emergency specialists to concentrate on dealing with complex cases by focusing their resources on those cases. To make a distinction in service delivery by claiming that emergency services are somehow not specialist is to fail to understand the medicine of modern emergency care. The life-saving end of modern emergency care is indeed highly specialist—

I need to make further progress. By removing perhaps two thirds of the cases that currently present at A and E and dealing with them as minor injuries and illnesses in community casualty units, we can allow for precisely that level of specialisation that is required in modern emergency medicine. Such a change will not only improve productivity and reduce waiting times in unscheduled care and the treatment of minor  injuries, but support quality treatment for the most urgent and life-threatening cases. Our clear proposition is that the status quo is not sustainable or desirable. That does not mean that every proposal for change will automatically be supported. Every proposal must be seen to be, and be shown to be, in agreement with the principles of the Kerr report. That is what we expect and will continue to deliver. In response to Nanette Milne, I point out that the relationship between the provision of acute beds and the provision of health services is changing, and that the basis for such change is also laid out in the Kerr report. The number of beds in surgical specialties has indeed gone down, but that has happened because more and more people are being treated as day cases. The proportion of day-case surgery has risen from 57 per cent 10 years ago to 66 per cent today. We welcome that development, which we think is the right direction of travel, and we want to increase that proportion further. We want more and more people to be able to be treated in out-patient departments and in primary care so that they avoid the need for admission to hospital. We believe that, in so doing, we are improving the quality of care as well as delivering care more locally than was the case in the past. Several members raised issues about the workforce. It is important to say that we are planning and expanding our workforce of nurses and GPs while taking predicted rates of attrition into account. We are ensuring that we provide mechanisms to allow that attrition to be compensated for in future. Workforce planning is a sophisticated process that is now being done in more detail and with more effectiveness than ever before. For both the medical and nursing professions, such planning will provide real benefits in the years ahead.

On community nursing, I can confirm that that will be piloted before it is rolled out further. Mention was made of breastfeeding as an important policy. We completely support that policy and we will continue to support and develop it. I hope that we will continue to see progress on that. In response to the issues that were raised about hospitals such as that in Glencoe, I can give an assurance that ministers will continue to expect detailed consideration of proposals before  approval of any change is given. That will continue to be part of any decision-making process. The fundamental argument in the motion is that we should celebrate our successes. There are challenges in achieving the shift towards a more locally delivered health service but, as we have heard from a number of members, there are already successes on which we wish to build. I call on Parliament to support that proposition, and to recognise that change is right and that the direction of travel in which we have set out will deliver the best outcomes for patients. As Euan Robson said, it is about outcomes. We have seen good progress in the recent past and want to see further progress in the period ahead.

Does Phil Gallie agree with Dr Peter Terry, chairman of the BMA in Scotland, that it is vital not to deconstruct the various parts of the strategy that is laid out in "Delivering for Health" and not to pick and choose elements on which to campaign for or against?

My officials discuss aspects of community care with local authorities and with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on a regular basis, including assistance with the preparation of food. Charges to individual service users are matters for individual councils to address.

I would never dream of ducking out of responsibility in any such area, but it is equally important that local authorities accept their responsibilities too, and deliver on them. On the question of assistance with food preparation—when simple tasks are undertaken to assist people with an assessed need for such services—the position is clear and has been since the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 was passed five years ago. Councils should act on their responsibilities. If they are not sure what those responsibilities are, they should follow the example of the City of Edinburgh Council—take legal advice and act on it.

I, too, thank Ken Macintosh for his opening remarks and for bringing this debate to the chamber, and I thank members for their constructive contributions on this important issue. I am happy to agree to Ken Macintosh's request to draw this debate to the attention of the JCVI before its next meeting and to ensure that it is aware of members' views on this important issue. As we have heard, cervical cancer is the second most common cancer that affects women. In almost all cases it is caused by a family of viruses called human papilloma viruses. HPV infection happens, as a matter of course, as a result of sexual activity. In most women, HPV causes no long-term harm, but some women are at risk of developing cancer without showing any physical signs of infection. In that context, the first thing to say about protecting women's health is that the cervical cancer screening programme offers the best protection available to women. We know that if cervical cancer is identified early, treatment can be delivered quickly and survival rates will continue to improve. That is why, although it is important to have a debate about vaccination, it is also important to encourage every woman to take up her invitation to attend for screening. I am grateful to Nanette Milne for reminding us of the pioneering work that was done by Betty Macgregor and her colleagues in Aberdeen. We want to maintain that reputation for leading the way in this area, so we will continue to build on the success of the cervical cancer screening programme in Scotland. Although Ken Macintosh and other members rightly drew attention to some negative trends, it is also important to recognise as part of the big picture that deaths from cervical cancer declined by 30 per cent between 1995 and 2005, and that the incidence of the disease between 1986 and 2003 fell by 45 per cent. Those trends are  significant and positive. The five-year survival rate for cervical cancer is now 70 per cent, compared with only 54 per cent in 1981. All those positive trends reflect clearly the benefits of early diagnosis through cervical screening, which is key to our continuing approach to dealing with the disease. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland reviewed the cervical screening programme last year and praised it for delivering "extremely high quality care." The national uptake target was set at 80 per cent. The level of uptake is still above that target but, equally, as members have said, there has been a slight decline in recent years. That concerns us, and we recognise that action is required. A number of members have asked us to take and support such action. We have in place a national advisory group on cervical screening, which is closely monitoring uptake rates and will provide advice as appropriate to the Executive and NHS boards on strategies for increasing uptake. NHS boards have a duty continually to assess the needs of their local communities and to target groups in their areas where that is appropriate to increase uptake, particularly, as has been said, among younger women, certain ethnic minority groups and women with learning disabilities. There are some good examples of local initiatives to tackle low uptake. For example, NHS Lanarkshire is piloting a community health education programme that is focused on deprived areas, and is also working with local learning disability services to improve the uptake of cervical screening. In Fife, women who do not attend screening are issued with leaflets that provide information on their choices as to where they might attend for treatment. The healthy women's project in Lothian is doing similar work. There are other examples throughout Scotland.

Yes. I recognise, as has been said by a couple of members, that among certain groups that is an issue. Boards recognise that and deal with it on a case-by-case basis. We continue to expect them and encourage them to do that. It is worth saying that the approach to dealing with cervical cancer is in the context of dealing with cancer as a whole, and that we are making significant progress in reducing death rates from cancer in Scotland. We are on course to reach our target of reducing the rate for people under the age of 75 by 20 per cent by 2010. However, we always want to do more and to be more effective. For example, we recognise the importance of providing information to patients  who have cancer and other diseases. We have approved a national framework, which was developed by Citizens Advice Scotland in partnership with the NHS, for the provision of independent advice and support to NHS users, their carers and their families. Of course, the key proposition in Ken Macintosh's motion relates to the introduction of vaccination. It is worth saying that the United Kingdom has one of the most successful vaccination and immunisation programmes in the world, and advice is provided on a UK basis by the JCVI. We are currently seeking expert advice from the JCVI on the efficacy and safety of the new vaccines against HPV and the benefits that they may offer. Of course, we do not expect decisions to be taken on introducing those vaccines until the JCVI has fully considered all the evidence and has presented its advice to ministers. We expect it to do that, and we do not wish to press it to make a decision or a recommendation until it has satisfied itself in scientific and medical terms that it has considered all the relevant information. However, we look forward to measures being put in place. In advance of that, work is already being done by, for example, Health Protection Scotland to prepare the way for a positive decision, so that people and NHS systems are ready to act on it at the appropriate time. It is important that the JCVI carefully considers all the available evidence on HPV vaccines and makes recommendations. However, I reiterate the point that such a development will in no way diminish the central role of the screening programme. I do not want anybody to go away with the impression that the introduction of vaccination would reduce the significance of screening—far from it. Vaccination has no direct relevance for women and girls who are or have been sexually active, therefore detection by the screening programme will remain essential for them. We will be advised by the JCVI on the potential benefits of vaccination for those who have not been sexually active. I share the view that it can make a real difference to future patterns of risk, disease and mortality. However, the screening programme will continue to be at the centre of everything that we do in reducing the impact of cervical cancer, and we should all ensure that that message is heard loud and clear by women throughout Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

We are satisfied that A and E capacity in Lanarkshire is sufficient at present, but we believe that fundamental changes are needed in order to provide the type and level of service that will be required in future. Those changes will include the streaming of emergency and planned care, the creation of five new community casualty units and the expansion of specialist emergency teams and physical capacity for A and E services at Wishaw and Hairmyres.

The very fact that there is pressure on existing services demonstrates beyond any question the need for modernisation and change in the provision of A and E services. That is why expanding the services at Wishaw and Hairmyres will deliver benefits for patients throughout Lanarkshire; it is why moving two thirds of all the cases seen at all three hospital A and E units out of A and E and into community casualty units will bring benefits to all patients; and it is why the development of the excellent new hospital at Larbert, which will serve part of the Lanarkshire population, will bring benefits right across the area.

Indeed I will. I offer a clear reassurance to all members that the new provision of community casualty units and the necessary upgrading and expansion of the A and E units at Wishaw and Hairmyres will take place before there are any changes to A and E provision at Monklands. In response to Cathie Craigie's specific point about access to Larbert hospital, she will be pleased to note that the board of NHS Lanarkshire has approved a board paper in the past few days that explains that in future, emergency in-patient services will be delivered in Lanarkshire for Lanarkshire patients. For the convenience of patients in Cumbernauld and Kilsyth, emergency services will be provided at the new hospital in Larbert, which will provide a high quality of care close to Cathie Craigie's constituents.

I understand that NHS Lanarkshire is in discussions with its partners in the west of Scotland transport partnership and that it will develop its transport impact assessment in the context of those discussions as part of its development of the business case for future hospital services over the next three years.

No—it is time that Opposition parties got behind the proposals for better health services for the people of Lanarkshire. If they did that, they would gain credit. The proposals are progressing on the basis that they will provide a better quality of service for serious emergency cases and for cases of lesser urgency. Streaming emergency care and planned care will bring benefits to all. If Margaret Mitchell had listened to my first answer, she would understand that the development of the business case for the improved hospital services, and the transport impact assessment that is part of that, will take place in the next three years as proposed and agreed so that, when the configuration of hospital services in Lanarkshire changes, the current transport situation will be taken into account and the best possible provision will be made.

That is a matter for individual boards, but we encourage them to work with the Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association to ensure that the needs of those in their area with the condition are met.

The Scottish Motor Neurone Disease Association, which acts and works on behalf of patients, has an opportunity to make that case. My officials have worked with the association to encourage it to do so and to make the case for the development of a managed clinical network, which would deliver many of the benefits that I am sure Mr Morgan is keen to have. Given the numbers that are involved, a clear case can be made for doing that nationally, rather than locally or regionally, but I look to the association to work up an application for the national services advisory group to consider in due course.

Work is being done to collect that information by national health service boards and as part of the Scottish medicines consortium's forward look financial planning programme. Early modelling has estimated that 16,000 patients in Scotland have wet age-related macular degeneration.

I am interested in the correspondence to which Mr Maxwell refers. If he wishes to copy that to me, I will be happy to read it. Treatment centres in Glasgow have the capacity to deliver the treatment to which the member refers. Of the 16,000 people who have the syndrome, only a small number will benefit from that treatment. Nonetheless, it should be made available. It is a clear directive that health boards should respond to the SMC's judgment. I understand that significant progress has been  made in that direction. If Mr Maxwell wishes to share details of that case with me, I will be happy to consider it further.

Community maternity units have been endorsed as part of a network of maternity care in the overview report of the expert group on acute maternity services. We expect such units to continue to play a key role in delivering maternity services in Scotland.

The Executive is happy to work both nationally and in partnership with health boards locally to ensure that people understand that the quality of care provided throughout our network of maternity services is second to none.

We agree on two key issues: the importance of effective public engagement and involvement with NHS boards, and the importance of promoting patient focus and public involvement, as vital in delivering the largest single public service for which the Parliament and ministers are responsible. The NHS is making good progress on improving patient focus and public engagement, but that does not immunise health boards or ministers from public comment and criticism when major service changes are proposed. However, we must not pretend that changing the governance of the NHS will in any way end the need for major service change or the public criticism of some health board decisions. Health boards have tough decisions to make if they are to implement the  "Delivering for Health" agenda, which this Parliament approved several months ago. To do that, they must be clear about to whom they are accountable and which policies they should implement. The coalition of Opposition members who support Bill Butler's bill is bizarre, in that their reasons for doing so are mutually incompatible. Nanette Milne said that she wants only a minority of board members to be elected, but that is not in the bill and Bill Butler has not said that he will accept it. Shona Robison said that her party supports the bill, subject to the board members being elected by the single transferable vote system, but that is not in the bill either and Bill Butler has not said that he will accept it. Eleanor Scott rightly worries about direct elections being seen as a substitute for proper consultation, about all interests not being properly represented and about the risk of woefully low turnouts, but the bill addresses none of those concerns. Jean Turner accepts that elected members on a health board would not necessarily make any difference to the issues that actually matter to patients, such as waiting times. It is not enough to say that we can explore those issues at stage 2, because if Nanette Milne or Shona Robison get their way at stage 2, we will end up enacting a different bill from the one that Bill Butler introduced.

I accept that point absolutely, but if members approved the general principles of the bill on the basis that board members would not be elected by STV, but then they were elected by STV, something would have been enacted that members did not intend. If we approved the principles of the bill on the basis that 51 per cent of board members would be directly elected, when in fact members wanted only a minority to be directly elected, something different from what members intended might be enacted. Those are key points. Nanette Milne said that changes to health board proposals in cases such as that in Aberdeenshire were achieved after hard-won fights in the teeth of opposition from health boards. However, as Mike Rumbles said, changes were achieved when local people and local elected members of this Parliament convinced ministers that ministers should take a different approach. It is not only that health boards are accountable to ministers; their decisions on major changes to services are subject to being overturned or amended by  ministers. That is not an exceptional power; it is an ordinary part of democratic accountability through MSPs to the Scottish people.

As Brian Adam pointed out, on that health board were local elected members and leaders of local authorities. They had decisions to make and they will have made them as members of that board. As has been said, whether someone is or is not an elected member will not of itself change the decisions that they make. However, what would change under the bill would be health boards' mandates. At the moment, those mandates come from this Parliament, from these elected members, and from the Scottish ministers who are accountable to this Parliament, which is as it should be.

I am afraid that I do not have time to take further interventions. Shona Robison made much of public concerns about people not being listened to in the NHS, but she was a little less forthcoming when Margo MacDonald asked her about her own accountability. As members of this Parliament, we are all part of the accountability of the Scottish NHS. It is part of what we are here to do. That is why we have held debates in this chamber on major service changes, why parties will go into the elections in May presenting different views on the way forward for the NHS locally and nationally, and why, as Gordon Jackson said, each of us is accountable to our own electorate for the stance that we take on health issues that matter to our local communities. That is as it should be.

I am afraid that I do not have time. We are clear that we want public engagement with and public involvement in the decisions that we make as ministers with responsibility for health and in the decisions that are made locally by health boards. We want that engagement to be more effective. As Eleanor Scott conceded, we have made a good start: there are senior local councillors on NHS boards, there is a statutory  duty on all health boards to involve the public, and the Scottish health council has a duty to ensure that health board consultations meet a set national standard and that each community health partnership has a public partnership forum. We believe that the concept of direct elections to NHS boards is worth exploring, but only in the context of continued good governance of the NHS in Scotland and the wider agenda of public service reform. Building on what has been said today, and in response to Brian Adam's request for further information, we should seek to pilot that concept in a way that allows us to take into account the costs, implications and effects of changes, and the concerns that have been articulated by members of the Health Committee and other members this afternoon. That will allow us to examine further whether having a directly elected element on health boards can assist in increasing the accountability of the health service, while safeguarding the future of the NHS in Scotland and its accountability through the Scottish ministers to the Scottish Parliament and thereby to the Scottish people. We have to safeguard the coherence of a national health policy that is truly national and covers Scotland as a whole.

Does the member acknowledge that the decision to establish CHPs was taken by ministers, for which we are accountable to Parliament and to the electorate, and does she agree that that is an appropriate democratic form of accountability for making changes in the delivery of health services?

I, too,  congratulate Mike Pringle on securing the debate and providing the opportunity to discuss this important issue. I acknowledge the work that NHS Lothian has done to date, planning for a new children's hospital at the Royal infirmary of Edinburgh site. That follows the opening of the new children's hospital on the Royal infirmary site in Aberdeen, and it is in line with the plans for a new children's hospital at the Southern general hospital site in Glasgow. It is all part of the modernisation of children's services throughout Scotland. NHS Lothian believes that the sick kids hospital should relocate from Sciennes to Little France because of the clinical benefits that could bring. Taking the hospital to the same site as the Royal infirmary and the University of Edinburgh's medical school is very much in line with "Delivering for Health", our blueprint for the future of the national health service in Scotland. An outline business case for that project is in preparation and I understand that the board plans to submit it to ministers for approval at the end of this year. It is also NHS Lothian's intention to locate new multi-storey car parks at the Little France site. I understand that the children's hospital business case will detail what the car parking charges at the new site will be. I do not want to pre-empt the proper approval process, but I expect that they will be comparable to the local authority parking charges that are currently paid by users of the existing hospital. Just before the summer recess, the Health Committee had a round-table discussion on hospital car park charging. Following that discussion, my officials carried out a survey of local NHS policy and practice since the Health Department guidance was issued in 2004. A number of members have mentioned the terms in which the guidance applies. I should make it clear that the introduction of car park charging, or the revision of existing car parking arrangements, will be for local determination by the board responsible for the site in question. It is not for ministers to dictate in detail how boards manage those matters, but we have issued guidance so that they know, in general, what is expected of them, in the interests of patients. The overarching principle that is laid out in our guidance is that the charges should reflect a reasonable balance between the availability of car parking spaces, the perceived needs of staff, patients, carers and visitors, the cost of car parking in the area and the cost of maintaining car park facilities. As I said to Colin Fox, at present, only five of the 14 NHS boards in Scotland levy car parking charges. As members would expect, they cover the main urban centres, where there is  the greatest pressure on car parking and where there is a need to prevent unauthorised people from using parking spaces that should be available to those who have good reason to use them.

I certainly do not share the view that Colin Fox expressed earlier, which was that there are no circumstances in which there should be car parking charges at any health service facility. That would not be practical for city centre hospitals or hospitals in sites that are attractive to commuters. There is a need to protect the interests of those who have good reason to park at a hospital. Where charging for parking can help to do that and follows the other principles that are laid down, it is legitimate for an NHS board to do so.

I expect any scheme that is proposed for the new children's hospital to conform with the general principles that we have laid down, which state that the charges should take into account the other provision in the area that is available to visitors and other motorists. My department monitors how car park income is spent, to ensure it meets the guidance we have laid down. Of course, boards should consider the transport infrastructure, the availability and cost of public car parking and other factors that will affect the supply and demand of parking at each hospital. There is limited visitor car parking at the current children's hospital site in Edinburgh, but there is significant local authority provision. That is one factor that will have to be taken into account. As I have said, we expect the board also to take account of local authority parking charges when it considers relocating the hospital. As has been mentioned, NHS Lothian has moved to establish two standard scales of car  parking charges for the sites for which it has direct responsibility in and outwith the city. As part of our response to the Health Committee, we have examined best practice in areas where car parking charges apply and the categories of patients who are, for example, exempted, provided with free exit vouchers or given access to a car park fob or season ticket. There are a number of different models. In response to the Health Committee, we intend to ensure that we revise the guidance so that the best practice of individual boards is made the best practice of all boards. That will meet a number of the concerns that have been mentioned this evening.  I expect boards to follow the guidance when they provide new facilities and revise existing charges. I also expect boards to work with public transport providers and their own contractors to ensure that hospital sites of all kinds are accessible to all who need access to them.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

On a matter of factual information, does Mr Fox accept that there are parking charges at hospitals in only five of the 14 health boards in Scotland? I question his claim that there are charges at three quarters of hospitals.

In the partnership agreement, we committed to establishing an outreach dental training centre in Aberdeen and to consulting on the need for its development to a full dental school. On 6 November, I opened the Aberdeen dental institute, which will bring together on one site an outreach training centre for dental students, postgraduate education for practising dentists and a general dental practice that will register up to 6,000 national health service patients over the next two years. We will consult on further development early next year, once the institute has been in operation for sufficient time to inform the consultation process.

I am delighted that in opening the Aberdeen dental institute, we have gone beyond the commitment that was made in the partnership agreement and put in place a centre for dental education, training and treatment. I look forward to being in a position in Government from which we can consult on the further development of that institute once it has been proven that it has made a significant contribution to dental education and to access to NHS treatment for dental patients in north-east Scotland. I have no doubt that that will be proven.

Absolutely. That is an important part of going beyond the partnership agreement. The dental institutes and outreach centres in other parts of Scotland are scheduled to come on stream in the next year or two. It is important that we are addressing not only the numbers of dentists, but access to NHS dentistry, which is a critical matter for patients. I expect that in future consultation on how we develop the dental estate further, the success that we have had in improving access to dentistry through salaried services, such as the Aberdeen institute, will be a key part of that consultation.

Full evaluation will be undertaken from March onwards. Follow-up research with patients who have been invited in for health checks as part of the initial pilot in North Lanarkshire suggests that the keep well programme is succeeding in engaging with its target group of people who are not frequent users of health services but may suffer significant health risks.

I look forward to the lessons learned from the initial pilots being applied in disadvantaged communities throughout Scotland. Duncan McNeil is right to highlight the existence of such communities in his constituency. Greenock and Inverclyde is one of the areas that we are considering actively for a second wave of pilot programmes of keep well during this year. We will make an announcement on the issue shortly.

No—999 emergency ambulance calls will continue to be answered by the Scottish Ambulance Service's emergency medical dispatch centres. Scottish Ambulance Service call handlers will continue to use the clinical algorithms that support decisions about the priority of the call and the nature of the response that is required. The vast majority of calls require an ambulance to be sent, but a number do not. At present, a caller who does not require an ambulance may be asked to hang up and contact their own general practitioner or NHS 24. In future, it will be possible for the call details to be passed electronically to NHS 24, to enable an appropriate adviser to call the patient back without the patient having to  repeat the information that he or she has already provided.

I am aware of some of the press reports that appeared to confuse with wider issues the change that will benefit the small minority of callers who do not require an ambulance to be sent. I am pleased to have the opportunity to clarify the position in Parliament today. I hope that Mr Gordon's constituents and anyone else who has been concerned by reports that they read in the press will be reassured.

I was pleased to visit NHS 24 in Aberdeen between Christmas and new year and to see its operations at a very busy time of year for the organisation. I am pleased to report to Parliament on the efficiency, high morale and effective response to patients that I found on my visit. The same is true of NHS 24 throughout the country. I am confident that it will be able to deliver this additional measure to assist those who call for medical advice and assistance. I repeat the assurance that I gave Charlie Gordon: people who call 999 because they need an ambulance will get an ambulance.

We are funding the healthy living programme that is run by the Scottish Grocers Federation to increase the availability of healthy foods in local neighbourhood shops, especially in low-income communities. Phase 3 of the programme, which Andy Kerr launched on 18 December 2006, is designed to expand the initiative as widely as possible. It now includes a number of convenience stores in the city of Dundee.

I agree that it is not simply a matter of making healthy food available and that retailers and others can do a number of things to assist consumers to make healthy choices. I am aware of the Dundee healthy living initiative, of the good work that the group is doing in Dundee and of the success that it has had in making a difference to those whom it has supported. I am happy to meet Kate Maclean to discuss the future of the project. NHS Health Scotland is taking an interest in the work it is doing and in the sustainability of projects that seek to promote healthy living in disadvantaged communities. I expect that to continue.

The treatment of any condition is a matter for clinical judgment. In that context, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland is carrying out a stocktake of services that are provided to those with any kind of neurological condition. That work will pave the way for the drafting of clinical standards for neurological conditions, including post-polio syndrome.

It is fair to say that post-polio syndrome is a well recognised clinical condition—there is no issue with that. Mr Morgan raises an important point about ensuring quality of service for sufferers of the syndrome, of whom there are relatively few, which means that there is not the same focus as there is with larger groups. Because there are relatively few sufferers of the syndrome, this is an appropriate area for consideration of a national service. National services should be available when the number of  people involved is small, but there are significant cost implications or significant implications for patients. The chief medical officer and the chief scientist in the Health Department have responded to inquiries in this area to indicate that they would be happy to discuss with those who represent patients with the syndrome how they might take part in drawing up a clinical guideline, which would be applicable throughout Scotland and would help ensure the quality of service to which Mr Morgan refers.

Local authorities are responsible for managing their services, which should include the active management of any waiting list for the provision of services to meet an assessed need for community care. We are working with councils and other partners to evaluate the operation of the free  personal care policy and we will publish our findings shortly.

If Shona Robison had listened to my answer, she would have understood that it is for local authorities to take action. We are working with local authorities on that. I hope that Shona Robison can find it in herself to welcome the progress that has been made by her local authority, Dundee City Council, which has achieved a significant reduction in the number of service users who are awaiting funding for care home placements and has reduced to nil the waiting list for self-funders, including those in residential homes, in respect of free personal care. Other councils have achieved similar success. We will continue to work with councils that are struggling to meet their statutory requirements, to provide them with appropriate advice and support so that they can address problems. There is an obligation on councils to deliver services for which a need has been assessed, but we have always acknowledged that there will be circumstances in which a service cannot be delivered instantly and it will take a little time to put the service in place. That is appropriate, as long as the council is seeking to put the service in place, is managing any waiting list and is providing whatever partial service is essential in the meantime.

Yes. As I said, I expect to publish the results shortly. I hope to attend a meeting of the Health Committee during the next few weeks to comment on the findings.

Local partnerships are required to report to ministers annually on local improvement targets for carers'  assessments and respite services, and recent performance indicators from Audit Scotland indicate that the provision of respite care continues to grow. We have also set up a task group in response to the care 21 report "The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland", which is updating guidance on access to respite services and gathering further evidence on respite care provision and need.

I agree with Bill Aitken's comments on the important role that is often played by unpaid carers in providing care to relatives and others who need care. We acknowledge that respite provision is a key issue if we are to improve the circumstances in which carers deliver support, which is why we have significantly increased the amount of funding we provide through grant-aided expenditure to local authorities for the delivery of respite care. I am pleased that funding is increasing. Bill Aitken is right to highlight the issue, which carers themselves raised as the care 21 report was prepared. We are taking forward our work on the matter.

The task group is currently assessing evidence. I do not want to prejudge its conclusions. However, recommendation 20 in the care 21 report, to which Mr Swinney referred, indicated a significant level of need and we do not dispute it. That is why we have more than quadrupled support for local authorities for the provision of respite care. It is not for central Government to dictate in detail how local authorities spend their funds. We ask Audit Scotland to monitor closely the  performance indicators that are reported by local authorities in order to judge whether those performance indicators reflect accurately the increased level of provision. There is, perhaps, some debate around the margins, but the trends are clearly in the right direction.

I am advised by NHS Lanarkshire that the Lanark community casualty unit will be operational by this time next year.

I am happy to provide that assurance. Karen Gillon referred to the need for community casualty units to deal with the demand in communities. We recognise that, which is why I am pleased that NHS Lanarkshire will be able to make the CCU operational as early as it can. I understand that it will consider further the levels of service in the unit. I expect it to make the availability of services in the unit as widely known as possible. I also expect it to continue to consult local stakeholders, including Karen Gillon, other stakeholders to whom she referred and the local public partnership forum, in order to assess need and the wishes of the local community in developing the services at that unit.

I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on bringing this debate to the chamber. It is particularly appropriate that we discuss the matter at this time of year. Our message must be not that people should not enjoy socialising or having a drink at a Christmas party but that we want to encourage a more responsible attitude towards the use of alcohol in Scotland. In order to do that, we must become more aware of the impact of alcohol on our health and our communities. Alcohol is and has ever been part of Scotland's culture. Most people in Scotland enjoy a drink and most people drink sensibly. We want to promote that approach to alcohol. In spite of the problems that we have heard about, we should not overlook the fact that many people enjoy alcohol without harming themselves or anyone else. We must be careful not to create an overly negative impression when we talk about alcohol, because responsible drinking can indeed—in northern Europe as well as in southern Europe—be part of a healthy, happy and sociable lifestyle. Nevertheless, we recognise that we have problems with excessive drinking, which includes binge drinking and the cumulative effect of drinking just a bit too much day after day, year after year. Four years ago, we published our "Plan for Action on alcohol problems", which set out a range of actions to seek a cultural shift to a point where alcohol was treated more appropriately. I will mention briefly a couple of things that developed on the back of that. We provided additional funding of £10 million this year and last year for alcohol treatment and rehabilitation services. We heard about some of those this evening. National communications campaigns have been run to challenge harmful attitudes and behaviour. Maureen Macmillan's motion mentions the don't push it campaign, which encourages individuals to take responsibility for their behaviour and not to persuade others to drink more. Members might have seen the campaign on television this week. We published a guide for parents, to help them talk to their children about alcohol and we developed a set of national leaflets that give factual and consistent advice on sensible drinking. We also support school-based programmes such as choices for life and a new media literacy pilot to  encourage a more balanced portrayal of alcohol and alcohol problems. Maureen Macmillan mentioned the unbalanced portrayal that is sometimes seen. We are keen to address that. In the Highlands and throughout Scotland, drug and alcohol action teams are co-ordinating action effectively to meet the particular needs of their communities. We need to build on that progress. We will shortly update the action plan on alcohol problems to promote a more responsible approach to alcohol. Maureen Macmillan talked about the role of the alcohol industry. I am pleased to report that we are in the process of developing a formal agreement with key partners in the industry. We are already doing joint work on guidelines on the responsible promotion of alcohol, a common set of responsible drinking messages and the development of exemplary workplace alcohol policies. That is a good start and it is setting us off in the direction of what I hope will become a long-term partnership that broadens to involve interests that are not involved at present. At present, the partners are mainly on the production side, but we hope to include businesses that are involved in retailing and the licensed trade. Maureen Macmillan and several other members highlighted the excellent work of CrossReach in Inverness, which provides a place of safety for those who are drunk and incapable as an alternative to the police cells, and an opportunity for people to access longer-term support if that is what they need. I recently visited the similar Albyn House Association project in Aberdeen, when I attended the launch of Alcohol Support, which has brought together Albyn House with the local Alcohol Advisory and Counselling Service. I was impressed by the quality of the facility there and the dedication of the staff. I understand that CrossReach is similar in many respects, including the quality of the provision. It was interesting for me to see in Aberdeen the effective joining up of services that voluntary sector partners provide. Facilities such as designated places of safety and rehabilitation services ease pressure not just on police cells, but on accident and emergency services, and provide protection for individuals who would otherwise be at risk in several ways.

I am sure that Mr Ewing will acknowledge that there are more police officers in Scotland now than there have ever been and that that is an important step in achieving the protection that is needed. My recent experience is not in Inverness, but in Aberdeen, which is similar in that it is a regional centre into which many people from rural areas come of a weekend to drink. A couple of weeks ago, I had the opportunity to go on patrol with the police in Aberdeen city centre into the small hours of a Saturday morning. I was impressed by the way in which they made effective use of their resource. I suspect that if I inquired about the issue with Northern constabulary, I would hear that the same takes place in Inverness. Measures can be taken to assist the police in their work. Establishing effective places of safety is one of them. The measures that we have put in place through the Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 will be significant and will have a particular relevance to city centres. The 2005 act will, for the first time, allow overprovision of existing licensed premises to be a consideration in the licensing process. In the past couple of years, the police have acquired new powers under antisocial behaviour legislation and a power to carry out test purchasing of alcohol by underage people. The evidence from the current pilot scheme suggests that the power is helpful in allowing the police to use their resources more effectively and to nip problems in the bud. There is an issue with binge drinking and young people drinking in city centres at the weekend, but we would be mistaken if we thought that that was the extent of the issue of alcohol as a challenge to our health. The statistics show that, sadly, the consequences of long-term misuse of alcohol have become more serious in recent years. I am sorry that Jim Mather was not enthusiastic about celebrating the success of the Highland economy, but I know that many others in the Highlands are. One of the consequences of a successful economy is that there is substantial disposable income, which can have consequences for the choices people make. However, as others have said, choices are sometimes influenced by poverty as well as by large amounts of disposable income. We should acknowledge that in recent years there has been more long-term excessive consumption of alcohol, of which there are consequences. We in the Government have a duty to work with the voluntary sector, the alcohol industry, the police, the NHS and other services to  develop a long-term vision and recognise that the issue is as much about culture change as anything else. We need to effect such a change and we will continue to work to do so. I hope that we will have broad-based support for that.   Meeting closed at 18:11.

No. It is for local authorities to estimate and meet their own spending commitments from the record resources that have been made available to them in recent years.

Mr McLetchie must have been overenthused by the consensus during this morning's stage 3 debate on the Legal Profession and Legal Aid (Scotland) Bill. Judgments on the application of laws are not usually arrived at through achieving a consensus of legal opinion, far less achieving a consensus among those who have been commissioned by local authorities—or, indeed, by anyone else—to provide such an opinion. In the position that he has described, Mr McLetchie fails to recognise that in on-going work that the Executive has commissioned, we are working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to establish the degree of implementation of the service and the degree of consensus in its delivery. That is the key issue not only for us but for those who receive the service. Moreover, as Mr McLetchie will be aware, additional resources were made available yesterday to local authorities. Those resources come with a number of conditions, including the requirement to ensure a consistently high standard of delivery of free personal care services throughout Scotland.

National health service boards provide services in line with clinical need, including on-going specialist care for those with chronic psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis.

We hope that the good example that Mr Baker cites from NHS Grampian will be replicated elsewhere. High-quality specialist treatment in a hospital setting is very significant for those who have psoriasis in a severe or chronic form. Many cases are dealt with in a primary care setting. We want that service to be maintained and improved.

I am aware of the work that Roseanna Cunningham and Richard Baker have done jointly in this area and of the points Roseanna Cunningham makes, which arise from discussions that took place in the Parliament a few days ago. We recognise the increasing importance  of primary care and of delivering care to people with conditions of this kind in the community, which can bring better and quicker treatment to patients and reduce unnecessary burdens on the secondary care sector. I have asked my officials to meet early in the new year representatives of the organisation that visited the Parliament the other day to discuss with it some of the measures that can be taken and to encourage its engagement with the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, which we have encouraged to represent the interests of all those with chronic conditions.

I am sure that Mr Fox has been following the matter with interest. He will know that we are still considering the representations that have been made to us. We expect to respond to a number of those representations in the near future.

The national maximum waiting time for a first time out-patient appointment with a consultant following referral, including the specialty of orthodontics, is 26 weeks. All NHS boards are meeting that commitment. We intend to reduce the national maximum waiting time to 18 weeks from the end of 2007. I understand that in the year to 30 September, the median waiting time for a first out-patient appointment in orthodontics in the Highlands and Islands was 152 days.

I do not accept that analysis. We would encourage dentists in the Highlands  and Islands who wish to take on national health service patients to do so. We have provided significant financial incentives for them to do that. I was delighted to visit the Highlands just a few days ago to open a new NHS dental facility in Caithness, from where six dentists will serve the whole of that area, and to visit the extension to an existing NHS dental surgery at Culloden, which will serve the area east of Inverness. Between them, those two NHS initiatives will serve, and will be able to register, some thousands of patients in the Highlands over the next 18 months. That is a positive trend. I encourage dentists in the Highlands who have deregistered their fee-paying adult patients to revisit that decision in view of the greatly increased financial incentives for them to treat all categories of patient on the NHS. If they do that, they will help to reduce the waiting lists even more quickly.

Yes. We are currently considering the report in detail along with the critical incident review.

I accept Margaret Jamieson's points, which she has made previously. As of today, we are consulting on new care programme approach guidance, which will require that henceforth in cases of this kind the police must be involved from an early stage in considering any proposal for unescorted leave involving a restricted patient. An initial risk assessment should be held within six to eight weeks of admission to the system and should be repeated at regular intervals. In addition, I know that Margaret Jamieson will be interested to know that, pending completion of the consultation and the introduction of the guidance, Strathclyde police  and NHS Ayrshire and Arran have agreed that the police will continue to be involved in those decisions in future and have put in place new protocols that reflect their recent experience.

That is a matter for Highland Council. I understand that it is currently seeking bids from the independent sector to secure 168 care home places for frail older people.

As I said, the primary responsibility lies with the local authority, which is accountable for the decisions it makes. I understand that the 168 places that Highland Council seeks to commission are at five locations in different parts of the Highlands. John Farquhar Munro may wish to raise the matter with the local authority. The NHS's interest is in discharge from hospitals and ensuring that people can access appropriate discharge options in their locality. NHS Highland will continue to work with Highland Council and Argyll and Bute Council to ensure that such provision is in place.

A range of measures is being introduced to meet the Kerr report's recommendations. I am pleased to say that the targets set by the Executive a year ago in "Delivering for Health", in response to Professor Kerr's report, are very much on schedule. We will continue that process of encouraging more care to be delivered to older people in their communities, to reduce unnecessary admission to hospital and to speed up discharge. There has been further progress this year on avoiding delay in the discharge from hospital into the community. We  will seek to drive that progress further in future years.

We recognise that the provision of relevant, high-quality, accessible information is essential to allow patients to access the local health services that they need and to become partners in decisions  about their care. The Scottish health council led a national conference on the subject last month to establish how we can continue to improve the provision of patient information.

I am happy to consider the point that Irene Oldfather raises. She has made it before and I have a good deal of sympathy with it. We want to ensure that people not only have theoretical access to information but are able to obtain it. I understand her point that information that is primarily available on the internet is not equally available to all. We will certainly consider any suggestions that she may wish to make, and I invite her to write to me with some.

The sensitivities surrounding the important issue of the proper protection of vulnerable adults have been highlighted in the debate. Acknowledging that abuse can exist or that frail elderly people can be at real risk of unintended harm is not always comfortable, but all members will be aware of cases involving such abuse or risks from their constituencies—such cases have been mentioned—or from media reports. Our task is to find a way of protecting vulnerable people from harm or abuse—one that will not be unduly intrusive on their rights. We want to clarify what the boundary ought to be between the reach of the state and the right to choice and privacy of capable but frail or vulnerable adults. We certainly do not intend to create a means of unnecessary intervention; rather, we want to enable the state to be an advocate that gets on the side of individuals who have capacity but who are not fully able to exercise choice for one reason or another. I welcome the indications that most members have given that they support the general principles of the bill, although I recognise that that support is qualified by a shared recognition of the need for further debate on and amendments to it. In a sense, Roseanna Cunningham dealt with the point that Shona Robison made towards the end of the debate. It is entirely proper that bills that are introduced into the Scottish Parliament are properly scrutinised at every stage. There is no merit in thinking that committees ought simply to rubber stamp proposals or that we should always aspire, before we even reach stage 1, to answer all possible questions that might arise in drafting legislation, try though we might. The point of the process of scrutiny of new law by committees of the Parliament is that the committees ought to add value to what comes before them. One cannot take that view and at the same time say that a new bill should contain nothing of substance that needs to be amended or improved. Legislation is sometimes required even when we believe that existing statute ought to provide people with protection or that existing duties ought to be carried out in a way that provides such protection. Good law can include measures that clarify and consolidate, as well as measures that  innovate. The bill does all those things.

Nanette Milne was right to identify the fact that the great majority of organisations in all the sectors to which John Swinburne refers that gave evidence to the Health Committee supported the general principles of the bill. In her speech, Jean Turner referred to some of the existing law that applies, which dates from the early days of the NHS. That legislation has been overtaken by developments since then and we need to amend and improve it. I do not regard the bill as the property of one interest or group. I think that it is required and that the increasing numbers of people who are living to a very old age and are frail, although they do not lack capacity, make it essential for us to have measures that address their vulnerability in a fair and proportionate way. We need to create the means of effective intervention but to ensure that interventions are proportionate to needs. Where an individual is believed to be at risk, the means must exist for that concern to be investigated. Where that investigation is impeded, there must be the means to carry it out. Where an investigation finds that an individual is at serious risk of direct and immediate harm, the means to act must be available. We need to tackle abuse and to deal with abusers—those who cause harm intentionally. The bill introduces measures to do that and to give victims of abuse the chance to be supported to take action to stop what is happening to them. The bill is also intended to extend protection to those who are at risk as a result of action that is not intended to have that consequence. We want to make it easier both to bring the perpetrators of abuse to justice and to protect those who are the victims of inadvertent neglect or self-harm. The bill covers all those risks and is intended to do so. We expect that, in most cases, public authorities will use the powers that the bill gives them with the full approval of the adult at risk. In some cases, a person will be asked to leave their usual home to have a discussion with officials elsewhere. In those cases, to which a number of members have referred, the individual may say that they choose to stay where they are. We expect that in almost all instances that express wish will be respected.

Indeed. It will be the duty of adult protection committees in each local area to review the use of all protection orders and to report their findings biannually to ministers, to ensure that those orders are not used inappropriately. Christine Grahame asked about the procedures for protection orders. Section 38(8) makes provision for those procedures to be specified in rules of court that will be approved by the Sheriff Court Rules Council. Members will recognise that that is the usual procedure; it applies, for example, under the Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981.

Protection orders will be granted only if a court or tribunal has evidence that it can consider. Christine Grahame has an interest in the detail of the matter and I will be happy to write to her about it if I have not fully answered her question. However, I am satisfied that the bill will provide for a proper judicial process, whereby evidence will be considered. None of the protection orders that are envisaged in the bill will apply without proper and due consideration.

Absolutely. The clear intention is to provide local authorities with the means to act when their existing means and duties in relation to persons at risk have not produced the desired outcome. The process would begin only after other measures had been exhausted. More contentious orders, such as removal orders, are intended to be used very much in the last resort. The question was asked whether the absence of a reference to the police as one of the bodies required to co-operate with local authorities and other bodies is significant. I am happy to consider the matter at stage 2, if the motion on the bill's  general principles is agreed to at decision time. We acknowledge the key role of the police in detecting and acting on the situations that we have been discussing. In most cases, when questions have been asked, the public authority will have fulfilled its duty, the individual will have exercised their choice and the matter will end at that point. However, in the rare and exceptional cases in which there is undue pressure, protection orders should be available to authorities if the other approaches that Robin Harper mentioned have failed. The bill offers a means to assess an individual and, in some instances, remove them from a situation in which they are at risk, for a short period. The person might be removed just for a few hours, so that a simple health check can be carried out, or for a few days, so that their circumstances can be assessed more broadly. It would be unusual for a removal order to have to remain in operation for the maximum of seven days. However, there might be circumstances in which an adult is prevented from exercising choice by another person in the household. In some situations, the person might not fully understand the pressure under which they are put. In such exceptional circumstances, it is right that there should be provision for a return to court for further consideration of the case. Concerns were raised about unintentional discrimination in the application of protection orders. Public authorities already have an obligation to assess whether action under legislation is compatible with the ECHR. The provisions of the bill are compatible with the ECHR. I agree with the Health Committee that the more restrictive actions should be taken only in the last resort, if there is a risk of serious harm and all other options have been exhausted. Any sheriff will need to be clear that there is a risk of serious harm. The code of practice that accompanies the legislation will signpost and emphasise the importance of those tests.

It is important to stress that guardianship orders under the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 are not designed to  meet emergency situations of the kind that we have been discussing; they are granted only after careful consideration of the adult's needs, and only if the adult lacks capacity as certified by two medical practitioners. The proposals under the bill and the provisions of the 2000 act are complementary, but different. Under the 2000 act, measures can be put in place only when a person is assessed as having incapacity. The powers under the bill will allow an initial assessment to be made if it is unclear whether or not a person has capacity. I hope that that will allow for an appropriate decision to be made. If a person is found not to have capacity, the 2000 act will apply. The question whether there is a risk of competing legislation was raised. There ought not to be. Once an assessment has been made, if a person lacks capacity, they should be supported by measures under the 2000 act. As Christine Grahame and others know, there are measures in the bill that will address and improve some aspects of the 2000 act to ensure that they are working as intended. The code of practice will provide further guidance on the structure and operation of adult protection committees. Euan Robson, I think, made a point about ensuring that adult protection committees and child protection committees share their expertise and that there should be no undue overlap. That point has been addressed—there is provision for that expertise to be shared.

There is an expectation that service users and voluntary sector representatives will be included in adult protection committees. We do not believe at this stage that that is likely to place an onerous duty on organisations to get involved. We expect their involvement to happen in any case, and provision is included to allow it. I mentioned that adult protection committees will review and report on the use of protection orders. That will allow us to continue to respect the human rights of those affected. Robin Harper asked about the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill. As I am sure he will recognise, that bill covers a different area—namely, the removal of perpetrators of abuse from the workforce. The Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill is very much focused on the victims of abuse—they stand at the centre of it. The remaining parts of the bill have been mentioned briefly, and I will respond briefly.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The power to amend the provisions of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 on placements from outwith Scotland is subject to the affirmative procedure. Therefore, it will be subject to scrutiny by the Parliament. Work on that area is already under way. We will ensure that the 1968 act is reviewed appropriately so that the work is delivered properly. The 1968 act currently includes provisions on the responsibilities of Scottish councils regarding the assessment and provision of services—that matter was also raised in the debate. We will consider ways to help address the issues that have been highlighted using revised guidance with a view to ensuring that the legislation is modern and fit for purpose. We recognise that it is not possible simply to pass a law and thereby completely eradicate the risk of harm. We acknowledge that particularly in the context of the increasing number of people who we know will live into their 80s and 90s in the future. The Parliament can reduce the risk of harm through legislation, however. That is what the bill is all about. We want to work with all concerned to achieve that outcome in the context of practical definitions that provide clarity and consistency, give clear direction to the relevant public authorities and enable individuals to exercise choice and be safe. It is about striking a balance between extending protection and enabling people to live fulfilling lives. We believe that the bill can deliver both those objectives.

I seek clarification from Christine Grahame as to which places she thinks should not be included in the bill, because I think that the intention is evident.

We introduced the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill principally to provide support and protection for those people in our communities who are vulnerable to harm, inadvertent or otherwise, but who are not covered by existing legislation. In 1993, the Scottish Law Commission produced a paper on how best to protect vulnerable adults, in which it observed that, at that time, there was "little or nothing available" to protect adults who were vulnerable but not mentally disordered. The paper also noted "an increasing awareness that abuse, deprivation and exploitation of vulnerable adults generally occurs and that the existing law is often not capable of tackling it effectively." In 1997, the Scottish Law Commission published a draft bill to address those concerns. Since then, the Parliament has passed the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. The bill is designed to fill a gap. In the context of the increasing numbers of people who are living ever longer in old age, it will address the vulnerability of those who are mentally well and capable but who are nonetheless frail and at risk of harm. The Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 provided groundbreaking new legislation for managing the welfare or financial affairs of adults who lack the capacity to manage those matters for themselves. The Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 updated the legal framework for people with a mental disorder. The main aims of the bill are to update further the legal framework to address the gaps that remain, which include groups of people who are not covered by existing statute and omissions in the range of interventions that are available to provide support and protection. In effect, those gaps mean that practitioners currently have no means to access some adults who are or may be at risk of harm. We first consulted on many of the proposals that are in the bill in 2001. Respondents to that consultation indicated strong support for measures that addressed a wider group than those with a mental disorder. There was a high level of  agreement about the need for the kind of protection orders that are proposed in the bill. Since then, as members will be aware, there have been repeated calls from Age Concern Scotland, the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland, the Vulnerable Adults Alliance Scotland and others who represent older people and those who are infirm to legislate for better protection of adults. That is because abuse can happen in regulated care settings such as care homes and in family homes. It happens in relationships of trust, in which it can be difficult for the individual who is being harmed to seek the help that he or she needs. Sometimes, that is because the individual relies on the abuser for care and sometimes because of fear of reprisal. The bill is about unintended harm as well as intentional abuse. Abuse, by definition, results in harm, but harm does not always result from abuse. The bill is intended to offer protection against abuse and other causes of harm, because the person who suffers inadvertently needs such protection. I recognise that acting to protect adults in those circumstances raises some sensitive issues. That is fully reflected in the Health Committee's stage 1 report. I welcome the committee's support for the important provisions in parts 2 and 3 of the bill and I acknowledge that its recommendations focus on the critical issues in part 1. I am grateful for the Health Committee's careful consideration of those issues and I thank the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their comments. The Health Committee's stage 1 report endorses our approach to some provisions in part 1. In the context of the general principles of the bill, the committee supports the provisions that establish rights of entry and inquiry and which put adult protection committees on a clear statutory footing. The bill's main purpose is to provide protection from deliberate and unintended harm. It is important to recognise that harm to vulnerable adults includes and encompasses abuse. Abuse of older people—elder abuse—is a reality and one of the reasons why we need the bill, but I am happy to concur with the committee's view that we need to give sufficient emphasis to situations in which harm is a result of self-neglect or the pressures of caring rather than intentional abuse. We will consider how that may be better reflected in the wording of the bill at stage 2 so that we explicitly provide protection from harm, including abuse, rather than risk appearing to focus on abuse to the exclusion of all else. We will consider how the bill makes clear the overlap with existing legislation. The bill reflects principles that are common to other legislation,  such as recognising the importance of the adult's known wishes. It is not intended to override the advance statements that a person may make about their treatment should they require intervention under the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003, and we will certainly consider how best to make that clear as we go forward. Advocacy is important in helping people to communicate their views. The committee has said that people to whom the bill applies should have the same rights as those who are subject to interventions under existing statute, and I am happy to concur with that point. Part 1 offers practitioners, for the first time, a range of options for responding to actual or suspected harm, and the underpinning principles put the individual's wishes first. The bill requires better co-operation among the agencies that are most likely to become aware of an adult being at risk of harm. It places a number of duties on local authorities and allows us to limit the class of council officer who will be permitted to perform the functions that are identified under the bill. Ministers will use the order-making power to define clearly the officers who are empowered to act and the qualifications that they will require to be able to use those powers. The committee welcomed the rights of access and inquiry. Sometimes, getting through the door will be enough, as the opportunity for a conversation with an appropriate professional may give an individual who may be at risk the information that he or she needs to make a real choice. However, that will not always be the case; hence the need for the further powers that the bill confers. There are safeguards to prevent inappropriate use of those powers. Protection orders can be used only with the authority of a sheriff. There is a balance to be struck between acting immediately to prevent serious harm and providing appropriate appeal rights to ensure that actions are in proportion to needs. I acknowledge that the most contentious of the protection orders is the removal order. To grant a removal order, the sheriff will need to be satisfied that it is necessary to prevent serious harm to the adult who is being removed. A removal order will expire after seven days or any shorter period that is specified in the order. The bill provides for variation or recall of a removal order when there has been a change in facts and circumstances. However, such a variation can never extend the period of the order beyond seven days. There is no right of appeal against a removal order only because the order is of such specific and limited duration that any appeal against it is unlikely to be heard until after it has expired. As a result, an appeal that is heard  after the order expires would not provide a different outcome for the adult at risk. He or she may instead seek a variation or recall of the order, thereby providing an opportunity for the issue to be looked at again by the court.

We have taken appropriate advice on the procedures, to which I will be happy to return in the course of the afternoon to give Christine Grahame more detail of the way in which they will work. In acknowledging issues that are raised around protection orders, such as those that were raised by Christine Grahame, I am happy to consider what might be needed to make it clearer in the bill how appeals procedures will function. We want to return to that area at stage 2. The bill aims to balance rights and protection. To override an adult's refusal of consent, where a court is persuaded that it is withheld because there is undue pressure, will be an absolute last resort. We do not expect such circumstances to arise very often. However, where a responsible professional person is convinced that an adult is refusing support and protection due to undue pressure from another person, it is essential that he or she is enabled to present the evidence of that to a sheriff for their urgent consideration. One of the most sensitive issues raised at stage 1 has been the definition of adults at risk. I agree that we should respond to the committee's concerns in that area by seeking to narrow the definition of adults at risk of harm in order to clarify the bill's intentions. There are people with profound and multiple impairments and others with cognitive impairment who are unable readily to articulate their views. They are among the people whom we seek to protect and support and we must not lose sight of their needs. The other measures in the bill are to enhance the operation of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 and the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 by simplifying and streamlining them to deliver the original policy intentions. I believe that those measures, which have been broadly supported, will achieve those objectives. We have considered carefully the views of the Health Committee. Ministers will seek to respond to those views in as positive a way as we can, consistent with the fundamental principles of the bill. On that basis, I hope that the bill can move to  the next stage of consideration with broad-based support. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Adult Support and Protection (Scotland) Bill.

In October 2005, we published our framework on the mental health needs of children and young people, which highlighted the importance of sensitive, integrated care for people who have complex needs at a challenging stage of life and focused on promotion, prevention and care. This year we carried out a national and regional analysis of specialist service needs, including the needs of people who have eating disorders. Last week in Aberdeen, I attended the first national conference of the national health service on eating disorders, at which I commended health boards for the progress that has been made, underlined the need for continuing work in the area and reaffirmed the Executive's commitment to working with NHS boards and other partners on improving all aspects of care for people with eating disorders.

I agree with the points that the member made. The recommendations that NHS QIS published last week on the management and treatment of people with eating disorders will help NHS boards and their partners to plan provision. In-patient treatment is important. Some good work is being done in Aberdeen by the north of Scotland planning group, but we expect regional planning groups elsewhere in Scotland to consider how best to deliver in-patient services to patients with eating disorders, whether or not services are delivered in partnership with the independent sector. The key is to ensure that services are available to people when they need them and are delivered as efficiently as they can be.

I do not recognise David Davidson's characterisation of the position of the project that Dr Harry Millar is taking forward in Aberdeen; indeed, the contrary is the case. The regional planning group developed proposals and it is clearly for NHS Grampian to make the final decision on how it commissions and delivers services to patients. Nothing that we do centrally will impede the board in doing that. It is for NHS Grampian to resolve the issues to which the member refers in relation to other boards in the north of Scotland, as Harry Millar fully acknowledged when he and I discussed the matter on Friday. I am sure that Harry Millar will continue to devote his energies to developing and promoting his proposals for NHS in-patient  treatment in Aberdeen to serve the north of Scotland. His proposals are welcome and are part of a range of measures that are being taken throughout Scotland. We require boards to identify the best way of delivering services for their patients on a regional basis and in the most efficient way possible.

I congratulate Jean Turner on securing the debate. As has been said, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board faces some major health and health care challenges that need to be tackled. Health inequalities are greater in that board's area than in Scotland as a whole and they rival the challenges that exist anywhere in the United Kingdom. That is partly why the board has undertaken a substantial and ambitious service modernisation task, which has been begun but needs to be carried through. Along with its staff and partners—including the local authorities—NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde is committed to tackling those challenges. It has our support in doing so through the acute services strategy that was agreed some time ago. It might be useful to consider the issues of acute bed numbers and capacity planning not just in the context of Greater Glasgow and Clyde but in an all-Scotland context. As several members pointed out, there are parallels between what is happening in Glasgow and what is happening elsewhere in  Scotland. Some of the fundamental points apply equally across the country. Prime responsibility for planning hospital services, including acute bed numbers, rests with NHS boards. As has been said, hospital beds are an important and expensive resource, but other resources are equally essential. Care also depends on appropriately skilled staff, modern diagnostic equipment, well-organised out-patient clinics, flexible and responsive primary care teams, trained mental health community teams and good-quality interventions that avoid the need for hospital admission in the first place. Every part of the health care system is linked to other parts and they are all essential in delivering patient care. Planning bed numbers is not simply a matter of getting the volume right. Available beds must be in the right specialties and at the right level to meet clinical need. The number of intensive therapy unit beds in the NHS throughout Scotland has risen steadily, from 159 in 1999 to 177 this year. Those are the most expensive and highly specialised beds in the NHS. As has been mentioned, at the same time, the number of beds in surgical specialties has reduced, which reflects the fact that more and more patients are being treated as day cases. The rate of day-case surgery has risen from 57 per cent in 1997 to 66 per cent now, which is very nearly two cases in three. Our ambition, which is based on clinical advice, is for that figure to continue to rise and to reach 75 per cent, or three cases out of four, by the end of the decade. I suspect that it will be scarcely believable for many members to hear that, in 1990—only 16 years ago—the average length of a hospital stay following cataract surgery was more than five days: nowadays, most cataract patients are treated successfully and discharged on the day they go to hospital. The NHS now carries out more treatment in out-patient departments and GPs' surgeries, which avoids the need for admission to hospital at all. Jean Turner's motion refers to the importance of waiting times. We agree with her about the importance of decreasing those times, but it is important to say that having fewer surgical beds does not mean less treatment and nor does it mean longer waits; it simply reflects the more modern and effective ways of delivering surgical treatment. As members will know, the figures show that, as surgical bed numbers have come down, waiting times have come down. For example, compared to 1997, 11 per cent more principal operations, 250 per cent more angioplasties, 104 per cent more knee-joint replacement operations and 58 per cent more cataract operations are now undertaken in the NHS. In the context of that significant rising level of surgical treatment, waiting times have come  down to a point at which no patient with a guarantee now waits more than six months for treatment and the NHS is on target to deliver a maximum wait time of 18 weeks. Jean Turner said that she would like the NHS in Glasgow and Clyde to keep acute bed numbers under review. I assure her that the board is doing that and will continue to do so throughout the enlarged area. That is essential if the board is to deliver its acute service strategy successfully. That strategy, which is for the modernisation of the way health care is delivered in Glasgow and Clyde, will result in a total investment of about £950 million in modern hospital facilities throughout the city and region by 2013. The investment will deliver a range of improved services for residents and patients in the area. Work on the new Beatson oncology centre—a project that involves £85 million of capital funding—is nearing completion and the centre will begin to admit patients early in the new year. There will be 170 in-patient beds at the new Beatson and 45 day-case beds, which will replace similar numbers of beds in existing oncology units. Work has started on the new diagnostic and day-treatment hospital at the Victoria site and work will commence soon on the developments at the Stobhill site. Together, those projects, including equipment, involve an investment of about £200 million. The hospitals, which will open their doors to patients in spring 2009, will be able to treat more than 80 per cent of patients who are currently treated at the existing Stobhill and Victoria hospitals. However, they will do so with a lot fewer in-patient beds. Again, that has been decided on the basis of clinical need. There will be only 12 short-stay surgical beds at each of the new hospitals because day-case patients do not require acute hospital beds.

I agree that that has always been the aspiration. The difference is in the way in which health services are designed and delivered. Henceforth, far more patients will be successfully treated without needing to be admitted to hospital. The demand for beds will also be reduced if we successfully implement the Kerr report's recommendation to stream and separate planned care and emergency care. That recommendation lies behind many of the changes that have been referred to in the debate. Separating those streams will allow clinical teams to concentrate their core skills, maximise productivity and significantly reduce the risk—to which Jean Turner referred—of planned surgical admissions having  to be cancelled because of peaks in emergency demand. We aspire to an NHS that is fit for the 21 st century. We realise that, in many respects, it will look different from the service that was created 60 years ago. One of those respects is that there will be fewer general acute beds but more support from intensive care.  The changes are all about how we deliver for patients and, to deliver for patients, the NHS must change and continue to change.  Meeting closed at 17:51.

We have commissioned the community-led supporting and developing healthy communities task group to consider how best to support the continued sustainability of community health initiatives. The task group will publish its recommendations very soon. Ministers will consider those in the usual way.

I do not want to prejudge the group's recommendations, which will be made public very soon and to which we will respond. It is important that we ensure that the evidence base for the recommendations is understood, and the task group is doing that work. It is doing it because we recognise the need for a coherent approach to such issues across the board. I look forward to seeing the recommendations in the near future.

The Scottish Executive makes provision for £1.7 billion in grant-aided expenditure to local authorities for community care services, with a further £400 million of supporting people funding for housing support services that are registered with the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care as care services. How much of that funding is allocated to housing organisations with charitable status is not recorded centrally.

The main responsibility in that regard lies with Communities Scotland and with the Scottish Executive Development Department, rather than with the Health Department. However, the funding for Balmain Court, a commendable new development by the Angus Community Care Charitable Trust that was opened recently, was publicly supported to the tune of approximately 71 per cent; that happened in the context of a public funding cap, as a result of European state aid requirements, of 75 per cent. Mr Welsh will find that the level of public funding for that project was nearly as high as it could have been.

I am certainly aware of the issue to which Nanette Milne refers and I am concerned about the future provision of services of the type that she describes. However, I do not accept the view that an issue has arisen because of an inadequacy of the overall funding that is provided to local councils. The issue is the way in which local authorities deliver support to the voluntary sector. That relates closely to the question that was asked a moment ago by Mark Ruskell about community health initiatives, as a similar point could be made in relation to care services. The voluntary sector works with local government, and we want to ensure that, in the future, a coherent approach is taken to those matters and that projects receive stable and reliable funding from their public sector partners.

Provision of respite care has continued to increase in recent years, and we have introduced a requirement that local partnerships must report to ministers annually on local improvement targets for carers' assessments and respite services. In addition, we set up a respite task group earlier this year, as part of our response to the care 21 report, to update the guidance that we issue on access to respite services. The group is also gathering evidence to inform future decisions on service provision.

I agree entirely that children and young people who find themselves in the position of being relied upon as the main source of unpaid care have particular and often significant needs, including the need for respite. It is not our policy that young people should be put in that position, but when it happens we want them to have support. There are 57 projects across Scotland delivering support of that type. In addition to recognising respite as a key issue arising out of the care 21 report, we recognise the position of young carers as a key issue. A task group is considering a range of issues relating to young carers, and we expect those two groups to work together on the important matter of respite care for young people. Flexible care and person-centred respite are needed, because it must be recognised that the respite needs of one individual may not be the same as those of another individual. That is the direction in which I hope that policy will continue to go.

I look forward to opening two dental centres in the Highlands later this month: a three-surgery extension at Culloden and a new five-surgery dental facility in Wick. NHS Highland employs 51 salaried dentists and it will continue to develop its network of salaried dental services. I expect further new developments in Grantown-on-Spey and Fort William to be completed early next year.

NHS Highland operates a dental helpline that deals with inquiries from members of the public who seek to access either emergency treatment or early treatment on registration. Decisions on both types of inquiry take into account the clinical position of the individual. Expectant mothers who have not seen a dentist for two years will automatically be fast tracked so that they receive early attention from NHS dental services. The policy of prioritisation in those circumstances will always be based on clinical assessment.

I can report to Mr Lochhead now that NHS Grampian has put in place plans for new dental developments in Elgin, Keith, Buckie and other places in the north-east following the opening of the Aberdeen dental institute only a few days ago. All those developments will help to address precisely the issues that he mentions. As well as looking for NHS boards to provide such services—as they are now doing—we look to dentists who have in the past chosen to deregister their adult patients to reverse that decision and come back to the NHS. If they do so, they will get a financial reward in excess of £25,000 per practice per year in new funding. That is a significant incentive, which I hope many dentists in Moray and elsewhere will take into account in deciding their future actions.

A variety of drugs can be used in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease and associated symptoms; those that are currently available include donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine. I expect NHS Quality Improvement Scotland shortly to recommend that those drugs should be used only for the treatment of moderate Alzheimer's disease,  at which point they will no longer be recommended for people in the early stages or with a mild form of the disease.

I am aware of the campaign. However, as we pointed out last week in the chamber, this is clearly a matter for NHS Quality Improvement Scotland, which is responsible for considering NICE's recommendations and their applicability in Scotland. Although NHS QIS has not yet published its recommendation, I understand that it intends to recommend that the national health service in Scotland should follow NICE's recommendations on the availability of these drugs. Given that it is conducting the scientific investigation of those matters, I do not think that it would be appropriate for us to second-guess the scientific evidence and advice.

I, too, congratulate David Davidson on his securing this timeous debate and I welcome many of the comments that have been made. I also welcome the opportunity to confirm our recognition of the challenge that is presented by diabetes and to highlight our actions to address it. We acknowledge David Davidson's points about the impact of type 2 diabetes on disadvantaged and vulnerable groups. Of course, tackling health inequality is one of the key themes of our vision of future health care—"Delivering for Health", which we set out in Parliament just over a year ago. Since devolution, we have been endeavouring to develop more effective ways of improving care of people who have diabetes. Euan Robson asked about the basis of that work. The "Scottish Diabetes Framework", which was published in 2002, set out a clear vision for improving diabetes services and the diabetes action plan, which came out earlier this year, refocuses that approach on consultation of diabetes sufferers, carers and service providers and sets out a clear three-year programme of action. We welcome health care professionals' commitment to delivering the action plan's recommendations. Diabetes services have improved considerably in recent years. Most important, the creation of managed clinical networks for diabetes care in every NHS board area has provided leadership and focus on delivery of local diabetes services. Investment in information technology has resulted in the creation of a fully electronic diabetes patient record that will be available at all stages of the patient's pathway. It will provide timely clinical data to support the care of the patient and increasingly robust data that will be used to examine the overall quality of care. The number of diabetes sufferers who receive the required regular tests has increased, which has led to an overall improvement in the number of patients who reach their treatment targets.

In answering that question I will also address the issues that Rob Gibson raised to do with diabetic retinopathy screening.  We look to managed clinical networks to address such issues within regions such as Grampian, as mentioned by David Davidson, or Highland, as mentioned by Rob Gibson, or Lothian. In all places, we look to MCNs to define the services that are needed in their areas and to ensure that those services are delivered in an integrated way. The action plan also emphasises the importance of supporting people who have diabetes in caring for themselves. We have to ensure that people have access to good-quality education and information so that they can improve their knowledge and skills and gain the confidence to deal with the condition and to integrate self-management into their life and care. Such education on self-care will be a key part of our work. It will be taken on board by the NHS as mainstream NHS business. Disadvantaged groups have been mentioned, including people from minority ethnic groups. For example, a genetic predisposition among south Asian people can be the fundamental cause of their particular disadvantage. We look to MCNs to undertake a needs analysis of their local populations to identify disadvantaged groups and appropriate treatments. People may be disadvantaged because of their ethnic origin, because they have learning disabilities, because of their social or economic position, or because of geography or transport issues. The MCNs will be key agencies in developing understanding of what is required and in ensuring that services are made available. I have already mentioned "Delivering for Health", in which a key point is that we should address inequalities in access to health services. Diabetes services are one such area in which we would be keen to address inequalities. We also have to consider the many people who are living with diabetes but who have not been diagnosed. In that regard, we take advice from the National Screening Committee, which advises all four United Kingdom health departments. It feels that general population screening for diabetes is not necessarily the best way forward, but that it will be critical in reducing risk among the groups that are at highest risk. We will continue to listen to such advice and to act on it. Work on diabetes screening should be taken forward in the context of addressing general cardiovascular risk factors. That is the advice of the National Screening Committee on the basis of its projects and pilots. It is also the focus of the keep well programme on anticipatory care, which is being piloted in five areas. Euan Robson asked whether the pilots and the focus on cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes will be confined to those five areas. The intention is to use the results from the pilots to inform policy more generally. We have to acknowledge that there are disadvantaged  groups as well as disadvantaged areas. Those groups exist all over Scotland. We hope to extend the pilots beyond the current five in the reasonably near future. We are committed nationally, regionally and locally to the goals in "Delivering for Health". Those goals include reducing inequality and improving treatment. "Delivering for Health" puts a clear emphasis on increasing support and increasing the focus of health services on people who are living with long-term conditions. That offers a basis for sustainable improvements in how we will support people with diabetes in the future. We support the call of world diabetes day for care for everyone with diabetes and we are working hard to deliver that care in Scotland. "Delivering for Health" sets the context and the diabetes action plan sets out the programme of steps that we need and intend to take. The direction that we are taking will, I hope, bring the kind of improvement that all the members who have spoken this evening have called for.  Meeting closed at 18:30.

I understand that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will recommend shortly that the majority of those drugs should be used only for the treatment of moderate Alzheimer's disease and that they will no longer be recommended for people in the early and mild stages of the disease.

I am aware of the concerns that have been expressed in the areas to which Mr Gorrie refers. Clearly, the views of the professional bodies are among the things that the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence will have taken into account in coming to its view. Our approach has been to follow the scientific views and conclusions of NICE, subject to the views of NHS QIS, whose job is to see whether those conclusions are appropriate and applicable in Scotland. We will continue to take that approach. There are issues beyond the determination on the drugs that will need to be looked at, and I am happy to consider how those issues can best be addressed going forward.

The approach that ministers take is not to second guess the judgments of those with a professional responsibility in the area. We look to NICE, with its accumulated expertise, to consider the issues carefully. This is not about side-stepping the views of the expert prescriber; it is about providing a framework within which decisions are made, which is informed by the best available science. That is and will continue to be the approach that we take. I believe that it is the right approach. The quality of life of the patients and the quality of life of the carers are both of significance. It is the job of NICE to establish where the benefit that is derived from any particular treatment is greatest and whether the benefit is sufficient to justify the treatment. For example, some of the drugs produce side-effects in many patients and produce benefits in only relatively few patients. These are difficult judgments, and they are judgments for the scientists rather than for ministers. It is for that reason that we follow the advice as we do.

All care homes are expected to meet the national care standards and the requirements that are set out in the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 and its associated regulations, which include requirements with regard to medication. The care commission inspects care homes at least twice a year to ensure that they do. Should a care home fail to meet those standards, the commission has the power to make recommendations or to impose requirements to ensure that the standards are met.

The existing standards are clear and I hope that all those who are involved will follow them. I take seriously the points that Irene Oldfather makes and I will be happy to draw them to the attention of the care commission, which has a responsibility both for enforcing standards and for ensuring the best possible standards of care in care homes.

Children under 16 get help with buying glasses through the optical voucher scheme. Additional vouchers are not provided for the purchase of sports glasses and there are no current plans to amend the scheme.

We are always happy to consider proposals of that kind. We have not seen such a proposal from either sports or optical interests, but if Mrs Milne wishes to write to me on the matter, I will consider it with interest.

The report of the Executive's range and capacity review group, published in May this year, considered the available evidence on the balance of needs over the next 20 years. It recommended that local partners do further work to assess future needs in individual local authority areas and come to conclusions at local level as to what future provision of services will be required to meet those needs.

I am grateful to Orkney Islands Council for sending me a copy of that report, and my officials have had a constructive meeting with officials from the authority. Jim Wallace knows that, as the allocation of resources forms part of the wider local government settlement, it will be considered as part of that wider process, and we would not wish to negotiate on the settlement within individual councils. However, we are happy to have a meeting to discuss and fully address the issues that are particular to Orkney. The report covers issues that relate to a number of different ministerial portfolios. I would like to take a little more time to consider which minister will be best placed to respond to the issues, but we will certainly accept Mr Wallace's request for a meeting.

Shona Robison knows very well that there are, in some circumstances, perfectly legitimate reasons why a person will wait for the delivery of full services. Responsibility for delivering those services at local level lies with the local authority. Where discharge from hospital is a factor, responsibility lies with the local authority in partnership with the local health board or with other partners. The allocation of funding for delivery of those services fully meets the earlier request that was made by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, and further consideration will be given to that in the spending review next year. Ms Robison is also aware of the fact that we are currently reviewing the implementation of the free personal care policy across Scotland, in order to ensure that we can learn any lessons that need to be learned and can improve the delivery of those services.

Good progress is being made in addressing the issue of making people's homes safer. We are keen to enable people to stay in their own homes as long as they can, because that is what most older people want. I commend the example of West Lothian Council, which is in many respects leading the way in adaptations to housing to enable that. That is the sort of example that we would like to see being followed throughout Scotland.

The staffing establishment at Monklands hospital in March of this year was just over 1,500 whole-time equivalent. Lanarkshire NHS Board expects the staffing establishment at Monklands hospital to  remain at much the same level in each of the next three years.

Mr Neil has slightly missed the point about the clarification that I provided on renal services and high-dependency care. We have confirmed that the changes that are to be introduced in the next five years will permit continued delivery of dialysis and level 1 high-dependency support at Monklands hospital. On the wider question of staffing at the accident and emergency unit, I am sure that Mr Neil is aware of the details of the changes that are to take place. The changes, which will take place in advance of any changes to the accident and emergency service at Monklands, will include the establishment of new community casualty units, including a seven-day 24-hour community casualty unit at Monklands, and other changes to accident and emergency provision in Lanarkshire and in neighbouring health board areas.

The number of dental students who graduated from Scottish dental schools was 116 in 2004, 109 in 2005 and increased to 133 this year. The number who did not take up vocational training posts in Scotland fell from 25 in 2004 to 14 of the 109 graduates in 2005 and 14 of the 133 graduates this year.

The scandal is the misinformation from Mr Ewing—the facts are contrary to what he says. The dental action plan made it clear that the number of vocational training places that we would provide would be in excess of the number of students who graduate from Scotland's dental schools. We have done that, so Mr Ewing's information is clearly wrong. As I said, 14 of the 133 students who graduated from Scottish dental schools this year chose to take up vocational training places elsewhere. That is a decision for them. Given the proportion of dental students in Scotland's excellent dental schools who come from other parts of the United Kingdom, it should not be surprising that about one in 10 of them chooses to take up a VT place in another part of the United Kingdom or elsewhere. Mr Ewing should welcome the significant advances that we have made on the matter, not least of which is the introduction of bursaries to encourage students to continue in the NHS in Scotland after graduation. The Executive announced the bursary scheme in the dental action plan in March 2005, and I was pleased to launch it in Dundee a few weeks ago. I am delighted to report to Parliament the high level of interest in the scheme among dental students.

I have recently approved plans, with a number of additional requirements, for modernisation of health services across Lanarkshire. I have required that the provision of a community casualty unit in Lanark be brought forward, and other planned changes include the replacement of the health centre at Carluke and investment in a new purpose-built community hospital to serve the Clydesdale area.

The intention of the proposals and the additional requirements is that the best quality health service will be provided for residents throughout Lanarkshire. Part of that will be that the five community casualty units, including the one at Lanark, will take the majority of people who currently present at accident and emergency units, and that those CCUs should be providing that service before any change to the configuration of the existing accident and emergency services.

I, too, congratulate Shona Robison on bringing the matter to the Parliament for debate. I also congratulate the campaigners, who have brought the issue to public attention so effectively, and Des McNulty, whose work has led to the publication today of the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Bill, which will provide some acknowledgement of the loss that families face. We all acknowledge that mesothelioma is a devastating condition. I add my words of sympathy for those who have the condition and for the families who have been touched by it. As members have said, there is no cure, sufferers do not tend to live long after diagnosis and, whatever treatment is provided, their last months are never easy. As has been said, rates of mesothelioma are increasing. As I said in the Parliament last week, the most recent complete figures, which are for 2003, show an incidence that is about three times that of 20 years earlier. We expect the figures to peak sometime between 2011 and 2015 at between 195 and 245 diagnoses annually in Scotland. Members have mentioned the clear link between mesothelioma and exposure to asbestos fibres. Most of those who suffer are men who were exposed to asbestos in the course of their work, but the disease can also affect families who have been exposed to the fibres. Pemetrexed disodium, or Alimta, is licensed as a treatment for mesothelioma in conjunction with cisplatin. As has been said, there is no current standard care pathway for people with mesothelioma, but other treatment regimes are being evaluated in research trials. Although we are discussing the NICE advice on pemetrexed this afternoon, appeals against NICE's final appraisal determination are being considered. Therefore, we have not yet seen NICE's final advice, and we will not do so until those appeals have been resolved later this year. According to the draft of the final appraisal determination, NICE takes the view that the drug offers a relatively modest benefit. It has concluded that it can extend life by between three and five months compared with treatment with cisplatin alone. The treatment is associated with serious side effects, although those seem to be manageable in most cases. It does not fundamentally alter the course of the disease, although it has an impact on life expectancy. The  final appraisal determination says: "there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that pemetrexed plus cisplatin was superior to other, far less costly treatment regimens." In other words, NICE was not persuaded that it was the best drug to deploy in the treatment of mesothelioma and was unable to recommend the drug for general use. Although it is critical that that should be understood to be the basis of NICE's advice, as I said, that view is subject to the appeals process. It is different from the advice previously given by the Scottish medicines consortium. It might be helpful briefly to review the process by which drugs are approved. Every new drug and treatment that becomes available is considered by the SMC, which looks at initial evidence from the manufacturer to decide whether a drug is cost effective and whether it should be made available for routine use. That examination takes place at the point at which the drug becomes available on the market and is licensed for use in health care treatment. As further evidence becomes available, NICE may conduct a full evaluation of the drug, often in comparison with other treatments. NICE is a UK body, which draws on knowledge from throughout the country. It uses seven independent centres to review evidence of drug efficacy, including—although not in this case—the University of Aberdeen. Therefore, its process is not divorced from Scottish expertise. The committee that considered pemetrexed included Professor John Cairns of the London school of hygiene and tropical medicine, who is also a member of the SMC. It includes a number of other prominent clinicians from different areas of the health profession. NICE is respected the world over and its appraisals are carried out at a later stage in a drug's history than the initial SMC recommendation. When NICE has come to a view on a drug, the drug is not returned to the SMC for further consideration. Instead, as Shona Robison indicated, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland considers the NICE appraisals and advises on whether they should apply in Scotland. NHS QIS is the key body for interpreting NICE conclusions for Scottish application. It considers whether there are particular reasons to vary those conclusions to reflect Scottish circumstances and it is its job to do so on the basis of the best possible scientific appraisal of the evidence and its application to Scottish circumstances. Other members made the point that the level of mesothelioma in Scotland is high, which is the legacy of Scotland's shipbuilding heritage. Des McNulty referred to the fact that the highest rates of all are found in the north-east of England. That is a phenomenon: a disease that exists in a  number of areas that have the same kind of industrial heritage. However, prevalence of itself is unlikely to lead NHS QIS to vary its advice. The effectiveness of a treatment for an individual patient is not altered by the number of patients. Epidemiology has been mentioned, and the question that NHS QIS will consider is whether the delivery of treatment has a particular Scottish angle. Once NHS QIS has come to a view, the Scottish NHS boards will be expected to follow its advice.

I would look to NHS QIS to make absolutely sure that it had considered all the angles in preparing its advice to NHS boards on the basis of the NICE appraisal. It should do that in the context of the ethos and values of the NHS in Scotland, the circumstances of patients in Scotland and what is right for patients, families and communities and on the basis of scientific evidence and advice. In large part, that will be derived from the appraisal carried out by NICE, which will have conducted a more thorough scientific examination of the evidence than would be available from elsewhere.

I am not aware of any specific representations, but the Scottish medicines consortium, which considered pemetrexed on its initial availability, includes NHS boards. Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board, for example, is regularly represented at the consortium's meetings at chief executive level. There is very active involvement there, and I would expect QIS to consider any evidence that became available to it from particular areas or that was brought to it by particular boards. I would expect QIS to take all those factors into account in carrying out its appraisal of the evidence. I will conclude with one further reassurance to Des McNulty on a specific point that he raised. Whatever the final appraisal by NICE and the final advice from NHS QIS, patients who are currently receiving pemetrexed and cisplatin will continue to  receive those treatments unless their doctor prescribes another form of treatment. What is at issue here is the advice that will be provided in the event of future diagnoses. I will ask NHS QIS to make absolutely sure that it has considered all the issues that have been raised in this evening's debate before it comes to a final view on the NICE appraisal.   Meeting closed at 17:47.

The average annual number of new cases diagnosed in Scotland between 1991 and 2003 was 183. Estimates derived from projections of mortality for Great Britain as a whole suggest that the number of new cases of mesothelioma in Scotland may peak at around 195 to 245 per year some time between 2011 and 2015.

Clearly, all such decisions must be informed by the scientific evidence and by the scientific expertise of those involved. Although NICE has made a determination, I understand that it has not yet considered appeals against that determination. I do not expect to receive advice about what should happen in Scotland until that process is completed. We will, of course, take due cognisance of that advice when it comes.

The work that has been done is indeed widely recognised. I am aware of Des McNulty's on-going interest in the issue and I will be happy to meet him to discuss those matters in the way that he suggests.

We are currently reviewing policy on the provision of wigs. From 1 April, we reduced the cost of the basic modacrylic wig to £6.65 to bring it into line with prescription charges for other items. A short-life working group has been established to consider the matter, including questions related to patients who are undergoing chemotherapy.

I would be happy to examine Wig Bank, to which Margo MacDonald refers. Clearly, we want there to be a range of provision. I am pleased with her comments about the improvements in the basic provision, which are important. I am happy to ask my officials in the  short-life working group to consider the work in Edinburgh to which she refers.

Yes. NHS Western Isles purchased the Bayhead dental practice in Stornoway last year and has since extended the premises by adding a further surgery. New patients are now being registered, opening hours have been extended and a mobile dental unit is now in place. In addition, the board's salaried service has recruited two additional dentists and seven new dental nurses have been appointed as part of the board's plans to improve oral health in the Western Isles.

Yes. We are clear that the way in which dental services are provided will vary from community to community. In the Western Isles and Shetland, dental services are provided principally in premises that are owned by NHS boards and are delivered by dentists who are employed by NHS boards. That is clearly part of the right way to deliver dental services in the islands and elsewhere in Scotland. At the same time, we continue to encourage dentists who own their own premises to continue to provide national health service services. For that reason, we have put in place a significant range of extra incentives and rewards for dentists who continue to treat all categories of NHS patient.

I am glad to take the opportunity to do that and to report on a number of initiatives. We recently introduced the bursary scheme for dental students, which we announced in the dental action plan in spring 2005. I am delighted to say that the scheme is now in place for students who are starting their studies in the current academic year. It will provide significant additional financial support to dental students in exchange for a commitment to continue to work in the NHS in Scotland for a period of years after their graduation. We believe that the scheme, in addition to the existing support for rural practices through golden hellos and other incentives, will make a significant difference to the supply of dentists in the Highlands in years to come.

I understand that Highland Council has recently approved the commencement of a care home procurement exercise to secure 168 comprehensive and flexible care home places for frail older people. The council is currently refurbishing a number of its care homes in rural locations to ensure compliance with statutory requirements.

The principle of access to care is important, but the way it is delivered is a matter for local authorities rather than the Executive. However, because we are responsible for the health service, we are cognisant of the problems for those people who are leaving hospital in the Highlands and looking for a place in a care home. We will work with Highland Council to address the issues when it brings them to our attention in detail, which I understand it intends to do in the near future.

I, too, congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing the debate. I have listened with great interest to what he and other members have said. Alex Johnstone reminded us that the issues are important in the wider context of rural Scotland and because they relate to choices in health care and the provision of locally appropriate services throughout Scotland. The motion highlights the consultation that NHS Grampian carried out on its proposals and how local people have taken part in the process. When I responded in a parliamentary debate last November, I emphasised my view that the opportunity to express views and influence decisions is an important part of an active democracy. That remains my view, and I am sure that all members share it. However, that engagement must include a willingness to consider all the relevant issues and to view issues and concerns within the wider picture. Last year, the community health partnership in Aberdeenshire developed a range of proposals for service change and consulted locally on the matter. That is what we expect community health partnerships to do in building up locally responsive service developments from grass-roots level. Following the development of those proposals and that consultation, the CHP made its recommendations to the NHS board, which then carried out its own consultation and submitted its recommendations early last month. As has been said, those proposals will go to Andy Kerr and he will respond to them in due course. It is important to recognise that NHS Grampian's recommendations are about the development in Aberdeenshire of a range of community-based services—including maternity services, as Nora Radcliffe stressed. They include proposals for extending and enhancing local services for older people and for moving a range of diagnostic  services into communities where people will be able to access them more easily. They include specific targets for moving services out of specialist hospitals and into local communities. I believe that those measures will be broadly supported, and the principle behind them is in line with wider policy objectives.

That is a good cue for me to move on to the issues around maternity services. The debate has focused on NHS Grampian's proposals not to continue to give women the option of delivering at four out of the five community maternity units. Peterhead is the exception, as was mentioned. There, the existing range of midwife-led services will be enhanced. In considering the matter, Andy Kerr will look at the basis for the board's proposals, as has been mentioned. The board's proposals are based on its view on changes in local demography, birth rates, and so on. Its conclusion is that the current service pattern is not sustainable and that the resources that are currently used to provide the service could be used more effectively elsewhere. That raises the question of choice for local communities—a question that has been fundamental in the local debate. As Shiona Baird said, childbirth is not an illness; it ought to be one of the most positive experiences in a person's life. That means that the way in which maternity services are delivered should be centred on the women, and service planners should take the wishes and interests of mothers into account in planning services. It is important to remember that pregnancy and childbirth are not always a positive experience and are not risk free. People's choice must be informed by the best available evidence, including the evidence of risk not only of extreme circumstances, but of the skills of staff being eroded by their being responsible for an inadequate number of deliveries.

That is a fair point. That pilot scheme was mentioned in our debate last November, as Mr Rumbles may recall. It replaced  the previous pattern of 24-hour cover. In considering the board's proposals, Andy Kerr will want to consider the conclusions that were drawn from the experience of that pilot project. The way in which NHS Grampian has addressed the balance between choice and risk is fundamental to the consideration that will be given to the proposals. That will include models of service delivery past and present. The proposals will also be looked at in the context of delivering for health and the work of the expert group on acute maternity services. We will consider in detail the views that have been put forward by individuals and organisations throughout the area who have expressed an interest. The matter of the alternative business plan has been mentioned. That is among the papers that will be in front of Andy Kerr for his consideration and it will be taken into account by him. As has been mentioned, Andy Kerr will meet Mike Rumbles and representatives of the campaign next week.  In the context of Richard Baker's speech, members will be interested to know that the Scottish health council has reported on the later consultation and is now satisfied that the process was adequate. Andy Kerr must now consider all the evidence—the board's proposals and the views of those who take a different view—and strike a balance between the concerns that have been raised and the necessity for a sustainable and properly delivered service. He will take all those considerations into account in reaching a conclusion, at which time he will report as quickly as possible.  Meeting closed at 18:00.

We recognise the value of the work of the committee and of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. It is precisely the problems that the committee has highlighted that our review is concerned with addressing, and I hope that the member will welcome that work.

The debate has been useful and a measure of the inclusive and effective work that was done by the Health Committee in setting about its post-legislative scrutiny. A large number of points have been made during this full debate and I will try to answer some of them as fully as time permits. We have heard confirmation today that a broadly supported policy is working well. At any one time, 50,000 people in Scotland are benefiting directly from the policy. As I indicated earlier, we began a major evaluation of the policy last year; we expect to complete the review this year and to publish our findings and conclusions early next year. That evaluation is being overseen by an evaluation reference group on which many organisations are  represented. As well as COSLA and the care commission, individual local authorities, care providers, older people's representative organisations and the Social Work Inspection Agency are represented, and the work of that evaluation group will ensure that we have a detailed picture of what the policy provides and how it is operating around the country. Once we have that detailed picture, we will be able to take the necessary steps to make further improvements. Some of the issues that are highlighted in the Health Committee's report will inform that evaluation. Funding has been a concern for several members. We are considering carefully the level of payments for personal and nursing care for residents in care homes, but we have not yet reached any conclusions. It might be of interest to members to know that early indications suggest that the initial work that was done by Stewart Sutherland and the care development group might have overestimated the cost of providing personal care but underestimated the cost of nursing care. We will seek to quantify those costs during the review and will proceed accordingly. However, it is important to be clear that while those payments have been fixed, they are not the whole story of funding. Additional funding for free personal care has increased from GAE provision of £143 million in the first full year to £162 million in the current year. Existing provision for poorer pensioners to receive free personal care was more than £60 million in 2001-02; it is now approaching £90 million in the course of the current spending review period. Funding to help poorer pensioners to meet their care home costs has increased from a total of £283 million in 2001-02 to some £457 million in the course of the current year. All those funding streams ought to be taken into account in assessing costs and spending, but that is what we will do in completing our evaluation. At the meeting of the health and community care ministerial steering group on joint working, which I chaired on Monday 11 September, representatives from COSLA and the NHS agreed that work to develop outcomes for jointly delivered services should be taken forward. That work will ensure that partnerships have a clearer focus on the kinds of outcomes that will meet the needs of the people who access their services. For example, when a local authority and an NHS board are working together to deliver a package of personal and nursing care, we will have an opportunity to examine how they are held to account for the delivery of those services and whether improvements can be made to ensure consistency in delivery.  One area in which we are keen to ensure that consistency of delivery is assistance with preparation of food, to which several members referred. I remind John Swinney that the letter that we sent to the committee in May made it clear that we expect local authorities to provide without charge assistance with such tasks. Simple tasks associated with the preparation of food should be provided without charge where there is an assessed need, but all such provision should be made on the basis of an assessed need. However, given the clear variety in the understanding of the matter, we will certainly address that issue in our review.

At the beginning of paragraph 6, the note states: "services are to be provided following assessment of the needs of the persons concerned ... there is no question of automatic entitlement to a free service" as entitlement should be on the basis of assessed need. That is precisely the point that I just made. However, as part of the review that we are conducting, we will examine the issue and, if there is a need to provide local authorities with yet further clarification, we will provide that in due course. Among the other issues that have been mentioned during the debate, I want to say at least something about the issue of the regulation of care by the care commission. Several members raised concerns about the policy of full cost recovery. It is important to note that, in relation to the care of elderly people, that position has already been achieved and put in place. On the basis of an accurate knowledge of the cost of regulation, we were able to reduce fees for the care home sector to £148 per place in the current year. We were able to do that because we had an accurate assessment. Where we take a policy view that we ought to take a different approach, we will do so by the explicit provision of a quantifiable subsidy to meet the quantified cost of regulation. In setting fees for 2007-08, as well as consulting on the care commission's costs, we will consult on reducing the frequency of inspections for a number of services so that the commission can focus properly on the services and providers that require the greatest improvement. We will also consult on whether the care commission could reduce the frequency of inspections when it believes that that could be done without jeopardising the interests of service users. Another continuing debate on the work of the care commission concerns the sharing of  information; several members highlighted that issue. Clearly, we will continue to encourage the care commission and others who are involved in the monitoring of services to ensure that they are not duplicating activity. Briefly, in response both to the committee's recommendations and to the important points that have been made this afternoon, we will shortly go out to consultation on guidelines on direct payments to encourage local authorities to work towards increasing the take-up of such payments in line with national policy. We welcome the post-legislative scrutiny of all these areas. That work—and, no doubt, the debate—will continue. Above all, we will carry on delivering these services on the basis of our on-going review of such matters.

I very much welcome this debate and the Health Committee's initiative in conducting the first major post-legislative review by a Scottish parliamentary committee of legislation of such size and scope. The committee's inquiry has highlighted that it is not enough for us in Parliament simply to pass legislation and then to regard it as a job done: the legislation is the start of the job, not its completion. That is why, as Janis Hughes mentioned, the Executive is also undertaking its own review of  implementation of the free personal care policy; indeed, it is the norm for the Executive to conduct a post-legislative review a number of years after the coming into force of new legislation. Such reviews not only check whether or not legislation is achieving its original purpose, but allow us to consider possible improvements, including to implementation.

I am certainly happy to confirm that we will look at that matter; indeed, we are already doing so in order to establish whether the figure that was set a number of years ago was the appropriate figure at that time and, on the basis of that finding, to ascertain whether change is required now. That is certainly a part of the review that we are undertaking. I will come to one or two related points in a moment. As Janis Hughes said, the Health Committee's report covers three areas. I will start, as Mike Rumbles has encouraged me to do, with free personal care. Before the free personal care policy was introduced, many older people were already receiving such care free of charge. For example, a person who required nursing care at home would receive that care without charge, and an older person who lived in a care home was not expected to pay either for personal care or for nursing care if he or she could not afford to. An older person who received personal care at home, such as help with dressing or bathing, received it without charge if he or she could not afford to pay for the service. Funding was already being made available to local authorities for those elements of care, amounting to more than £60 million of provision through grant-aided expenditure in 2001-02, the final year before the new legislation came into force. In response to the public comment that has been made about funding levels, it is important to recognise both that that funding has remained in place, and that it has continued to increase year on year in line with the general increases in funding for older people's services. It represents approximately £90 million in the current financial year, in addition to the money that has been labelled, under the line for free personal care, for pensioners who are relatively recent recipients of the service. The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 did not change the nature of the services that were already available to older people—it extended the free personal care that was  previously available to poorer pensioners at home or in care homes to all those over the age of 65. Free personal and nursing care was the agreed outcome of that policy decision, and it had wide cross-party support. Contrary to some fears at the time, the evidence—which has already been referred to from the committee's perspective by its deputy convener—is that the policy remains affordable. We have provided generous additional funds to reflect the additional pensioners who qualify for free personal care, which amounts to about £162 million this year, to top up the pre-existing and continuing funding of about £90 million, to which I have already referred. That fully meets the bid from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in the 2004 spending review. In short, the policy is fully funded.

The formula for distribution among local authorities is a matter in which local authorities themselves have an interest. We deal with them as partners in that regard. I give way to Mr Swinney. I am sorry—I was going to take an intervention that was not even being made. That is a generosity that I might not repeat. I see that it is Ms Robison who wishes to intervene.

The review is under way and we look to come to conclusions in the course of the current calendar year. We do not ring fence or hypothecate the money that goes to local authorities for locally delivered services, whether free personal care, community care or older people services more generally. It is for councils to allocate the funds that they receive in the way that best meets local needs—provided, of course, that they meet their statutory obligations. However, if they decide not to spend all the money that GAE indicates is available for older people services and community care services, they must be able to justify such decisions.

We will be happy to discuss distribution issues with local government, through COSLA, in the usual way. However, on the adequacy of resources, it is worth noting that the funding that local authorities have for delivery of the services is not confined to the £162 million this year that is labelled under the free personal care line, because local authorities will have already have been funded to provide services to approximately one third of people who were in receipt of personal care prior to the passing of the act in 2002. I am glad to hear from those who have spoken so far that the Health Committee agrees that the policy has been successful and I am glad that all parties still welcome it. Although there are implementation issues, which we will debate this afternoon, it is worth reiterating that some 50,000 people benefit from the policy, 40,000 of whom are living at home and receiving personal care without charge, and more than 9,000 of whom are receiving payments for costs in care homes. We acknowledge that there are implementation issues, which we intend to address as part of the review. We intend to consider how we will be able to deliver long-term sustainability.

It sounds as if David Davidson has already delivered his speech. We are keen to ensure that local authorities understand and implement the policy consistently throughout Scotland. In reviewing the implementation of the policy, we are reviewing the way in which local authorities understand and carry out their obligations. That work will continue.

That reflects the question that Mr Rumbles asked about inflation proofing or changing the level of fees that are made available. The review will consider those issues. As a result of the Health Committee's inquiry, earlier this year I asked my officials to look at some of the issues in respect of numbers. When we make public the results of the review, we will make public a fuller understanding of the figures, including the funding figures. The care commission has been mentioned. We are pleased to see increasing work being done by the care commission with regard to sharing information with other public agencies. We believe that the scrutiny review that is currently under way will build on that. Janis Hughes raised an important point about costs. It remains our view that it is right that the costs of a regulatory system should be open and transparent. Fees for regulation are as legitimate a business cost as other costs are. However, as Janis Hughes said, we have chosen to subsidise costs where we have made a policy decision and there is a sound policy reason to do so.

We believe that it is right that the costs of regulation should be open and transparent. That means that it is right that those  who are regulated should be charged the cost of that regulation. However, I accept that there might be a case for subsidy—we have followed that up in relation to early years services—but it should be subsidy on the basis of an assessed and quantified regulatory cost. That is a better solution than simply not putting charges in place. Janis Hughes also mentioned direct payments. The Executive accepts that more can be done to promote direct payments. That will require effective partnership working among local authorities, health boards, support organisations and users. It is important to stress that direct payments are not an all-or-nothing provision and that they can be combined with receipt of other services in other ways. I am glad that we have the opportunity to debate these matters—detailed scrutiny of such important areas is constructive. I look forward to hearing the remainder of the debate and to responding later to other points that will be made.

The Scottish Executive places the highest importance on maintaining nutrition and hygiene standards in care homes. The national care standards for care homes specifically address the issues of nutrition, hygiene and infection control and are taken into account in the inspection and regulation of care homes by the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care.

I completely accept the important points that Irene Oldfather makes. I am pleased to report that in recent months the care commission has worked in collaboration with NHS Education for Scotland to assist providers to understand their obligations in relation to care homes. Work has also been done with the Royal College of Nursing, which has a number of members working in the sector. Further such work is planned with providers. I accept Irene Oldfather's point that it is important that residents and their families are aware of these matters and I will consider carefully whether there is anything that we ought to be doing, or encouraging the care commission to do, in that regard. The national care standards require that providers have a staff development strategy and effective annual training in place for all staff, which is the right way to proceed in that area.

Mr Swinburne will be aware that the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 does not relate to that directly, but the provisions of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 on personal and nursing care do. The 2002 act makes it clear that the hotel costs that residents face are legitimate. However, one of the things that any family will want to consider before making a decision about placement in a care home is the fees regime that is in place.

We recognise the additional anxieties and difficulties that are faced by people with serious illnesses such as cancer, and we take seriously the points that the report has made. We have circulated guidance to national health service boards to ensure that patients are made aware of the two existing national schemes that allow for the reimbursement of travelling expenses for patients who are attending hospital for treatment and of escort expenses, where an escort is medically necessary. In 2004, we issued revised guidance to NHS boards that made it clear that they should make available sufficient car parking spaces and concessionary rates for patients who attend hospital regularly, for example for dialysis or radiotherapy.

In addition to the statutory position under those schemes, boards currently have discretion to consider on a case-by-case basis whether a patient should receive further reimbursement or travelling expenses. That is the right approach. It is important that boards are aware, and make patients aware, of the support that can be accessed. I am happy to consider any alternative suggestions for promoting the schemes that could improve eligible patients' access to them.

No.

As I said in response to Janis Hughes's question, I am certainly prepared to consider other ways of promoting the schemes. I do not accept Sandra White's point that hospitals are blatantly ignoring the guidance. I have no evidence that they are doing so. If such evidence exists, I want to know about it. [ Interruption. ] I hear members making additional suggestions from sedentary positions. If those members have anything coherent to say, they should make the appropriate information available to me. We want to ensure that hospitals and health boards throughout the country follow the guidance, but we must also recognise the reality. The ability of patients to park close to large general hospitals in urban areas in particular must be protected, and that is often best done by a charging scheme that will deter fly parkers and those who ought not to be there. However, I would be happy to discuss the matter further, as Cathie Craigie has requested, because we want to ensure that whatever schemes are in place, the interests of patients who require access to hospitals come first.

We work closely with NHS Health Scotland and national health service boards to support a range of activity to promote breastfeeding across Scotland. Some 40 midwives and health visitors have completed United Nations Children's Fund—UNICEF—training in Grampian in the past year and are now key workers in promoting breastfeeding and supporting mothers. Aberdeen maternity hospital and Dr Gray's Hospital in Elgin are working actively to achieve UNICEF baby-friendly status, which includes a range of training and education opportunities for staff and ensures consistent practice and a positive breastfeeding culture.

The overall picture in Scotland is that breastfeeding rates are increasing. We support that trend and will continue to do so.

I would be interested to hear how Mr Neil believes that the Kerr report should be applied in relation to emergency services in Lanarkshire.

At the heart of the debate is the critical question of what members believed that the Parliament voted for when it supported "Delivering for Health". Shona Robison said that the SNP supports the principles of the Kerr report, but the Kerr report is very clear about the fact that the way in which unscheduled care is currently delivered is unsustainable without reform. To maintain local services, we must "develop ... community casualty units ... staffed by multidisciplinary teams to provide much of our urgent care needs 24 hours a day" and create new centralised specialised emergency services.

I am glad that Shona Robison has seen the operation of the separation of scheduled and unscheduled care at Monklands hospital. We want to build on the effectiveness of that separation and take it forward. Indeed, the  Kerr report states that, for the delivery of emergency care, "A potentially generalisable model already exists in NHS Grampian", where Aberdeen royal infirmary is linked to local hospitals but provides focused A and E services for some 500,000 people. The Kerr report does not support the SNP position that such changes are okay in theory but that Lanarkshire does not need to change the way in which it provides emergency services.

I understand the point that Cathie Craigie makes, which was also made by Jean Turner. The commitment that I have given, which I give again today, is that the new services that I have instructed the board to deliver will be in place before there are changes to the provision of A and E services. Clearly, all of that is subject, as it always must be, to issues of clinical safety but, with that proviso, I make that clear commitment, which I have imposed on the board. I give the commitment to Parliament today that we will bring forward the additional primary care investments. We will bring forward the investment to improve capacity at Hairmyres and Wishaw and we will bring forward that £100 million of investment in future provision at Monklands before we get to the point at which the configuration of A and E services at Monklands and the other hospitals is changed. Those are important and clear commitments. We recognise the central significance of deprivation and the clear connections between social and economic deprivation and poor health.

I give way to Mr Swinburne.

Mr Swinburne gives me the opportunity to respond to points that were made in the debate about the financial figures, which are  an important issue. I am satisfied that the financial issues have been properly addressed in the process and I am satisfied that the sums add up.

It is fundamentally wrong to say that the changes are driven by cost; they are driven by the interests and needs of patients. I am happy to address the specific concerns that have been raised by local members, but it is critical to recognise that the purpose of the proposals, which ministers have endorsed with additional requirements, is to improve the quality of patient care. That alone is the driver of the changes and that alone was the deciding consideration for ministers' approval of the proposals.

I am afraid that time does not allow me to accept a further intervention.

I am happy to re-emphasise the point that I made in response to Cathie Craigie's intervention about my commitment to ensure that the services are in place to deliver the quality of care that people in Lanarkshire are entitled to expect and that these proposals, with our additional requirements, will deliver for the people of Lanarkshire.

The debate is about how to modernise the national health service in Lanarkshire, how best to provide emergency services for patients and the future role of Monklands hospital. Those issues must be  addressed in the context of our national policy for Scotland's NHS, on which, as Shona Robison indicated, members of this Parliament have already had a say. As Shona Robison indicated, the publication of the Kerr report was broadly welcomed in the chamber last year. In October, members supported the Executive's response to that report, "Delivering for Health", by a substantial majority. When we debated "Delivering for Health" there was widespread understanding of and agreement on the key principles on which we needed to base future services. Those include the need to shift the balance of care, so that we rely less on acute hospitals and provide more local services geared towards the management of long term conditions; the need to tackle health inequalities by anticipating and preventing problems, rather than waiting until a person is seriously ill; the need to streamline emergency care and provide the majority of such care in community casualty units while developing more specialised A and E departments that can concentrate on the most serious cases; and the need to separate planned from emergency care so that we can make the best use of facilities, cut down on cancellations and reduce waiting times for patients even further.

I will give way to Mr Gorrie.

I understand that Elaine Smith, whose constituency is in the area, has asked the Auditor General to consider the matter. His response is of course a matter for him, but if he chooses to take up her invitation all appropriate figures will be made available to him. The answer to Mr Gorrie's second point, on transport, is yes; we will ensure transport provision.

I will resist the temptation. No doubt Mr Stevenson will attend Mike Rumbles's members' business debate on maternity services in Aberdeenshire next week, when he will have another opportunity to ask me about the matter. In this debate we are discussing acute services—[ Interruption. ] We are discussing acute services in Lanarkshire, as Mr Stevenson and Mr Swinney know. It is clear that, throughout Scotland, NHS boards must embed the principles of "Delivering for Health" in the design and delivery of local services. As happens when there is any significant change in the way in which public services are delivered, we recognise that turning those principles into reality will involve hard choices that will sometimes be difficult for communities to accept. That is why I wanted to see for myself what was happening in Lanarkshire, so that I could understand the issues and choices.

I assure Cathie Craigie that I did not ignore those people's views—far from it. As I will explain, I have attempted to strengthen the proposals that relate to those parts of Lanarkshire, to ensure that people's concerns are fully reflected as we go forward. When I visited hospitals in Lanarkshire in June, what struck me most was the poor quality of primary care in North Lanarkshire, which meant that many people were bypassing primary care and presenting directly to hospital A and E departments. People often presented to A and E very late in the development of a long-term condition, although their conditions would have been far better managed through early intervention by their general practitioners. Like Mr Stevenson and other members, I use health services in NHS Grampian. On close examination of the services in Lanarkshire it was clear to me that there were areas in which significant improvement and modernisation was required. The test that I applied to NHS Lanarkshire's proposals was whether they would deliver the improvement and modernisation that is needed. I am conscious of NHS Lanarkshire's commitment to use the proposals in its document, "A Picture of Health", as the basis for a better  quality health service than Lanarkshire has ever had before. I will hold the health board accountable for that commitment.

Far from ignoring the views that were expressed at those meetings and elsewhere, I have taken those views into account in my response to the board's proposal. I have imposed a number of additional requirements that NHS Lanarkshire must put in place before it makes any change to A and E provision at Monklands hospital and elsewhere. First, the necessary investments in primary care must be brought forward. I made it clear to the board that I expect early progress on new primary care premises, in Airdrie and in Coatbridge in particular. I am pleased to report that initial agreement on Airdrie resource centre has been reached, which is a necessary first step. We have brought forward capital funding to facilitate such developments. I also made it clear that I expect the board to focus on reducing avoidable A and E admissions in the most deprived communities of North Lanarkshire, as part of the prevention 2010 initiative. I agreed to the early deployment of 43 additional paramedics and ambulance technicians by the Scottish Ambulance Service in Lanarkshire. I also required the provision of a shuttle bus service between the three Lanarkshire hospitals. I made it clear to the board that necessary additional capacity at Hairmyres hospital and Wishaw general hospital, which Shona Robison mentioned, must be in place before any changes are made to the service at Monklands hospital and that the community casualty unit at Monklands should operate 24/7. I also required that community casualty units should be in place in Cumbernauld and Lanark. I also set expectations for regional planning by NHS Lanarkshire and other health boards in the west of Scotland. Finally, in order to make crystal clear my expectation that Monklands hospital will continue to provide a full range of appropriate services as an integral part of NHS Lanarkshire, I announced that up to £100 million would be provided in the NHS Scotland capital programme, for the regeneration of Monklands hospital. That programme of action requires NHS Lanarkshire to deliver measures to ensure that necessary improvements are in place before changes are made to A and E provision. The  programme guarantees the future of Monklands hospital and provides the step change in improved health care that the people of Lanarkshire need and deserve. I move amendment S2M-4784.2, to leave out from "does" to end and insert: "reaffirms its support for Delivering for Health as the basis for service change in NHS Scotland; commends its commitment to shifting the balance of care to provide more safe and sustainable local services including the separation of scheduled and unscheduled care; notes the commitment of local communities to their health services and natural concerns when long-established services are changed, and remains committed to an NHS Scotland which responds to changes in the demands placed upon it."

In the year to 31 March 2006, one dental practice in Fife ended the NHS registration of more than 2,500 patients and a further four practices deregistered between 100 and 1,000 patients.

I am happy to acknowledge practices such as Templehall that have expanded their NHS lists and improved their premises with support from the Scottish dental access initiative. That is good use of public money that enables patients to improve their access to NHS services. If we are to achieve access for as many people as possible, we need independent high street dentists such as Templehall that are prepared to grow their NHS lists, and we need a salaried service such as the one to which Marilyn Livingstone referred, which is being provided at a number of places in her constituency and across Fife.

All local authorities must provide personal and nursing care without charge where that care is assessed as necessary to meet the needs of people over 65. We are working with councils in the Highlands and across Scotland to secure full implementation of this policy.

I do not accept the premise of Mr McGrigor's question. I reiterate my first point: we are working with councils in the Highlands and across Scotland to secure full implementation of this policy. Responsibility for delivering detailed implementation on the ground clearly lies with local authorities. In many cases, local authorities deliver services by working in partnership with local health boards. Across the Highlands and Islands, I look to that partnership to continue to work to address the issues. The figures that Mr McGrigor quoted for the elderly people who are waiting for various services to be provided under the community care budget are snapshot figures. They are from February and relate to different services, some of which take time to put in place and others of which should be delivered promptly. Mr McGrigor simplifies the  issue, but there is a degree of complexity to the way in which services are best delivered. We are working on the ground with councils to address those complicated issues and to ensure full implementation of the policy.

I am, of course, very aware of Jackie Baillie's continuing interest in these matters. Indeed, I met the leader, the chief executive and other senior councillors and officials of Argyll and Bute Council last week to ascertain whether there are any particular reasons for some of the evident difficulties the council has had delivering the services that it is obliged to deliver. I am pleased to say that the council responded to me this week. It has made it clear that it will make additional funding available. I will seek to assure myself that the money is indeed additional and that it will be put to the uses that I discussed at the meeting last week. I expect to see the joint improvement team's continued involvement in the Argyll area. The members of that team are already working with Argyll and Bute Council and NHS Highland. I also expect new engagement by the Social Work Inspection Agency, to ensure that these services are secured and delivered as they ought to be.

The Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service works in collaboration with the Anthony Nolan Trust to recruit bone marrow donors. Blood donors are encouraged to become bone marrow donors and information is available on the service's website.

I am happy to discuss those matters with Kate Maclean. I assure her that we make every effort, through the SNBTS, to encourage those who arrive at sites to donate blood to consider becoming bone marrow donors. That is appropriate and we will continue to do that. However, if initiatives or innovative ways to attract donors are in place south of the border, we would be happy to learn from that experience.

I begin by congratulating Margaret Smith on securing this debate on a matter of such obvious local interest. I also acknowledge the positive contributions that other members have made. I am aware of the extensive discussions between NHS Lothian and local elected representatives on the board's plans for the Royal Victoria hospital site. I expect that approach to continue. As has been said, the context is set by the Kerr report and our response to it, "Delivering for Health". Our approach of setting a national framework for service change throughout the NHS over the next 20 years has attracted broad support. We expect any proposal for change in the provision of services that NHS boards develop to be in line with the principles that underlie the Kerr report and "Delivering for Health". Those are that services should be delivered as locally as possible and should be as specialised as necessary; that sustainable and safe local services should be delivered; and that, where possible, those with long-term conditions should have their conditions managed at home or in the community.  Our aim is to ensure that health services for older people are delivered in ways that improve the lives of older people throughout Scotland, including the Lothians. As has been mentioned, the proportion of older people in the population will continue to increase in the coming 25 years. The proportion of those who are over 65 will increase to one person in four and the proportion of those who are over 80 will increase to one person in 12. Despite the continuing improvements in health care, older people are more likely to have a long-term illness or a combination of such illnesses; to be admitted to hospital; and to stay there following admission. Those demographic changes mean that we must change the way in which health services are provided. Compared with the past, we are now better at preventing people from becoming unwell, we can treat them faster and better and we can treat more people in their homes or closer to their homes rather than in hospitals. The document "Improving Care, Investing in Change 2004", which has been mentioned, was the subject of a rigorous consultation process by NHS Lothian. The major service changes that were proposed affected older people's services, acute services and mental health services throughout the area. I have listened with interest to the broad support for the plans to relocate the majority of geriatric in-patient beds from the Royal Victoria site to a modern, fit-for-purpose facility at the Western general hospital, which has the added advantage of reducing the need for patients to travel between sites for diagnostic tests. It is important that NHS Lothian and other boards should provide the best possible care for elderly people, in accommodation that is fit for purpose, whether in Edinburgh, Musselburgh or elsewhere. NHS Lothian acknowledges the difficulties to which Susan Deacon referred and is doing its best to resolve them as quickly as possible. Since Andy Kerr approved NHS Lothian's proposals, further planning work has been undertaken on the reprovision and relocation of the various services that are based at the Royal Victoria hospital. Preliminary discussions have been held with a range of interested people, including local elected representatives. Members will be interested to know that a programme of structured meetings with groups and representatives from a wide range of stakeholders groups is being planned and will take place in the coming two months. Among the groups that will be contacted in the first tranche of consultation are the Pilton Elderly Project and the Almond Mains Initiative, both of which have been mentioned. I have no doubt that the Queensferry Churches Care in the Community Project will also be consulted, along with similar groups. When their views have been canvassed, more detailed  site and service planning will be undertaken and a business case will be prepared for consideration by the board early next year. It is acknowledged that the hospital is no longer fit for its current purpose and is inappropriate for the range of services that are required for the care of the elderly in the 21 st century. It has been said, correctly, that the board intends to use the capital receipts that it acquires from the outcome of its determinations to invest in patient services throughout Lothian. The board has given an assurance that, when the planning work to identify possible options begins, consideration will be given to the future provision of services for older people. Margaret Smith and other members have mentioned some of the options that have been considered, which include the development of a care home, jointly with the City of Edinburgh Council; an older people's resource centre to integrate social day care and day hospital provision; and a housing with care project for older people, perhaps provided by a voluntary organisation or a housing association with expertise in the matter. A further option is the development of affordable housing for key workers such as essential NHS staff.  The board is clearly considering a range of options. Mention has also been made of the measures relating to car parking at and travel to the Western general, which will be helpful. I hope that members will agree that the board's continuing engagement with them and with others in the community will allow proper consideration to be given to all those options, so that the board can make a decision about the proposals that it wishes to develop to provide a solid basis for meeting long-term elderly care needs in this part of Scotland.  Meeting closed at 16:55.

We provide core funding to NHS boards, which includes support for health promotion and health improvement initiatives, and their health improvement targets are scrutinised as part of the boards' annual reviews. Funding for community health projects is made available by NHS boards, along with local authorities and other partners, in the context of community joint health improvement plans, allowing local community partnerships to agree on local priorities and on the delivery of appropriate services.

I do not recognise Mr Ballard's description of a national crisis, but I do recognise that it is appropriate for local authorities, local health boards and other local partners to make decisions about priorities, about where they make investment and about where that investment can make the greatest difference. If Mr Ballard takes a different view from that taken by the organisations that are responsible for those decisions in his community, it is to those organisations that he should make his views known.

I am aware of the good work that is done in Castlemilk in promoting better health in the community. Mr Gordon has taken the right course in raising his views with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, and I encourage him to continue to do that. All health boards have to make decisions on the basis of the evidence that is before them, and I would expect them to take into account evidence of a successful and effective project.

I do not accept the characterisation of crisis put forward by Mr Sheridan and Mr Ballard, although I recognise that there are issues to be addressed. As Charlie  Gordon has said, some community health projects have made an enormous difference over the years and will no doubt make their bids for future funding on that basis. It is right that those decisions are taken at local level. That is the nature of the arrangements that we have in place, and I think that that is the right way for such decisions to be made.

I congratulate Cathy Peattie on promoting the debate, which comes at an important time for more than 660,000 unpaid carers in Scotland. It is  appropriate that the debate is held during national carers week. In many ways, addressing the needs of unpaid carers goes to the heart of health and social policy and relates to inclusion, equality of opportunity, reducing health inequalities and supporting the most vulnerable people in communities. Our approach is not to take the view that all the issues can be resolved overnight, but to work with carers and their representative organisations to identify priorities and take actions to address them. Representative organisations such as Carers Scotland and many others worked closely with my officials in preparing the care 21 report "The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland", which I was delighted to help launch in Inverness last year and to respond to here in the Parliament on 24 April. We have maintained a focus on these issues with the reception hosted by John Swinney, the petition about which we have heard and this debate this evening. The care 21 report is at the heart of what we want to do and what carers want to be done in this area. It emerged from a wide-ranging study that the Executive commissioned of present and future needs. It was the largest study of its kind in the UK and found that Scotland leads the UK in its support for carers but highlighted some of the gaps that exist and further actions that will be required. In the report, there are 22 recommendations for action, some of which are for the statutory or voluntary sector agencies involved, some of which are for the UK Government and some of which are for the Executive. I will say one or two words about the ones for the UK Government, given the motion's focus on employment issues. One of the recommendations in the report was that the United Kingdom Government should undertake a national campaign to advise employers of the benefits to them of supporting carers and highlighting the rights and responsibilities of employers to carers. I forwarded that recommendation and other recommendations that were directed to the UK Government to colleagues at Westminster who hold relevant portfolios. In my response in April, I was pleased to be able to welcome the UK Government's proposals in the Work and Families Bill to give adult carers the right to request flexible working arrangements and to be able to acknowledge the work of Carers UK, Carers Scotland, the Equal Opportunities Commission, the European social fund and others to promote good practice among employers through the action for carers and employment project. There are good examples across the private and public sectors of employers giving a  lead in these areas. Indeed, the Executive seeks to provide support to civil servants and other members of its staff who have caring responsibilities to allow them to balance work and care. We will keep under review the measures that we have in place in the light of the Work and Families Bill and will seek to improve them further. It is not my view that unpaid carers are in some way a substitute for care by the state. That view misunderstands the value of what motivates carers and what it is that those who are cared for want. The question is not how the state can replace unpaid care but, rather, how we can support unpaid carers. The question of carers' rights has been mentioned, as was the idea of a carers charter and the right to respite care. We are happy to consider those areas as policy goes forward, but they are not among the areas that have been identified as being the most immediate priorities. Clearly, there are things that can and should be done in the short term. However, we will keep under review the framework within which support is provided and services are developed. In responding to the care 21 report, in consultation with carers organisations, we identified what we felt were the overall priority areas for immediate action. Strikingly, all of them have been mentioned in the debate this evening. With regard to our support for young carers, respite care, the health of carers and carer training, we have sought to work with carers organisations to develop proposals that can be put into place. On carer health and improving access to flexible respite services, we have brought forward proposals that are intended better to balance caring with paid employment. However, we recognise that improvement will come from wider developments in those fields. We have issued a carer information strategy—we did that at the same time as we responded to care 21. We have also enhanced incentives for general practitioners to register carers with named carer-liaison staff, which will make a significant difference. Further, we have highlighted the interest of carers in the self-assessment tool that we are preparing to help community health partnerships in their work in managing long-term conditions. Carer information strategies will ensure that carers are identified early on in their carer roles. Given that most carers present themselves in health settings before they present themselves in social work settings, I hope that that will help to address the issue that Cathy Peattie raised about carers being unknown to social work services and will help to get the recognition that a number of members highlighted as being important. Indeed, the single shared assessment, which is the gateway to accessing services quickly and  efficiently, is something that we look to the national health service and social work departments to work together to deliver as efficiently as possible. Maureen Macmillan and others asked about resources. Clearly, that is a critical question. We will certainly look to the work on respite, young carers and other areas that we are doing jointly with carers organisations to provide us with information in advance of the forthcoming spending review so that we can scope the resources that might be required to improve the position of carers. Critically, we will do all that work in partnership with carers organisations, recognising both their effectiveness in representing carers and their importance in providing practical support to carers. They can give us in government a clear sense of the priorities for those who provide such valuable care. The role of carers will only become more important in future years. Long-term challenges will demand long-term solutions. I finish by saying simply that we in government—along with, I am sure, members and carers organisations—are in this for the long term.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

I, too, congratulate Cathie Craigie on bringing her motion  to the Parliament for debate. I echo what has just been said about the clear consensus on the importance of the issues that have been highlighted and the importance of responding to them. Everyone who spoke in the debate recognised that it is important to ensure that people who have inherited muscular disorders have the best possible quality of life in living with them. I acknowledge the central role that carers play in achieving that aim. I also acknowledge the Muscular Dystrophy Campaign's work to raise awareness of people's needs, particularly through its current my life campaign. Neuromuscular disorders are inherited as single gene disorders and the genetic defects that are responsible for the more common conditions have been identified. Through the Scottish molecular genetics consortium and local genetic counselling services, families have access to the molecular genetic testing that they need. We have been conducting a review of genetic services and looking at improving access to highly specialised expertise. The review is looking at supplementing the support that is provided by voluntary organisations, especially by providing user-friendly information and resources such as family care advisers to support those who live with the conditions. A number of members, including Michael McMahon and Stewart Stevenson, talked about the opportunities for research. We recognise those, and the chief scientific officer in my department would certainly be willing to consider any soundly based request for funding for research into muscular dystrophy. As with any research, proposals would be subject to peer and committee review before they proceeded, but I encourage anyone who has such soundly based proposals to submit them for consideration in the usual way. Members will be aware that, a few months ago, we set out in "Delivering for Health" our approach to long-term conditions. We stated that people with long-term conditions should be recognised as equal partners in managing their condition and that the services they need should be provided as locally as possible and should respond to the totality of their needs. That means, among other things, that people with complex and frequently changing needs should have a key person who actively manages and co-ordinates all their needs. People with muscular dystrophy will be among those who will benefit from that approach. We already have in place the Scottish muscle network, which was set up some seven years ago and recognised as a national managed clinical network in April 2004. On that basis, it receives NHS funding. The network draws together  professionals from health, social work and education and seeks to integrate services. Such integration is a key point that has been mentioned by several members this evening. The network also ensures that there is a consistent quality of service throughout Scotland. Cathie Craigie and others mentioned the importance of assessment. It is worth emphasising that anyone who has needs that arise from a neuromuscular disorder—or anyone acting on their behalf—can seek an holistic assessment of their needs that will include consideration of the suitability of their home environment. The assessment will be done by a health or local authority professional and recommendations will be provided to housing officers if adjustments to the person's living environment are required. That assessment is clearly an important stage in dealing with neuromuscular conditions. As has been said, we need co-ordination between local authorities and NHS boards. The importance of joining up services so that they are delivered coherently is the message of "Delivering for Health", but it is also reflected in our review of social work services and in the creation of community health and care partnerships. Anyone who needs a community care service has the right to have their needs assessed. I am pleased that Cathie Craigie's local authority area, North Lanarkshire, is in some respects leading the way in those assessments, particularly with the sharing of information between agencies and with lead assessors having direct access to other agencies' services. That joint futures approach is one that we want to develop further in the future.

I am happy to go and say hello to Cathie Craigie's constituents, as she suggests, and to ensure that the views that have been derived from that work are fed into the Health Department's consideration of how to progress. The single biggest concern about equipment that has been raised tonight involves wheelchairs. Members will be interested to know that the report that we commissioned some time ago on the NHS wheelchair service will become public in the next 24 hours, according to the existing timetable. Like  many members who have spoken, I recognise how needs have changed and that more sophisticated wheelchairs can assist people in a way that they could not do previously. On the basis of the changes in the environment in which decisions are taken, we commissioned NHS Quality Improvement Scotland to undertake an independent review of the service and to make recommendations on how the service might be improved. The report is independent and I cannot prejudge its detail, but I assure members that I will consider carefully the recommendations that NHS QIS makes on the basis of its assessment of the service. We have established a guidance review group to provide a pathway through the guidance for people who use equipment and adaptations and an advisory group to progress the recommendations from "Equipped for Inclusion: Report of the Strategy Forum: Equipment and Adaptations". The advisory group's purpose is to break down unnecessary barriers to service users. We have provided funding to reduce waiting lists and to support improvements in the delivery of equipment and adaptations. In the latest financial year, we have provided additional resources to support improvements. Together, local authorities and NHS partnerships are using that funding in a variety of ways in relation to wheelchairs, access to housing and joint delivery initiatives.

I am not familiar with that point, but I am happy to examine the evidence for Mr Ewing's statement. If he is prepared to write to me about that, I will respond as fully as I can. I emphasise that the Government recognises the points that have been made about the need to join up local authority and NHS services in support of people with neuromuscular disorders, to support the work that is being done on the identification of genetic causes and to deliver services as closely to people's homes as possible and in a way that meets their needs. We are particularly conscious of younger people's needs, which members will find are covered in the wheelchair service review report when they see it.  Meeting closed at 17:49.

Waiting times fell between June and November last year in nine of the 12 areas for which figures are available. We continue to work with all national health service boards to reduce those waiting times further.

I agree that the length of time that Mike Pringle describes is not acceptable. I understand that during the past 12 months in Lothian, the period during which new patients have been required to wait for assessment and then for a fitting has fallen by nearly half. It is clear that progress remains to be made in that regard and I expect audiology departments throughout Scotland to continue to work towards meeting the rigorous targets that we set in relation to the fitting of digital hearing aids for patients, wherever they are in Scotland.

If health boards are struggling to make the changes that are required to put services in place it is appropriate that they seek support from elsewhere. I believe that in the  former NHS Argyll and Clyde area progress has been made in recent weeks, but there is more to be made. The key for many boards is to put in place trained staff, particularly audiologists, and the necessary equipment and facilities. I understand that quite a lot of the money that was provided is being used for those purposes. The money does not deliver everything immediately, but we want early delivery. As short-term measures, a number of boards have brought in private sector providers to assist them or made other temporary arrangements to help to reduce waiting times. We expect all boards to consider such measures if they are appropriate and will help them to achieve short-term targets. In the long term, boards must put in place the facilities and staff that are key to meeting the targets.

I hope that it does not. I also hope that the term "postcode lottery" does not become a code for saying that local health board discretion is suddenly a bad thing, because it is a good thing. Boards have specific challenges to meet in their areas and we expect them to meet those challenges. We also expect the good example that some boards have set in pushing down waiting times, in some cases to half of what they were a year ago, to be followed by others. We have provided funding for degree courses for audiologists—a four-year course for new students who start from first year and a two-year conversion course for students who have already completed a bachelor of science course. That will bring new audiologists on stream. The first students will complete the conversion course in the summer of next year and newly trained students will become available two years after that. That provision will make a significant difference over that timescale. In the meantime, we expect boards to learn from one another and to work with Executive officials to ensure that waiting times are driven down as fast as possible.

We have done so. We have asked boards to ensure that the waiting time is reduced to 26 weeks—that is the target that is in  place and we want boards to make progress toward achieving it. Some are already doing well but, as I said, others have some way to go. We want to ensure that they work toward those outcomes in a co-ordinated way. However, we realise that, to do that, boards need trained staff, which is why we have made provision for the degree courses that I described.

The issue is for Highland Council, but it has kept my officials informed about the progress of the tender exercise. The council believes that it can make significant savings by tendering a number of care home places to the independent sector and intends to use any savings for the delivery of home care services in its area.

I am grateful to Mr Ewing for the advance notice of his supplementary question. Arriving at a specification and the tendering processes that follow from that are always complex matters. It is for Highland Council to determine how it does that—that is the discretion that we give local authorities. The council assures me that, in preparing for that, it has followed  Treasury green book methodology and Executive guidance on value for money. Nonetheless, more significantly in respect of Mr Ewing's question, the council, rather than wait for the routine audit of its plans and expenditure, has asked Audit Scotland to monitor the tendering process as it happens. That may well meet Mr Ewing's request.

The Executive allocates more than £23 million annually to NHS boards for the provision of drug treatment and rehabilitation services, including those for young people. Drug action teams and their local partners should assess the level of need in their area in order to ensure that drug treatment and rehabilitation services meet local needs, and NHS boards should take their advice in deciding how best to provide those services.

I agree that there are good models in the Fife drug action team's work that focuses on families and young people. Such work will certainly help to support those people and their wider families in dealing with addiction and preventing addictions becoming lifelong. It is clear that good work is also being done in the safer neighbourhood teams to encourage young people to access services, which is to be welcomed. We want such models to continue to develop.

I am aware of issues that have arisen in the Grampian area, as I am sure are other members. Difficult issues relating to treatment and rehabilitation and the levels of addiction and drug misuse in communities are involved and it is clear that we must tackle both ends of the spectrum. The treatment of and support for those who misuse drugs must be improved, but we also need to continue to support the action that has been taken to reduce the supply of drugs and the number of young people throughout Scotland who become involved in such damaging practice.

Duncan McNeil makes an important point. It is important to put in place treatment services, but they will not by themselves tackle all the issues that arise. I am certainly prepared to consider such matters in the way that Duncan McNeil has suggested and will respond further to him in due course.

Our work on smoking, diet and exercise will all help to reduce the risk of people developing osteoporosis. Our work on falls prevention will also help prevent people with osteoporosis from experiencing further fractures. Early diagnosis is very important, and we encourage NHS boards to ensure ready access to DEXA—dual energy x-ray absorptiometry—scanning. Boards should also ensure there is local implementation of the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network's guideline on the management of osteoporosis.

I would certainly be happy to have a discussion with Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board on that matter. Clearly, the board is responsible for delivering those services and that support. As Stewart Maxwell acknowledges, the board has led the way in the provision of a DEXA scanner in the west of Scotland. That encourages me to believe that it will want to extend that service more widely.

John Scott is right to say that we have a growing problem that must be faced. We have an aging population and we have to address such problems when people are at an early age. Good work is already going on under the Scottish diet action plan, an aspect of which is the encouragement and promotion of calcium intake. That is clearly very important for young people, but also for more mature people.  "Delivering for Health" sets out the importance of early preventive interventions before conditions develop. We will continue to work on that.

I, too, congratulate Adam Ingram on securing this important debate. I also commend him for completing his speech despite the little local difficulty that he encountered along the way. Adam Ingram and other members have raised some important issues, and it is important that people understand how those issues are being addressed. Care and support for those with both sensory loss and mental ill health are founded on the principle of inclusion, as we seek to secure barrier-free access to services for all. Where deaf and deafblind people and others with a sensory loss have mental health issues, they clearly have particular needs that must be addressed. The key to our policy approach is that we do not separate those who have particular needs but aim to ensure that they are given the best possible access to mainstream services. That will not happen overnight, but I am clear that it must happen. I believe that we have made a significant start, not least through the progress that has been made in taking forward the initiative that was set out in "Fair for all" and through our  sensory impairment action plan for community care services. Our research into those issues, which will be published next month, will further inform the development of future policy. The progress that we have made has relied on, and will continue to depend on, input and support from people with sensory impairment and their representative organisations. I thank those organisations for their on-going input, support and commitment to the plan. Let me respond to some particular points. The Loudon and Black report to which Adam Ingram referred is not, as he implied, gathering dust. The report formed part of our early consideration of policy development for change and improvement and informed investment and the direction of policy. The report has also played a part in the formulation of the current guidance. If Adam Ingram believes that other recommendations in the report should be taken further forward, he is welcome to let me know of them and I will seek to respond in the most appropriate way. However, the report has informed our process and I think that in some respects we may have moved on from when the report was produced. One thing that has changed in that time is that the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003 has begun to be implemented. The act has implications for the care of those who face both mental health and sensory loss issues. As a consequence of the implications of the act, we conducted a review last year of all the published material on services and approaches for those with mental ill health and sensory loss. We wanted a pragmatic document that would help to identify the key issues and offer workable solutions.

As I said, we are keen to understand as much of the validated information as we can obtain about the way in which people receive services so that we are able to improve and further develop them. The guidance that we have issued focuses on improved access, better communications, better training and a better  understanding of needs and how services are received. As part of that, we will also promote on-going review. That includes a commitment to undertake a national survey on progress. The survey is well under way and will be completed in the next few weeks and published. We will follow it up as necessary to secure the level of service that will be required. The issue of a specialist mental health service was raised. It is for NHS boards and their local partners to keep all service options under review. I take issue with the proposition that we should remove such discretion from health boards. Ministers do not support that. We believe that it is right for local decisions to be made on how to meet local needs and, year on year, we are providing record resources for NHS boards and local authorities to invest in services that improve access and outcomes. Health spending will reach more than £10 billion next year. In 2004-05, more than £670 million was spent on mental health by health boards or local authorities. It is for partners to set local priorities for that expenditure.

The Scottish Council on Deafness and other representative organisations are part of the on-going work. We expect them to feed any concerns that they have into the review process and consideration of the sensory impairment action plan. Reference was made to the John Denmark unit and concern was expressed about the future of that in-patient service. We were in touch with the Bolton, Salford and Trafford Mental Health NHS Trust in advance of the debate. I understand that there are no plans to withdraw the in-patient services that are available to Scottish patients and that no changes will be made until suitable alternative arrangements have been put in place. The issue of training in sign language was raised. We are keen to take that forward. Significant investment is being made in a graduate diploma in teaching BSL tutors. As part of the sensory impairment action plan, we are funding and working on a basic awareness and communication training package, which will encompass all three areas of in-patient care and is geared towards both social care and health care staff. We believe that all staff who deal with persons with sensory impairment should be able to meet the basic communication needs of those patients in an appropriate way. That is why the package is encompassed in our national training strategy, which we aim to have in place by 2007. One member referred to the good example of  NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, which is planning the development of a multi-agency, multidisciplinary specialist team, with members based in mainstream community mental health teams, who will be trained to BSL stage 3, with special emphasis on mental health. The approach that is being rolled out in Glasgow can be applied profitably elsewhere. A number of significant issues have been raised. A good deal of continuing attention is being given to those issues by Government, the NHS and local partners. We have issued robust guidance and taken specific initiatives to tackle exclusion head on and have put in place a framework for developing better and more responsive services. We recognise that there is still more to do, but future development will be informed both by our national survey of the current situation and by our continuing research. It will also be informed by those who experience these challenges in their daily lives, which is absolutely essential. The service user and the carer must be at the heart of health care and social care policy. I look forward to continuing engagement with deaf and deafblind people and the organisations that represent them as we develop accessible mainstream services over the months and years ahead.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

It is for individual local authorities to determine their community care needs and to secure an appropriate range of services. The Executive's joint improvement team is helping Argyll and Bute Council and NHS Highland to develop their strategic governance and local management arrangements. That work has been undertaken in response to a request for practical support from the Argyll and Bute partnership and is promoting more effective local delivery of joint services, which will ultimately benefit the people who use them.

The joint improvement team's work is being done because all concerned recognise that there is significant room for improvement. I expect the outcome of that work to be an improvement in the services that are delivered. If such improvement does not transpire, I will be minded to ask the Social Work Inspection Agency to conduct an inspection, scrutinise the processes that are being followed and ensure that provision improves so that the needs of older people are met as they should be met. However, I hope that the joint improvement team's work will deliver significant advances in admissions, discharges and other areas in relation to which there are clearly deficiencies and problems. I want to see how that work develops during the next few months.

If Jamie McGrigor had done the work that Jackie Baillie has done to examine community care services in Argyll and Bute, I am sure that he would know the answers to many of his questions. If he had listened to my earlier answers, he would have heard me say that there is room for improvement—that is recognised not just by the council and the health board but by the Executive. That is why we are working with the council and the health board to ensure that they meet the requirements. As I said to Jackie Baillie, I will keep a close eye on how the improvement work proceeds and I will ensure that we follow up that work if required.

Each CHP is responsible for determining its priorities. The east Glasgow community health and care partnership provides not only a dietetic service that offers expert dietary advice to patients, carers, advocates and agencies, but health promotion advice that is aimed at preventing ill-health in Shettleston and neighbouring areas.

Those initiatives are significant. I applaud the east Glasgow partnership's work to address nutritional issues. A clear connection exists between the dietary and nutritional issues that Frank McAveety raises and some of the ill-health issues that apply to a large degree in the east end of Glasgow. The input of dietary advice, expertise and clinical interventions is critical to addressing those problems.

We made clear in "Delivering for Health" that changes to acute hospital services delivery must be consistent with the principles of the national framework for service change as laid out in the Kerr report. Any proposals for change that come to ministers for approval will be judged on that basis.

I am certainly aware of Karen Whitefield's views and concerns on the matter. A consultation on the particular issues relating to cross-boundary flows was part of the wider consultation that was recently completed in Lanarkshire. Karen Whitefield can rest assured that, when the board's proposals finally come to me, I will consider the extent to which the consultation on those matters met the requirements that we laid out, which are monitored on our behalf by the Scottish health council.

As John Scott will be aware, Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board has decided to consider those matters further in conjunction with its consideration of provision for planned care. Clearly, that is the basis on which its report will come to ministers and the decision will be made on the basis of that joint consideration.

The findings from independent social research show that there is some positive movement in attitudes towards binge drinking and greater recognition that excessive consumption can have negative consequences. We are clear, however, that if we are to achieve a fundamental shift in attitudes towards alcohol, there is a good deal still to do.

The pilot will be conducted over a 12-month period from this summer until the summer of next year. It will then be evaluated independently to assess the extent to which the procedures proved to be fit for purpose. If they prove to be fit for purpose, there will be nothing to prevent us rolling them out. However, we must wait for the results of the evaluation before we determine when and where we want to extend the use of the procedures to other police force areas.

We expect NHS boards to have in place a palliative care strategy for their area and, in that context, to fund 50 per cent of the agreed annual running costs of voluntary sector hospices that provide palliative care.

It is important to ensure the provision of palliative care to people as close to their communities as possible, although any hospice provision must meet the appropriate statutory requirements. In the circumstances that Alasdair Morrison described, I expect payments to continue under the previous year's service level agreement until a new agreement is in place. I certainly expect the management of Bethesda and the health board to engage in constructive dialogue to resolve the issues.

As I said, the expectation is that NHS boards throughout Scotland will support voluntary sector hospices. We acknowledge that hospices provide a significant service that is particularly sensitive to patients and their families. We want that to continue, which I expect to happen in the case of the combined care home and hospice facility that Alasdair Morrison asked about and in other cases. However, the statutory requirements must be complied with, including the requirement for the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care to inspect homes biannually. We must also ensure that the standards of medical support and provision are appropriate for the circumstances.

I am happy to meet Des McNulty to discuss issues that he wants to raise in connection with the hospice that he mentioned, but it is important to understand the basis on which negotiations of the type that he mentions could take place. The hospice movement does not seek full funding from health boards, because it appreciates and values its independence. That independence is delivered and protected by the funding arrangement, under which we expect health boards throughout Scotland to provide funding in the order of 50 per cent.

When we published "Delivering for Health", our response to the Kerr report, in October 2005, we made it clear that we envisaged implementation over the next 10 years. We will publish proposals in the next few  weeks for a rehabilitation framework to support services for older people and those with long-term conditions. The chief medical officer will shortly begin to draw together existing work on identifying the frailest people in our communities, in order to provide co-ordinated care that will allow them to remain independent in their own homes for as long as possible. We expect work on the integrated care that they need to be completed and implemented by all health boards before the end of next year.

John Swinburne raised number of points, and I support the principle underlying his question. We want people to stay in their own homes for as long as possible, and we recognise that the implication of that is that we will provide the services—either directly or, more commonly, through a partnership between health boards and local authorities—that will enable people to do so. The issue of palliative care at home is a difficult and complicated one; it is not always an appropriate form of care or the best way in which people should spend their final days, but, where it is appropriate, we would want to make it possible.

Yes, not least because of the constructive meeting earlier this week involving those groups, Des McNulty and Hugh Henry, at which justice issues arising from that work were discussed.

The bill to which Des McNulty referred relates to issues that require to be resolved. That was acknowledged by Hugh Henry when he met Des McNulty earlier this week. I would be interested in any lessons that we can learn from work that is being done in West Dunbartonshire on support for patients in the circumstances that Des McNulty described. As far as Alimta is concerned, the consultation that is being held by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence is just that: a consultation. It is not NICE's final view. It is important to stress that patients who are already receiving Alimta will continue to do so, whatever the final conclusions of the NICE consultation.

We are making progress on increasing the number of dentists, building up a salaried service where required and providing incentives for high street dentists to continue to treat patients on the NHS. I am pleased to report that the number of practices treating all categories of patients in the NHS, and therefore qualifying for enhanced NHS funding, increased from 566 in December 2005 to 579 in March 2006.

I am delighted to report again that the number of salaried dental posts across Scotland has now risen to 196. That provision is enabling a significant level of treatment of the kind that Iain Smith described, such as emergency access. Clearly, we want to ensure that both adults and children are able to access NHS treatment in their own communities wherever possible. That is why our approach has involved not only building up the important salaried service but providing incentives for high street dentists to continue to treat NHS patients or, indeed, to resume treating patients on the NHS, as a number of such dentists are now clearly doing. That is the direction of travel. At the same time, I agree with the implication behind Iain Smith's question that we need to strengthen the salaried service. I am pleased to say that we are doing that. On 1 April, we designated Fife to assist in the recruitment of salaried dentists and of new graduates to independent practices. We will continue to pay attention to those issues in the months ahead.

We are making good progress. Last year's figures for dental decay in children starting primary school were the best ever in Scottish dental history. That is clearly significant progress. We still have a good way to go, but we are confident that we are heading in the right direction to meet that target.

I will certainly respond to Christine May's letter shortly. On the issue of the dental profession's representative bodies, I was pleased to address the BDA's conference of Scottish local dental committees a few weeks ago, when I was able to respond to dentists who raised a wide range of  issues that I had been keen to raise with them. I encouraged the BDA to join us in our work on updating the statement on dental remuneration—the fee scale, in other words—for dentists in the NHS. Clearly, we would welcome the BDA's active participation in that work as that would enable us to make quick progress in that regard.

Although the number of practices that treat all categories of patient on the NHS has increased over the past quarter, I am aware that the figures include not only practices that are coming back to the NHS but some practices that have opted out. Clearly, we are seeking to discourage that trend. The additional funding that we have provided, which I believe amounts to something in the order of £25,000 per practice per year, will encourage dentists to continue to provide treatment to all categories of patient on the NHS. That is a significant incentive to dentists to commit to NHS patients. However, where commitment to the NHS on the part of high street dentists is lacking, we look to NHS boards to put in place other provision, including a salaried service, in localities such as those that Bruce Crawford has described.

The vast majority of targets for the first year of the dental action plan have been met. For example, we have introduced fissure sealant fees for the treatment of children and a fee for the treatment of adults with special needs. We have extended the patient registration period from 15 months to three years. We have introduced free dental checks for all NHS patients. Last year, we increased the number of vocational training posts to 135. We have made  significant new payments to NHS-committed dentists for rent reimbursement and practice improvements. We have increased general dental practice allowance for NHS-committed dentists to 12 per cent of NHS earnings. In addition, we expect the number of dentists graduating from Scotland's dental schools this year to be nearly 30 per cent higher than the number who graduated five years ago. Later this year, we will introduce a new bursary for dental students, committing them to the NHS after graduation.

I recognise Derek Brownlee's point in requesting a publication. I set out as many targets as I thought that I reasonably could, within the Deputy Presiding Officer's tolerance. I would be happy to make public the full list of targets and our achievements against them over the past 12 months. We will undoubtedly do that on completion of the action plan period. I mentioned the increase in the number of qualifying practices over the past quarter. We want that trend to continue and expect at the end of the action plan period to be able to demonstrate an increase in the ability of patients to access dental services through the NHS.

I am pleased to report the significant commitment of practices and the NHS in the west of Scotland to addressing the significant issue of tooth decay in children in the area. We have focused on five-year-olds, whom Pauline McNeill mentioned. The fissure sealant fees that we have introduced are for the treatment of children who are acquiring their adult teeth, which is very significant. I accept Pauline McNeill's point that we should examine all the methods that are available to us, to ensure that the trend of improving oral health among children continues.

I am delighted to hear John Swinney's commitment to having yet more targets on the NHS dental front. That is a positive sign. Of course, had he read the dental action plan, he would know that we have a commitment to increase registration for adults and children for NHS dental services.

There are many challenges ahead in responding to the Kerr report and in delivering on the change in focus of the NHS in Scotland, which we laid out in "Delivering for Health" last October. I welcome the proposition from Margo MacDonald and John Swinburne that the debate should not focus on the negative but emphasise the positive, and I want to respond in that spirit. Of course, the challenge is not only for ministers or the NHS—it is for all of us. As Mary Mulligan said, if we are to deliver the type of health care that Kerr envisaged, we must move away from the overwhelming emphasis on acute care delivered in hospitals to in-patients that characterised the NHS's first 50 years, and towards a wider emphasis on delivering care to people through improving health across the board. Margo MacDonald asked about our willingness to work with voluntary sector organisations that represent people with long-term conditions. We very much support such work. For example, we are working with Asthma UK Scotland on plans and clinical standards for children with asthma; we are working with Epilepsy Scotland on the development of managed clinical networks—we have recently provided funding to it; we are working with Voices of Experience, or VOX, to give voice to users of mental health services; and we are working closely with Diabetes UK to refresh the Scottish diabetes framework. We regard the voluntary sector, which represents and talks to and for users of the services, as a key partner in a number of ways.  Several members have mentioned the secondary care sector. The Kerr principles lay out a national framework for service change. That framework does not provide excuses for easy decision making; rather, it sets criteria against which changes must be designed and justified. That is a process that all parties should welcome. The real laziness is in saying that, in spite of those principles, change should always be opposed. We cannot accept the principle of specialisation where it is needed and yet find no case for ever changing anything in real terms.

At what point in the debate did I suggest that that had been said? Let me be clear. There are principles according to which service changes must be justified, and I reject the proposition that no changes should ever happen. Services should be delivered as locally as possible, but they should be as specialised as is necessary. That is why, since the debate last October, we have carried out further work to establish which services need to be concentrated in fewer centres. I emphasise the fact that the default position is the local provision of services. Several members have referred to the need for proper consultation. The Scottish health council was established last year to act on behalf of ministers in ensuring that the proper processes for public consultation are followed. That is the assurance that we have. The members who referred to those processes will be aware of that and will know that the Scottish health council's views are considered by local health boards when they are making their recommendations as well as by ministers once those recommendations have been brought forward. The emphasis under the Kerr report will be on keeping people healthy for as long as possible. Improving the health of Scotland in the longer term requires effective action, such as the ban on smoking in public places and our proposals on the promotion of better nutrition in schools. It also requires us to address the issues to do with inequality that were raised by Duncan McNeil. The prevention 2010 pilot projects will have a key role in developing new models of anticipatory care to increase the rate of health improvement in our most deprived communities through the provision of enhanced primary care services and through picking up early what otherwise might turn into serious long-term conditions. When people develop a long-term condition, we want to slow its progress as much as we can, to reduce complications and to help people to cope with that condition. As I said at the outset, we also want to work with users and carers, who know more than anybody about the nature of those  conditions and what it is like to live with them. That is a key task for the Long-Term Conditions Alliance Scotland, whose launch Andy Kerr supported a couple of days ago. When the disease process cannot be halted, people should have the best possible care as locally as possible. Our review of community nursing and the development of the rehabilitation framework underpin that aim. Our work on neurosciences has shown that even specialised services must have a strong base in the community. That is why we need to see our neurosurgical units as part of a neurosciences service for the whole of Scotland, which involves developing a local tier that is designed to give people the ready access that they want to neurological opinion. The services that people get must be personal and should be integrated so that all health care and other care that people receive work together. The community health partnerships are the key agencies in delivering that, and schemes of establishment for those have now been approved in most areas. Through the CHP development group, we will continue to support those developments. Likewise, the funding that we are providing for primary care premises is designed to encourage the co-location of services wherever that is possible.

The joint future programme that is going forward as we speak is very much about encouraging the alignment of budgets and the sharing of premises. Indeed, in some local areas it has involved joint appointments of staff by health and local authority services. That provides us with the right direction forward in those areas. We have developed a long-term conditions toolkit for CHPs to use in working with people who have long-term conditions. We also recognise the need to support those people in our communities who have complex needs. That involves developing services that focus on the patient and ensure that all the relevant professionals are able to provide the necessary service. We are taking forward the delivering for health programme and we are delivering on a whole range of issues, including many issues that have been raised today on which there is no time to respond. That approach is central to the development of public services in Scotland. We want to focus on people as people rather than as patients or carers, and we want to provide services that are personal and address all those  people's needs. As I said at the outset, the emphasis must be on the positive aspects, recognising that the more successful we are in maintaining people's lives, the more people will live with long-term conditions. We need to work across the board to ensure that people can enjoy the best quality of life in those circumstances.

Do Mr Swinney's general comments on the import of the Kerr report mean that his party would never support the specialisation of services or the delivery of specialised services at a prime site?

We have not had such discussions, as European Union institutions have no remit for the planning of health care for specific chronic conditions.

Helen Eadie raises important issues, so I am happy to reply to her supplementary points. We share the priorities in the World Health Organisation approach and recognise the importance of a risk assessment as the best way in which to act. The Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network guideline on osteoporosis acknowledges that the development of a validated tool for risk assessment would be a useful addition to the assessment of the condition. We are keen to learn from the continuing work of the WHO on the matter.

I agree that those matters are important. I am glad that Mr Ewing's question was heard courteously by members throughout the chamber—that is a good model for dealing with such serious issues. We accept that the audit that NHS Quality Improvement Scotland carried out last year showed clearly the benefits of the type of dual energy X-ray absorptiometry scanning that is carried out in Glasgow. We look to health boards throughout Scotland to adopt a similar approach to address the issues that Mr Ewing raises. A further audit of fractures, which will involve several hospitals throughout Scotland, started last month.

Any proposals for service change must be consistent with "Delivering for Health", which describes our vision for the future provision of health care  services across Scotland and which sets out an action plan for the implementation of the Kerr report, "Building a Health Service Fit for the Future". Each proposal for change will be considered in that context.

That was a rather confused question. My answer is that it would be presumptuous of me to anticipate the recommendations of Lanarkshire NHS Board. Members will be aware that the board completed its consultation on the main part of its proposed changes on Friday and that it will continue to consult over the next couple of weeks on one or two late papers. Once proposals have come forward, have been properly considered by the board and have been submitted to ministers, they will be considered, as I said, in the context of "Delivering for Health".

I am very conscious of the effort that Elaine Smith has made on this issue and I can certainly assure her that the public consultation process will be an aspect that we will  consider in looking at any board proposals for significant service change. The board must show that it has fully engaged with the public on the range of options available. Last year, we established the Scottish Health Council for the specific purpose of ensuring that NHS boards carried out full and proper consultations in circumstances such as those in Lanarkshire. The report of the Scottish Health Council on the consultation in Lanarkshire will be one of the documents in front of me when I come to make a decision on this matter.

In addition to the standard uplift made annually to the budgets of all boards, NHS Lanarkshire has received additional funding to move it towards its target share under the Arbuthnott formula of just over £21 million, including nearly £7 million in the current financial year.

The reality is that the funding levels of NHS Lanarkshire and every other NHS board in Scotland have been increased by at least double the rate of inflation every year under devolution. Some of Carolyn Leckie's comments were, therefore, very wide of the mark. She quoted NHS Lanarkshire. She will know from its public statements on the matter that it has made clear the fact that its proposals for the provision of accident and emergency services, to which she referred, are not driven by financial considerations.

As I said, in considering any proposals for significant service change that are made by NHS Lanarkshire, I will consider all aspects of the consultation and the case that the board makes, including the financial aspects. I reiterate the point that NHS Lanarkshire has made clear publicly: its proposals are not driven by financial considerations.

The plans for e-health outlined in "Delivering for Health" include the establishment of a Scottish centre for telehealth, which will promote standardised solutions for telehealth and telecare applications. We are also exploring ways of embedding the use of information and communication technology in policy initiatives and of sharing good practice and experience.

There are indeed some very good examples. West Lothian Council and its partners are developing housing-based alternatives to traditional residential care, making good use of ICT in supporting people at home. I believe that that could be extended further and I want to build on the good work that has already been done to enable people to live independently in their own home with support from ICT.

I start by acknowledging the importance that John Scott and other members in the chamber this evening attach to these matters. I assure members that I will feed back to Andy Kerr the views that have been expressed in the debate. As the Minister for Health and Community Care, he will be involved in the  decision-making process, as and when NHS Ayrshire and Arran submits proposals to him for his consideration and approval. What I will not do this evening is comment in detail on the proposals. I do not want to do that before the Executive has had the opportunity to consider the board's proposals in their final version. The local consultation and decision-making process must take its course before ministers can come to any final view. Several members have said how important it is that NHS Ayrshire and Arran listens to the views of the public and health professionals before it reaches a decision on the future of accident and emergency provision in Ayrshire. Members have also commented on the decision that the board took at its meeting yesterday not to move to a decision until it has consulted on the future provision of elective care. That appears to be a very sensible decision and I note that has been welcomed on all sides of the chamber this evening. I understand that the board made that decision in response to public comment and to the views that were expressed by the Scottish Health Council. I will return to the matter of the council in a few moments. The decision also follows the recent visit of Professor David Kerr. I understand that that visit was organised at the invitation of Cathy Jamieson and that it allowed a fairly full discussion in which a number of members who are in the chamber this evening were involved. The board has listened to the views that have arisen from consultation responses and those discussions. I understand that a second phase of consultation will be carried out over the next few months. At the end of that consultation period, the board will consider the responses to both consultation exercises and agree recommendations for the future configuration of health care services. It will then submit its recommendations to Andy Kerr for a final decision. Some of the comments that have been made in the debate, particularly those directed at ministers, are about how boards consult on proposals and how such proposals are made available to the public for comment. It is absolutely right that boards make transparent the process of reaching decisions on what services can best be delivered locally and on how that will be done. In developing its proposals for the redesign of services, it is essential that NHS Ayrshire and Arran demonstrates that it is putting patients' interests first. It also has to show that every reasonable effort has been made to explain the impact of service changes on patients and local populations. The board must fully involve patients and the public in the consideration of options for change. That has to be done in a meaningful way.  Given the decision that NHS Ayrshire and Arran took yesterday, I imagine that it has considered carefully the lessons of its earlier engagement and consultation on the proposals and that it will apply them in taking forward the next part of the process. In doing so, the board must define the issues clearly. It must explore and examine all possible options in an open way and on the basis of evidence. We also take the view that those who were consulted must receive feedback that demonstrates that their views were listened to, understood and acted upon where that can be done in a way that delivers the best practicable outcome. In other words, the board must be able to show that public participation in the redesign of services has been real and meaningful. The Scottish Health Council was mentioned and I was asked whether the requirements that the Executive places on health boards are sufficient to achieve the level of transparency that I have described. The Scottish Health Council has the specific task of ensuring that consultation processes are effective and meaningful. It is actively monitoring the process that is going forward in Ayrshire. It has been working with the board to ensure that consultation is meaningful and that the views of patients and the public are listened to and responded to. It will continue to work with the board in discussing the design and roll-out of the next phase of consultation on elective services.

That is a fair question. The Scottish Health Council will certainly expect NHS Ayrshire and Arran to show that it has considered cross-boundary implications and impacts as part of the process of reaching decisions. I expect that that will be the case, just as it is with NHS Lanarkshire, as patients in Lanarkshire may use hospital facilities that are outwith the area.

The point was also made that the health board has said that the consultation is not a referendum. That is an important and accurate point and the health board is right to take that view. Its duty is to consult and to take into account the views of the public and patients but, as was stressed at the board meeting yesterday, the final decision on what to recommend to ministers lies with members of the board. They must demonstrate that they have taken into account the public's views but, at the end of the day, the decision that they recommend to ministers must be balanced and take into account the best means of delivering services for patients in future. That is their responsibility, and we expect them to do precisely that. They should do it in the context of the national framework of "Delivering for Health" and the Kerr report. In further answer to John Scott's question, we expect that the proposals that are submitted to ministers will be firmly set in the context of the national framework and demonstrably consistent with what the Kerr report and "Delivering for Health" set out as the proper way to deliver health services in future. Adam Ingram asked whether there is a contradiction in the Kerr report and whether it is too open to interpretation. The report is clear that change is necessary if we are to deliver the future high-quality health care that is set out in "Delivering for Health". It is also clear that that change must be made through genuine dialogue with communities. When the consultation responses come in, Andy Kerr, as the minister responsible, will consider carefully that evidence as well as the evidence on how best to deliver the health services—including accident and emergency services and elective services—that people are entitled to expect from their NHS.

NHS Ayrshire and Arran, like any health board that proposes to redesign services, must be able to demonstrate that the new services will be put in place in time and that they will deliver the quality of service that people  reasonably expect. Members mentioned the community casualty units and the other provision that is planned as part of the proposals. If the proposals go ahead, ministers will look for a clear indication that the new services will be put in place in good time so that patients have a safety net, as Adam Ingram describes it, and are assured a quality service. Andy Kerr will consider all the available information, all the representations that have been made and all the points that we discussed this evening. In closing, I assure members that ministers will not endorse any proposal that fails to fit with national policy and guidance or fails to secure a safe, high-quality and sustainable health service for the people of Ayrshire. Equally, we will not pretend that it is possible to develop a health service fit for the future simply by standing still. We must subject the proposals for the redesign of services to the test that I described this evening.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

The National Health Service (General Medical Services Contracts) (Scotland) Regulations 2004 make provision for residents of nursing and residential homes, including temporary residents, to be accepted on to general practitioner lists and thereby to have access to primary health care services. Residents who for any reason cannot identify a GP practice at a temporary address may be allocated to a local practice by the NHS board for that area.

I agree that people have an entitlement to access primary health care and it is a reasonable expectation that that would be organised. Clearly, the primary responsibility for registering with a GP lies with a patient. However, in recognition of the position of elderly and frail people, the national care standards for care homes, for example, require that care home staff will know residents' health care needs and will arrange to meet those needs in a way that best suits the residents. That will include, where necessary, arranging for registration with a GP, which in turn provides access to other primary care services. If a care home operator fails to carry out that requirement, the national care standards are there for everybody and clearly it is open to an individual to make a complaint either to the operator or, indeed, to the care commission, and such a complaint would be investigated.

We published guidance in 2004 on the best means of delivering care and support for those with dementia and their carers, no matter the setting. When we published "Delivering for Health" last October, we committed to develop a standard for integrated care pathways for dementia services.

Many of the features of care to which Irene Oldfather refers are indeed the kind of things that we wish to encourage. We wish to develop those features where they are in place and, where they are not yet in place, we wish to ensure that we achieve them. The purpose of developing the integrated care pathway is precisely to ensure that all agencies, from primary care through social services, the voluntary sector to hospital services and, indeed, care homes, are aware of their particular roles, that users and their carers are consulted and that the agencies work in partnership with users and carers to deliver the most appropriate service.

Yes. I recently announced £30 million in funding to NHS boards for new or substantially improved dental premises, most of which will support the community and salaried dental service. At the same time, we have put in place millions of pounds of new funding to encourage independent high-street dentists to remain with or to return to the NHS.

Yes. I am delighted to be able to say that under the dental action plan, we will, for example, reimburse the annual rental value of premises of high-street dentists who remain with or return to the NHS. I pay tribute to those dentists—including those at the practice that was mentioned by Mr Home Robertson—who have renewed their commitment to delivering services to people as NHS patients on NHS terms. I hope that other dentists will follow that example in the near future; it points us in the direction of providing the kind of access and service that patients want.

I am delighted to be able to say that on 1 April, NHS dentists will no longer charge patients for dental checks. That is the fulfilment of a partnership agreement commitment that will be very widely welcomed indeed. The key to giving all patients across Scotland equal access to that opportunity lies with dentists who chose to deregister NHS patients making the decision to come back into the NHS and to begin again to deliver services to patients on an NHS basis. I hope that many dentists will make that decision. Should they do so, the concerns that Shona Robison has raised will be resolved.

Since the announcement of the dental action plan, we have been very clear that the way to address access issues for NHS dentistry is to improve and strengthen the salaried service, and to incentivise high-street dentists to stay with or come back to the NHS, as I mentioned in my previous answers. That is critical, but an individual dentist who owns his premises and runs his own practice has a business decision to make. In recent months, we have sought to influence that business decision so that that dentists find it easier to decide to deliver services to patients on the NHS. That is what we all want to happen.

We plan to establish a managed clinical network for neurosurgery, and thereby to develop a single service for the whole of Scotland. The Aberdeen neurosurgery unit will play a very significant part in that network.

No proposition has been put forward to downgrade the service in Aberdeen. Instead, the clear proposition is to establish a managed clinical network for the whole of Scotland. I fully expect that all the existing neurosurgery units in Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow and Edinburgh will have a part to play in that single service.

As I said in response to the previous question, I fully expect that to be the  case. The process for making such judgments will be the responsibility of an implementation group that will be established shortly and which will consider all the options for establishing a single managed clinical network. I must re-emphasise that no decision has been made on the location of any particular service within the range of neurological services or on the boundary between the most specialised level of service and general neurosurgery. The implementation group will consider all those matters and, as "Delivering for Health" makes clear, decisions will be made in 2008.

Funding for 2006-07 will be distributed according to the Arbuthnott formula, which assesses each NHS board's relative funding need on the basis of population size and characteristics that influence the need for health care. It is for NHS boards to decide how best to utilise available funds to meet the health care needs of their resident populations, taking account of local and national priorities.

I agree that resources should be distributed in a fair and just way and that it would make no sense whatever to make sudden adjustments to health board funding in a way that would interrupt or disrupt the delivery of health services. That process of ensuring fair and equitable distribution takes account of the health care needs to which Helen Eadie has referred and existing health care provision, and there must be a process of getting from one place to another as far as distribution is concerned. Carolyn Leckie would have some explaining to do if funds were taken away from boards in areas such as Fife and, particularly, greater Glasgow to address the issues that she raised in the debate.

I expect Dr Gruer to present the smoking prevention working group's findings to the ministerial working group on tobacco control at its next meeting in May 2006.

We will want to consider the report quickly and address the issues. However, I do not want to anticipate the report's content, which will cover several aspects. Duncan McNeil is right that, in the week in which the ban on smoking in public places has been introduced and has received a great deal of public support, we must pay attention to the health needs of younger people as well as those of the general population.

I start by congratulating Euan Robson on securing the debate. I listened with interest to his remarks and to the other positive contributions about modernising and improving health services for the people of the Borders. Clearly, that is the right approach to take. I know that Euan Robson has raised the issue previously with Andy Kerr, the minister who will be responsible for making the decision. Because of that, it would not be appropriate for any minister to comment in detail on the proposals that might be made as a result of the debate until such time as they have been finalised and made formally in the appropriate manner. It is also important that the local consultation and decision-making process should take its course before ministers give detailed consideration to what arises out of it. The Kerr report and the Executive's response to it—"Delivering for Health"—have put in place a national framework for service change and we expect NHS boards to make any proposals for service change with an eye to that framework. "Delivering for Health" sets out a comprehensive strategy for health care in Scotland for the next 20 years and NHS boards must show that they have taken that into account. Euan Robson and other members talked about possible alternative ways of delivering the same objectives. All I will say about that at the moment is that when NHS boards make their final proposals, they must show that they have considered all realistic options for the future delivery of services. The strategy that is set out in "Delivering for Health" aims to bring services as close as possible to patients' homes. Consequent on that strategy is the requirement for the prioritisation of investment in local health services, including community health centres. It is also about developing practitioners with extended roles, and fully utilising the skills of all professionals through stronger  teamwork in community health partnerships. We expect NHS boards to identify priorities for investment in a delivery plan that builds on our framework for health, including mental health services and services for people with learning difficulties. Members have described the process of engagement by Borders NHS Board with staff, voluntary organisations and the public in reviewing services. That has been done over an extensive period of something in the region of 18 months. As I said, I will not comment in detail on the proposals. However, the NHS board has set itself the test that its final proposals should be able to demonstrate improvement in health care and delivery of waiting times targets, and better co-ordinated care for those with a chronic illness. Those targets are in line with the recommendations of "Delivering for Health". Although I recognise some of the points that have been made, it is important to be clear that the principles of "Delivering for Health" are not about saying that there should never be change; in fact, they envisage quite radical change. I hope that members will accept that. The direction that has been set will require reconfiguration of services in some cases. It is also in the document that NHS boards must engage in genuine dialogue with patients and communities to build a consensus, where possible, on how such change will be achieved locally in order to deliver the high-quality health care that we envisage. Boards need to be transparent over decisions on what is to be delivered locally. We expect boards to ensure that patients' interests are put first in developing proposals for service redesign. When there would be an impact on patients and communities, that must be explained fully and carefully and the public must be engaged from the earliest possible stage. With proposals of the sort that we are discussing, the board must be able to demonstrate increased capacity in community services, increased support for people to stay in their homes for as long as possible, an emphasis on preventive and anticipatory care and encouragement for self-care. It is important to say a word or two about the consultation exercise, which members have mentioned. The process is complete, apart from next week's board meeting, which has been referred to. In examining service redesign proposals, ministers must consider whether the consultation process has met the necessary standards. During the consultation, there have been more than 50 meetings of various kinds, including drop-in meetings, roadshows and meetings with specific groups in the community and groups of users and carers. However, the determination of whether a consultation has been  adequate is not simply about adding up the number of meetings. Euan Robson mentioned the interest of the Scottish health council in the matter. The council has been involved from an early stage in the process—the board invited its comment. We will consider the council's view on whether the process has been adequate. As has been said, the Coldstream and Jedburgh action groups have produced alternative proposals, which I expect to be given serious consideration. I understand that both action groups have worked closely with the board to ensure that that happens. The board must take into account those views and the interest in and enthusiasm for maintaining and developing local services. Another issue that ministers will consider is transport, which several members have mentioned. The local authority and voluntary groups have been involved with the NHS board in discussions on the matter. A traffic impact assessment has been carried out and the local authority has been actively involved in discussions. However, we must wait for the final proposals before we consider the conclusion of those discussions. In deciding on the final recommendations from the board, Andy Kerr will have to consider whether he is satisfied that the board has examined all the views that local people and the action groups have given and all the issues about which concerns have been raised, including transport, access to services and alternative options for delivering services. I assure members that Andy Kerr will give the matter proper consideration, on the basis that I have described.  Meeting closed at 17:48.

All relevant agencies should co-ordinate their efforts to ensure a safe and timely discharge from hospital once treatment has been completed. Local authorities have a statutory duty under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 to assess what services people need in those circumstances and to arrange for them to be provided. Services may be provided either by the local authority at its own hand or by a voluntary or private agency on its behalf.

I do not want to comment on individual cases. However, I reiterate the guidance from the Executive. The document, "NHS Responsibility for Continuing Health Care"—MEL (1996)22—states: "No individual discharges should take place until such time as appropriate provision, including accommodation, is available and properly resourced in the community."  Circular SWSG 10/1998, entitled,  "Community Care Needs of Frail Older People: Integrating Professional Assessments and Care Arrangements, states: "On no account should an older person be discharged prematurely from acute hospital care."

Such discussions are on-going. I assure Nanette Milne that we take the matter seriously. There is an obligation on councils to provide services a person's need of which has been assessed; they should make that provision. How they do so is a matter for them but must be in line with their statutory obligations.

It is the duty of local authorities, under the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, to assess the needs of people who appear to be in need of community care services and to meet those needs. The obligation to meet an assessed need for personal care, without charge, has been in place under the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 since July 2002.

Funding is negotiated between local authorities and the Scottish Executive. The funding that is currently provided for community care services is in line with the discussions that took place at the beginning of the spending review period. Naturally, as part of the next spending review, those matters will be considered again. As I said in a previous answer, the obligation on local authorities to provide  services to meet the needs that they have assessed people as having is in place and is something to which all local authorities should have proper regard.

The matter that we are pursuing with local authorities is about ensuring that they provide access to the services to which people are entitled. As I said a moment ago, how a council meets those assessed needs will be up to it. For example, if a local authority has assessed a person as being in need of certain services and would wish, ultimately, to provide those in a care home setting, it would be meeting its obligation if it were to provide them to an adequate level in a domestic setting, as long as the service of which that person has been assessed as being in need is provided.

The policy position is clear. A local authority should carry out an assessment and, having made that assessment, should provide the services in question. Clearly, the issue of free services depends on the circumstances of the individual and the nature of the services that are to be provided. Where that service requirement is assessed to be one that should be provided free of charge, that is exactly what should happen.

We have made significant progress, although the conclusion of the  discussions has not yet been reached. I met the president of COSLA earlier this week and I look to my officials and those of COSLA to take forward those discussions very soon.

I do not intend to give an undertaking to one council that I would not give to the others. The position is the same across Scotland. Local authorities have been provided with funding that is in line with what we discussed with them at an earlier stage. This year, we are undertaking a thorough examination of the funding provision that is in place and of local authorities' effectiveness in securing services for that funding. We will carry that forward, continuing discussions with COSLA as we do so, to reach conclusions about future funding.

Herceptin is currently licensed for the management of HER2-positive breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. I understand that the manufacturer has applied for Herceptin also to be licensed for use in early-stage breast cancer. Decisions on whether to prescribe a treatment are made according to the clinical judgment of the doctor concerned, in consultation with and with the consent of the patient or carer, and bearing in mind the risks and benefits of treatment.

As I said in my initial answer, clinicians must certainly make a clinical judgment. However, it is important to recognise that they do so in the context of whether a treatment has been licensed, and Herceptin is licensed for treatment of HER2-positive breast cancer that has already spread and is not currently licensed for early-stage breast cancer, so the judgment that clinicians must make is clearly different. It is appropriate that any treatment goes through a proper process of assessment before being licensed for use in clinical circumstances.

I acknowledge Carolyn Leckie's views and the concerns that have been raised by other members. As the minister who will make the final decision on whether to accept the board's recommendations, I will, of course, want to take  into account the points that have been made this evening. What I will not do this evening—indeed, what I might not do at all—as the minister with that decision-making responsibility, is comment in detail on the proposals or on some of the other specific points that have been made, because it would not be appropriate for me to do so before I have had the opportunity to consider the board's final proposals. It is important that the local consultation and decision-making process should take its course before I come to any final view. I will address a general point that a number of members have made. In such a consultation, should boards consult on maintaining the status quo in the configuration of services? I can assure members that, in considering the final proposals, I will also consider the option appraisal exercise that NHS Lanarkshire undertook last year in order to arrive at the options for consultation. That was the stage at which it determined not to consult on the status quo.

It is not unique to say, as NHS Lanarkshire is, that separating out emergency care and planned care can improve the flow of patients through hospital services. That is the fundamental point that, I suspect, the health board would make with regard to the cases that have been touched on. I also suspect that that is a point that the board will put to me in its proposal. It is important to say that we would not expect boards to consult on options that they cannot deliver, no matter how desirable people might believe them to be. It would be disingenuous for a board to consult on an option that it did not believe could deliver safe, sustainable and high-quality services for patients. Members will, no doubt, already have made their views known as part of the on-going, three month consultation process. At the end of the consultation period, the board will consider the responses, agree recommendations on the future configuration of services in Lanarkshire and submit them to me for a final decision.

I have not dealt with a consultation of this precise nature that has reached this stage, so the answer is that, from my experience, I am not aware of such a case. However, it is not unique for a board to consider in the first stage of an option appraisal an option that it subsequently does not take forward. Essentially, NHS Lanarkshire will argue that that is what it has done. I turn to some of the speeches that were made in the debate. Elaine Smith argued passionately in support of Monklands hospital. I am, of course, well aware of the campaign that she and her colleagues Karen Whitefield and Cathie Craigie have mounted. It is important to say that, although the option appraisal identified Monklands hospital as the preferred option to become the planned care site, no decisions have been made—or can be made—until the consultation is complete. When the final proposals come to me for approval, I will want to ask the board to what extent factors such as social deprivation and disadvantage have been taken into account—and also the views of the public, of course.

Certainly, yes. I will want to consider the range of evidence on the final proposals. In a moment I will say something about the consultation process, but first, in response to Elaine Smith's earlier comments, I assure her that I am aware of no plans to close Monklands hospital. She expressed concerns about that, but it is certainly not on the cards.

I understand the point. In considering the final proposals, I will look not just at the short-term plans, but at the longer-term plans that the board might bring forward as well. In response to comments made by Donald Gorrie and others, I confirm that I expect to see evidence of effective engagement between the board and neighbouring boards where there might be an impact on the demand on services in neighbouring areas. The west of Scotland cardiothoracic unit is a good example of the co-operation that already exists in that part of Scotland and we expect to see that level of co-operation in any proposals.  One or two members mentioned "Delivering for Health" and the Kerr report. It is important to say that those documents set out the framework within which NHS boards must work when they plan service change. We asked Professor David Kerr and his group to consider the long-term health needs of the population and produce a national framework for service change and that is what they did. In "Delivering for Health", we responded to that and set out what we believe is necessary. I think that most members who are here this evening were in the chamber when we debated "Delivering for Health" last October. In that debate, Andy Kerr and I made it clear that we accept the analysis in the Kerr report and that we expect boards to use both the report and our response to it as a framework for developing proposals for service change. I will resist the temptation to respond to the party-political points that were made, particularly by Scottish National Party members, but I will respond to the point that there will be no health benefits and there is no need for change. I think that there is a need for change. "Delivering for Health" and, before that, the Kerr report set out clearly the reasons why we need to change how we deliver services. We therefore expect boards to examine how they deliver services and to improve that where they can. We also expect boards to engage in genuine dialogue with patients and communities about how to do that in their areas.

I am glad that Michael Matheson assures us of his position, because that was not entirely clear from his speech. I am happy to say that we look to health boards to deliver health benefits and to make the changes that will improve the delivery of services. Boards must demonstrate that any proposals that they make will do that and I look forward to receiving such proposals from NHS Lanarkshire as a result of the consultation process. As several members have said, NHS boards need to be transparent about decisions on what can best be delivered locally and what can best be delivered in existing or new ways. I expect NHS Lanarkshire to make patients' interests paramount in developing its proposals for the redesign of services and to show that every reasonable effort has been made to explain the impact of service changes on patients and local populations. NHS Lanarkshire is required to involve patients and the public fully in the consideration of the options for  change. The public's views must be sought from the earliest stages and the issues must be defined clearly. All possible options must be explored and examined openly and on the basis of evidence. Donald Gorrie and Nanette Milne, among others, asked a fair question about the credibility of consultation processes. I fully recognise the importance of that. NHS Lanarkshire will have to be able to show that the consultation process was meaningful and credible when it produces the proposals that arise from the consultation. Ministers have given the Scottish health council the task of ensuring that the consultation process is effective and meaningful. The council is monitoring the roll-out of the process under "A Picture of Health" in Lanarkshire. It is available to advise the board to ensure that it achieves the objective and to listen to the views of patients and the public as the engagement process unfolds. The council will be keen to examine the process by which any option has been set aside and to ensure that the public have the information and explanations that they require. As I have said, when the consultation concludes I expect the board to decide what proposals to submit to me for a final decision. I will need to be assured that they are in line with "Delivering for Health" and that the guidance that we have issued on public involvement, engagement and consultation has been followed. I will ask the Scottish health council to assess the consultation process against the guidance that was issued to boards. I will consider the speeches that were made this evening and all the representations that have been made to me during the process. I assure members that I will not endorse any proposal that does not fit with national policy and guidance or which fails to secure a safe, high-quality and sustainable health service for the people of Lanarkshire.

We are increasing the number of graduates from Scotland's dental schools from 108, which the figure was five years ago, to 135 this year and 143 by 2008. We have given health boards new powers to recruit salaried dentists and we have helped with the recruitment from Poland of dentists for the Scottish national health service. We have put in place golden hello payments for new and returning dentists who want to practice in the NHS in Scotland. Furthermore, we will from September this year offer bursaries to dental students in return for a commitment to work in the NHS in Scotland after they graduate. Those bursaries will be worth up to £4,000 per student per year.

I hope that Tricia Marwick listened to my answer to her initial question. I was  delighted to read in the press this week that the Scottish National Party is supporting our proposition for bursaries for students who will commit to work for the NHS in Scotland. I hear comments by members from sedentary positions. It is a shame that those members did not listen to Rhona Brankin on 17 March last year, when she said that "we plan to introduce a bursary scheme for dental students who commit to NHS dentistry on graduation".— [ Official Report , 17 March 2005; c 15535.]  Indeed, if Tricia Marwick had read the dental action plan that was published on the same day last year, she would have seen exactly the same point in it. A range of measures are being introduced—including bursaries—to tie students. Dental students who receive four years' bursary will commit to work in the NHS in Scotland for four years after they complete their training. I hope that Tricia Marwick will welcome that measure.

I welcome Jim Wallace's motion and the opportunity that it provides to address the changes that the Scottish Ambulance Service is planning to implement in its air ambulance service provision from April. As Alasdair Morrison said, these are important matters for all Scotland's islands, as I know from my background. Indeed, the service goes back to the time when my father was a boy on North Uist. The first air ambulance flight was from Islay in 1933 and there has been a continuous service to Scotland's islands since then. Neither Scottish ministers nor the Ambulance Service would wish to compromise the service, but we should not assume that the means of delivery of the service are beyond improvement. That is why, since 2003, the Ambulance Service has been engaging with service users and other key stakeholders, including health boards and local authorities, in preparation for a new service contract to begin later this year. When the consultation began, the Scottish Ambulance Service had already made significant changes in its provision of ambulance services. It had introduced a priority-based dispatch system for emergency telephone calls, which was informed in part by the work of the Audit Committee. It had created three new emergency medical dispatch centres—to which Mary Scanlon referred—that use the most up-to-date technology and are designed to improve the responsiveness of the service to those in greatest need. The basis on which the emergency ambulance service operated was fundamentally changing from getting the patient to a hospital as quickly as possible to focusing on using the enhanced skills of paramedics and technicians to take high-quality clinical care to the patient as quickly as possible. The road accident and emergency ambulance units and the rapid response ambulance units are designed and equipped to support such an approach.  The consultation on air ambulance services that began in 2003 was intended to ensure that they too could deliver a service compatible with the overall direction of the Scottish Ambulance Service—getting the best-quality care to the patient. The tendering process sought to invite bids from companies that could provide aircraft to achieve those objectives. At its January 2005 meeting, the board of the Scottish Ambulance Service agreed that Gama Aviation with Bond Air Services be confirmed as the new air ambulance service provider from 1 April 2006. The new service will be provided by two dedicated EC135 helicopters operating out of Glasgow and Inverness on a 24-hour basis, and by two brand new dedicated fixed-wing King Air aircraft at Glasgow and Aberdeen that have been designed for the required medical equipment. Back-up for the outer Shetland Isles will be provided by BP using its Super Puma search and rescue helicopters. Further back-up will be provided by the Ministry of Defence and HM coastguard, as has been the case for many years when, for one reason or another, an aircraft in the service has been unable to complete its mission.

The coastguard back-up is available around the clock. I will be happy to respond in writing to Mr Stevenson's inquiry regarding the Ministry of Defence. However, I expect that it would be covered in the same way. As Jim Wallace acknowledged, the majority of missions that are flown by air ambulance flights are planned. In 2005, 310 out of the 340 Orkney air ambulance service missions were planned. Up to 96 per cent of those met established performance standards. Of the 30 Orkney missions in 2005 that were classified as emergencies, 27 had a timescale that was agreed with the requesting clinician. The Scottish Ambulance Service met the timescale in all but one case—a performance of 96 per cent against a target of 95 per cent.

The performance standard is one that is agreed between the clinician in question and the air ambulance dispatcher. As has been indicated in several speeches, the GP or clinician in such circumstances has the final responsibility to make that judgment. Clearly, he or she should always do so with the interests of his or her patient firmly in mind. Of course, there are occasions when time is critical. I will comment briefly on such cases, about which Jamie McGrigor asked. Both the EC135 and the King Air aircraft are available around the clock—24 hours a day—and have an activation time of two minutes. I understand that the Islander aircraft has an activation time of 60 minutes. Both the EC135 and the King Air aircraft are able to deliver patients to hospital within their set target times. We know that that is the case for the EC135 because the air ambulance service agreed to put the service in place in Orkney a year early, in order to test its ability to deliver patients on time and to standard. In general terms, that has been achieved successfully.

I would never diminish concerns that are felt either by elected representatives such as Jim Wallace, Alasdair Morrison and others from whom we have heard and with whom issues have been raised locally or by GPs. However, I recognise that changes in service always require all parties to work together to deliver them successfully. Concerns have been raised that will be addressed as the service is rolled out, but I hope that what we know from the 12 months of trials in Orkney will give some reassurance to members that some of the issues about which they are concerned will prove to be less serious than they anticipate. For example, it has been suggested that weather will have a significant impact on the flying ability of the EC135. Over the past 11 months, there has been only one occasion when the Ministry of Defence helicopter has been deployed because the EC135 was unable to fly due to weather conditions. Jim Wallace referred to a number of other occasions. I understand that he will receive more detailed information about those in the near future. Concern has been expressed about fuel and refuelling. I point out that, where necessary, the EC135 can fly from Inverness to the northern isles of Orkney, collect a patient and return to Kirkwall without refuelling, which is significant.  The issue of utilisation rates has been raised. The air ambulance is currently working at 13 per cent of capacity, so there are grounds for believing that capacity will be available. A number of members raised the issue of the carrying of escorts. If the service is informed of the need to transfer an escort when the request for transport is made, it will do so. In its standard configuration, the aircraft is set up with three seats—two for the paramedics and one spare seat—so an escort can be accommodated. The same should apply in maternity cases. However, it is recognised that more needs to be done on the interior spec for carrying such cases. The Ambulance Service is working on the issue at the moment, with midwifery staff from the Queen Mother's hospital in Glasgow.  Officials will visit Barra tomorrow, and I hope that Alasdair Morrison will be able to meet them if he is in his constituency at the time. They will certainly be happy to meet him and council representatives to address any specific issues that they would like to raise. All of us recognise the importance of ensuring that the service that is provided meets the needs of islanders. I hope that, with continuing dialogue between local authorities, elected representatives, the NHS locally and the Ambulance Service, the remaining concerns—about which Mary Scanlon was right to ask—can be addressed to the satisfaction of the communities in question.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

Detailed planning of such matters is for the local authorities in the first instance. However, I expect a report in the next few weeks from the range and capacity review group, which we set up to consider the issues. The proposition that the best way to deal with growing numbers of older people is simply to place more older people in care homes is not one that I expect the group to support.

I would be concerned if such matters were dealt with in a way that was as alarming as Frances Curran's question implies. The reason why we look to local authorities to make such provision is that they are best placed to know the position in their areas and to plan accordingly. In addition, we do not accept that care homes offer the only way or the best way of supporting older people. We believe that the right direction of policy is to maintain the care home sector while fulfilling as far as possible the wish that older people have made clear to remain in their own homes for as long as possible.

Cancer is a serious business and one of the things that make leukaemia and other cancers so alarming is that we do not know in general what causes them. In the debate, members have raised the possibility that electromagnetic radiation from the electricity distribution system might be among the causes of childhood leukaemia. The right response to such concerns is not to assume them to be right or wrong but to consider the evidence and to act on it in a proportionate fashion. The evidence includes a large number of published papers. The results of those studies are often inconclusive and they are sometimes contradictory, so we must look beyond individual independent papers to expert reviews, which evaluate the evidence critically to provide a balanced overview. In 2001, the National Radiological Protection Board's advisory group on non-ionising radiation produced a comprehensive review of the subject, which focused particularly on two studies. The first was a study from 1999 and 2000 by the UK childhood cancer study investigators, which found no evidence that the risk of childhood leukaemia or any other cancer was associated with the proximity of homes to electrical installations or the levels of magnetic field to which children are exposed. The second study—by Ahlbom and others in 2000—pooled the results of studies on childhood cancer and exposure to magnetic fields in homes from several different countries. That analysis,  which included data from the UK childhood cancer study, suggested that there might be a doubling of the risk of leukaemia for children who were exposed to magnetic fields of 0.4 microteslas or more. It is estimated that about four in every 1,000 children in the UK are exposed to magnetic fields at or above that level and that about half of those exposures are due to overhead power lines, while most of the others are attributable to electrical wiring in the house. From those figures it might be concluded that, if there were indeed an effect for magnetic fields above 0.4 microteslas, one or two of the approximately 500 cases of childhood leukaemias that are diagnosed each year in the UK might be attributable to the magnetic field from power lines. However, the general conclusion of the review was: "In the absence of clear evidence of a carcinogenic effect in adults, or of a plausible explanation from experiments on animals or isolated cells, the epidemiological evidence is currently not strong enough to justify a firm conclusion that such fields cause leukaemia in children." The review also concluded that the possibility remained that intense and prolonged exposures to magnetic fields could increase the risk of leukaemia in children. A number of members have mentioned undergrounding. It is worth noting that underground cables also emit magnetic fields, albeit within a smaller area.

The magnetic field can certainly be confined, which is the important point. Nonetheless, we are talking about the magnetic field that the cables themselves generate, whether they are overhead or underground. In 2004, the NRPB conducted a review of the scientific evidence for limiting exposure to low-frequency electromagnetic fields. On the basis of that review, it advised: "The government should consider the need for further precautionary measures in respect of exposure of people to" electric and magnetic fields. The final study that we must take into account is the Draper report, which was published last year. Members have described its findings on increased risk of childhood leukaemia. However, for the sake of completeness, it should also be noted that, at distances greater than 200m, the magnetic field levels from power lines would normally be lower than those in the home from domestic sources,  such as conventional electrical wiring. Although the Draper report clearly contributes to the concerns, it is important to bear in mind the views of the authors—not of ministers, as Brian Monteith suggests—that the statistical association could have been due to chance or some other aspect of living near power lines and that they could offer no satisfactory explanation of their findings in terms of possible causation by magnetic fields.

If Bruce Crawford's point is that the risk is not the same in every domestic residence, I would agree with it. However, we would be as unwise to ignore the evidence about the possible impacts of domestic electricity arrangements as we would to disregard the possible impacts of overhead power lines. That is why SAGE, the stakeholder advisory group that was set up on the basis of the reviews that have been carried out, has in turn set up two working groups. One group is to consider the impact of overhead power lines, and the other is to consider the impact of magnetic fields in people's homes. It is right that both those factors are considered seriously in that way. Roseanna Cunningham mentioned membership. A senior scientific adviser from the Scottish Executive Health Department is a member of SAGE and will be one of those who will receive the reports of the working groups on both those impacts. We expect the report of the group dealing with overhead power lines to be made in the course of the summer. It may well be that some of the recommendations will have something to say about planning policy for power lines—that is of course entirely a matter for the group to determine on the basis of its scientific expertise and the best available medical evidence.

As I have said and as I intend to explain further in the next few moments, the SAGE process will produce recommendations, which we expect to have this summer. It would be reasonable to predict that any decision on the Beauly to Denny line, and certainly any public  inquiry that is held into the application to construct the line, would occur at such a time that the content of the SAGE recommendations, which will relate to any possible impact of overhead power lines on health, could be considered. The debate touches on energy policy—as a number of members did in their speeches—as well as on health. I did not recognise Bruce Crawford's suggestion that there was no clear sense of direction in energy policy. Our view on the need to generate more renewable energy could hardly be clearer. Everyone who has spoken on that point recognises that that will require a substantial upgrading of Scotland's electricity transmission and distribution network. All those who recognise the particular potential of the Highlands and Islands to generate renewable energy will recognise the importance of having the means to carry that power south.

I can assure the Presiding Officer that I will do precisely that, focusing on the application that has been made jointly by Scottish and Southern Energy and Scottish Power for their Beauly to Denny proposals. The application was made on 28 September last year and the public consultation period ended at the end of January. Other consultative bodies, such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Natural Heritage, will respond by the end of February, and the local authorities have until the end of April. Several thousand representations have been received from the public and they will be considered by Scottish ministers as part of the process of determination under the Electricity Act 1989. Any suggestion that a feature of the environment or of technological development might affect the health of Scotland's children will be treated with due seriousness on the basis of the evidence. The concerns of those who respond to the consultation will receive proper consideration from ministers in reaching a decision. As I said a moment ago in response to Dennis Canavan, in the event of there being a public inquiry on this issue, it is unlikely to begin its  consideration before the recommendations of the SAGE working group on power lines and property are known. Should there be no public inquiry, I am equally confident that ministers will want to take account of whatever recommendations have emerged from the SAGE process at that stage.  It is not a choice between a healthier population and a healthier environment; we aspire to a joined-up approach across government, which will ensure that we achieve both.  Meeting closed at 18:20.

I, too, congratulate Elaine Smith on securing an important debate on the challenge of Scotland's growing levels of childhood obesity and how we can improve our children's health prospects. Scotland is experiencing a rise in obesity, but it is important to recognise that, as members have said, Scotland is not alone in that. Population surveys from throughout the globe have shown an increase in obesity in the past 20 years. Nanette Milne commented on the statistics that the NHS information services division released in December, which illustrated that 20 or so per cent of our 12-year-olds are classified as obese. That report was accompanied by a summary of reference data that were collected between 1978 and 1990 from 11 distinct surveys of children in England, Scotland and Wales, which illustrated how much things have got worse since that time. However, the report did not show a different scale of problem in Scotland compared with that in the rest of the United Kingdom, although some commentators misinterpreted the comparison and concluded that Scotland had the fattest children in the world. That is not the case, although we certainly have a serious problem. We can draw more accurate comparisons using the results of the health surveys of England in 2001-02 and of Scotland in 2003 and the  international comparisons of childhood obesity for countries that participate in the health behaviour in school-aged children study. All those studies suggest that obesity rates for young people in their early teens in Scotland are comparable with those in England and lower than those in several other countries. Of course, we accept that the rates in Scotland are serious, but our problem is neither unique nor significantly worse than the problem in comparable countries. However, we face a large-scale and serious obesity problem that continues to grow. As has been said, childhood obesity has huge health implications for later life as well as economic implications for our health service and national productivity. That is why obesity is emphasised as a priority in the action plan "Improving Health in Scotland: The Challenge", which was launched in March 2003 and provides the strategic framework for what we need to do. The World Health Organisation has stressed the importance of preventing obesity through combined action to tackle the problems of lack of physical activity and poor diet. As Elaine Smith said, the WHO has strongly commended Scotland for its preventive approach to what the organisation recognises is a growing global chronic disease. It is clear that most children become obese because of their lifestyles, which is why we take a prevention-focused approach to childhood obesity. Across departments and tiers of government, we support individuals and their families to make gradual lifestyle changes that involve both food and physical activity.

There is interaction between the Health Department and the Development Department and several other departments because, in delivering for health, we have made it clear that tackling the health issues of deprived and disadvantaged communities is critical, in relation to obesity and other health improvement challenges. We want our schools to become, among other things, health-promoting environments for our children, and we can be proud of the part that hungry for success has played in achieving a whole-school approach to food and health. Supported by nutrient standards, that programme ensures access to good-quality nutritious school meals for our children. That is the right priority for school meals policy in tackling obesity. Indeed, Jamie Oliver, who has already been mentioned,  pointed to hungry for success as the right road for others to follow. We are finalising guidance to restrict the sale of full-sugar soft drinks in the public sector, with particular emphasis on children's environments such as schools and leisure centres. A comprehensive programme of action is in place to increase levels of physical activity. I acknowledge the points that have been made, but we are trying to ensure that, by 2008, at least two hours of good-quality physical education will be available to each child every week.

I agree that we need to look beyond the public sector, but we must start with the public sector because we have powers to act directly in that sector. We want to look beyond the public sector, but we must take a first step. We acknowledge that one step might lead to others, but we need to make a start. I am interested in what Margo MacDonald and others said about other ways in which we can use the school environment to help us to address obesity, but we cannot wait until children start school. Support is needed at every stage of life from before birth, through early years and into childhood. Elaine Smith was right to emphasise the importance of breastfeeding. I will shortly launch a consultation document as part of the development of an infant feeding strategy for Scotland. I hope all members with an interest will respond to the consultation process. Progress has been made in that area with many hospitals achieving baby-friendly status. I am sure that Elaine Smith will acknowledge that her Breastfeeding etc (Scotland) Act 2005 is one part of a continuum of healthy eating for infants. The consultation on the strategy will invite views on weaning practice and maternal nutrition. We want to ensure wide involvement in promoting healthy and nutritious feeding at all stages of childhood. The consultation will run during breastfeeding awareness week. A national conference will be held to explore several issues, not least those around the breastfeeding legislation that was passed last year. As a result of consultation, a leaflet has been developed, with some input from Elaine Smith, and pre-tested on those sectors that may be  affected by the legislation, such as businesses, public buildings, bed and breakfasts and restaurants. The leaflet will be launched to employers at the same time as the infant feeding strategy consultation. We must learn from and add to the wider UK, EU and global experience of child obesity. Steps have been taken to ensure that the Scottish experience is reflected in the on-going public consultation on the EU green paper on obesity prevention. The findings and recommendations of that process will be of some interest. Several members spoke about food labelling and signposting. The Food Standards Agency Scotland and its UK counterpart have done significant work on that. A consultation process is under way on guidance for food manufacturers and retailers on appropriate signposting and labelling for foods. Scotland is well placed to tackle obesity. Action has been taken locally and nationally to change established patterns in both diet and physical activity. At the treatment end, the NHS in Scotland is keen to offer the best treatment options and support, in line with evidence-based practice.  Our health improvement challenge is the key to the objectives that we have set. As has been said, that must be complemented by sustained engagement with the food industry, processors and retailers, both here in Scotland and beyond, to ensure that they, too, modify their actions to enable consumers to make healthier choices. There are no short-term fixes—nobody who has spoken this evening has suggested that there are. Instead, there is a long-term agenda, which calls for concerted and sustained action. That action has already started, and it must continue. I have no doubt that we will return to this subject for as long as the growth of obesity threatens the otherwise rising standards in our health.  Meeting closed at 17:55.

It is for individual local authorities to determine what level of provision is required to meet the needs of older people and to arrange an appropriate range of services. In the current financial year, we have provided councils with £1.6 billion to support their provision of community care services.

Jamie Stone rightly alluded to the fact that my officials are in touch with Highland Council on that and a range of related matters. However, it is important to be clear that it is not for ministers or officials to tell councils how they should make best use of the resources with which we provide them. We are clear about the importance of appropriate services being available to people where they can access them. Clearly, those services need to meet given standards, which are set by the Scottish ministers. We look to local authorities to ensure that, whatever range of services they provide in order to meet the needs of people in those positions, they do so in a way that meets those standards. Jamie Stone referred to the importance of respite; again, that is well understood and is reflected in the guidance that we give to local authorities.

It is important to be clear about the direction of policy, which is not to encourage more people to be resident in care homes but to enable more people to stay in their own homes. I know from Jamie Stone's and Rob Gibson's questions that they appreciate the importance of people having access to services close to home. That is our intention too. However, it would not be appropriate for Government to dictate to councils whether sheltered housing, care homes or other forms of support are most appropriate in the circumstances. That is for councils to decide; they are elected and are therefore accountable.

I cannot confirm the details that Nanette Milne has provided to the chamber, but I am aware of issues around the funding of free personal care and how councils carry out their responsibilities in that regard. We are working closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to ensure that there is a better understanding around the table of the funds that are provided and the purpose for which they are provided, and to ensure that they are properly spent. The policy position is clear: an entitlement to free, personal care in the circumstances that have been described.

I agree with the principle that Eleanor Scott enunciates. That is the principle that underlies "Delivering for Health", which Andy Kerr announced to the Parliament a few weeks ago. Making a spectrum of care available in communities is the right way forward. We will look to our delivery agencies to deliver that in the most appropriate way in their local areas.

The NHS in Scotland will continue to work towards further significant reductions in its consumption of energy and water, in carbon dioxide emissions and in volumes of waste sent for disposal. We are currently updating NHS Scotland's environmental policy, and NHS boards are making good use of NHS Scotland's computerised environmental management system, as are others in the health care, retail and manufacturing sectors throughout the United Kingdom.

The direction of our policy is to recognise both the impacts of the environment on health and the role that the health service plays in the environment. If that is the direction in which the member is inviting me to go, I am happy to confirm that we endorse that cross-cutting approach. Indeed, our officials on the environment side are working together in precisely those areas.

We do have such concerns. As a result, we allocated £1.9 million of interim funding to the wheelchair service to help to reduce waiting times during the current financial year. We set wheelchair centres a target that 80 per cent of adults should wait no more than 26 weeks from their referral to the time when they leave the centre with the appropriate equipment to meet their clinical need. All five wheelchair centres in Scotland are currently meeting that target.

I believe that that is the case. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland has indeed commissioned a review that is examining the structure of the service and considering the best way for services to be delivered. Margaret Smith referred to her constituent who is 18 years old. One of the difficult areas for those who need to access the wheelchair service is the transition from children's services to adults' services. In some respects, that might be particularly marked in Lothian, where the services are provided from different centres. The review is considering ways in which patients who need access can get access quickly. The funding that we provided in the current financial year has undoubtedly made a difference and we expect to receive the report from NHS QIS by the end of the financial year.

I thank members across the Parliament for their support for the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill, which they have demonstrated here at stage 1, in committee at stage 2, and here again this morning. The bill's passage through the Parliament has been assisted by a great many people, whose contributions I acknowledge. I thank the many individuals and organisations who took the time to work with ministers and with our officials, as well as with the Health Committee, on identifying the aspects of the bill that could be clarified and improved. I acknowledge those who responded to the various consultations and those who gave evidence to the Health Committee. Members of the Health Committee deserve  particular recognition for the careful way in which they considered the bill and for the measured way in which a potentially difficult debate was conducted. I put on record the Scottish Executive's thanks to the Health Committee clerks, who ensured the effective management of the committee stages of scrutiny, and I record my own particular appreciation for the hard work and commitment of the Executive's bill team throughout the process. The bill gives us a modern system of authorisation for organ donation, post mortems and other purposes that is fit for the 21 st century. I believe that the bill has been further strengthened by all the attention that it has received. It gives us an excellent basis from which to move forward. I have no doubt that, as Ken Macintosh suggested, the bill will restore and improve public confidence in the system of post-mortem examinations. I am equally convinced that it will give all the health professionals who are involved with post-mortem examinations renewed confidence about approaching family members in circumstances that are obviously very distressing. The expected increase in the number of examinations that I believe will result from the bill will yield enormous benefits, both for families and for society as a whole. There is widespread support in the chamber for action to increase the number of organs that are available for transplantation and for ensuring that a person's wish to be a donor is not overturned after their death. Currently, families refuse to agree to donation going ahead in 40 to 50 per cent of cases. Our new system of authorisation, which is founded on honouring people's wishes, will mean that the person's own wishes are paramount. That will, I believe, lead to a considerable increase in the number of organs that become available. We want to go further, however—as members have suggested in today's debate that we should do—and take advantage of the new legislation to develop further the transplantation infrastructure in Scotland. One of the key messages that we have gleaned from the evidence that was gathered during scrutiny of the bill is that we need to ensure that the right arrangements are in place and that we devote the necessary resources to the organisation of organ donation and transplantation. I am asking the Scottish transplant group to develop that, taking into account the views of NHS board chief executives and regional planning groups. We have been asked about monitoring. We will monitor the impact of the eventual act on transplantation in every respect. The Scottish transplant group and UK Transplant will undertake that monitoring on our behalf, especially in relation  to the organ donation rate in Scotland, which is clearly a matter of concern. On post mortems, the Executive will track the number of hospital post-mortem examinations and we will work with NHS Quality Improvement Scotland on monitoring the standards that apply to hospital post mortems. As regards aspects relating to the Anatomy Act 1984, the inspectorate arrangements that are in place will ensure on-going monitoring of the provisions. Throughout the process, we have kept an eye on what has been happening with human tissue legislation in the rest of the United Kingdom. The bill will be a distinct piece of Scottish legislation, but we want to ensure consistency for people throughout the United Kingdom as far as possible, particularly when it comes to the timing of the introduction of the new arrangements. The Human Tissue Authority will scrutinise applications from Scotland for living donation, and it will do the same for the rest of the United Kingdom. The authority will be in a position to begin that work in the autumn. For that reason, the UK Human Tissue Act 2004 will not commence in England and Wales in general until 1 September this year. Given the cross-border role of the Human Tissue Authority, that appears to offer us here in Scotland a very suitable commencement date. Commencement on 1 September will allow us time to put in place the training that health professionals and others will need to help them to implement the new legislation as effectively as possible. It will also allow us proper time to develop the regulations and guidance that will add detail to the bill's provisions, on which I have given further undertakings today. Above all, it will give us more time to raise public awareness and to inform people about the effects of the bill and its significance for each of us. That is the central message about the bill. I advise Roseanna Cunningham that we will come back to the Parliament and say more about how we will carry forward the policy. A campaign is under way to encourage donation, and we will seek to put in place a registration campaign over the next few months. We will issue a Health Department letter to NHS boards, with guidance of the kind that I described earlier in the debate and at previous stages. Above all, the bill is about ensuring that everyone has the opportunity to make their wishes known. One of the key changes under the bill is that the organ donor card will change from being a gesture of willingness to being a legal statement. Once the act comes into force, it will be even more important for people either to carry a donor card or to put their name on the organ donor register. Under the bill, those steps remain the two most convenient vehicles by which people may make their views known about what they wish to happen  to their bodies after their death. The result is that carrying a donor card or putting our name on the register will count under the bill as a form of authorisation. The provisions of the bill will work to ensure that all such authorisations are respected. On that basis, we expect there to be a significant increase in the number of organs that are made available for donation. A number of the points that have been made in the debate have emphasised how important it is that, as well as registering or carrying a card, people discuss their wishes with family members and those who are close to them so that, in the event of their death, those who might be asked about the person's wishes are aware of them. That is clearly a wise action to take, although it does not take the place of authorisation, which, as has been said during the debate, removes the requirement for a relative to be asked. We will work with UK Transplant to change the wording on the existing forms that are available from general practices, from the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency, through passport applications and elsewhere, so that they reflect the new legislation. That will enable us to ensure that not only will we have changed the law but, at the point at which we implement it, a sustained effort will have been made to ensure that people can take advantage of the law and authorise donation if that is what they wish to do. Those who make a declaration to that effect will know that it has the backing of the law. It is incumbent on each of us to take advantage of the power that the bill creates, whether that gives someone else the gift of life after our own death or enables medical research, which could save or enhance the life of future generations. We want to encourage every citizen to think about that. The decision on self-authorisation is one for each and every citizen to make, and we want to ensure that each and every citizen is aware of how the law is changing. We want to encourage people to give the matter serious thought.

That is a valid point. When we address the issue of how to raise awareness and ensure that that is the case, we will have regard to the fact that the law will make specific provision for children of secondary school age or over the age of 12. David Davidson's point is pertinent to that.  On that basis, and on the basis of the very broad support that we have heard this morning, I look forward to the vote later today confirming that the bill is the appropriate vehicle for the changes that we propose and that it has support across the Parliament.

This morning's consideration of amendments has been good and has reflected a broad consensus not on every issue but on the basic principle of the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill that, wherever possible, we should respect and follow the positive wishes that the living express about what should happen to their bodies after death. The Executive's stage 3 amendments have put some final touches to the bill and round off changes that were made at stage 2. I believe that the bill has been very much strengthened and improved by the range of amendments that have been agreed to, many of which were brought forward by the Executive as a response to comments made and issues raised at stage 1. The thoughtful and serious way in which issues were raised and debated at every stage is a credit to the Parliament, the Health Committee and all those involved in the process. The process by which ministers sought to respond to members' views has been in keeping with our approach to the development of the bill. We started by responding to concerns about past practice in post-mortem examinations and we worked closely with patients representatives and with a range of clinicians to ensure that the bill supports and strengthens best practice in each of the areas with which it deals. It is worth reflecting briefly on the main changes that have been agreed to the bill since our stage 1 debate on 30 November. First, we have incorporated an approach to donation by adults with incapacity that is in harmony with the principles in the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. The bill, as amended at stage 2, now makes it clear that the only forms of donation that are open to a living adult with incapacity under part 1 of the bill are organ donation as part of a domino transplant operation or the donation of regenerative tissue. In practice, "regenerative tissue" will mean bone marrow and skin. Our consultation last autumn showed that there is general support for our approach. The approach will also apply to donation by living children. We have also responded to concerns about the original definitions of the terms "organ" and "tissue" by clarifying the areas of uncertainty that members had raised, specifically to do with  corneas and skin. We have made adjustments to the provisions in parts 1 to 3 of the bill relating to authorisation. In particular, we have made sure that the needs of those who are blind or unable to write can be taken into account for each type of authorisation and for the withdrawal of authorisation. The key feature of the bill is that the concept of authorisation has replaced the concept of consent. By "authorisation", we mean the way in which people express their wishes about what they want to happen to their body after death. We use the word in the sense of, "I give my authorisation for the use of any part of my body after my death for the purpose of transplantation." That is a very direct and forceful statement for a person to make, as it allows the individual to take the initiative in making their views known.

It is certainly worth saying that one of the purposes of the bill is exactly what Ken Macintosh says: to regain trust in the system of organ donation and post-mortem examination. I believe that we will be able to move forward. However, it is important to acknowledge that passing the bill today will be the biggest contribution that we can make to increasing the number of organs that are available for donation. The wishes of the quarter of the Scottish population—more than a million people—who have already indicated that they would like their organs to be used for transplantation after death will now have legal force. As Mike Rumbles said, that is new and significant. The bill will significantly increase the number of organs that are available for donation. On that basis and on the basis of the trust that would thereby be regained, more and more people will register as donors. The bill will also update the Anatomy Act 1984. In response to evidence that was given at stage 1, we introduced amendments at stage 2 that provide more stringent controls on authorisation by children aged 12 to 15. The amendments will exclude bona fide museums from the need to be licensed for the public display of anatomical human remains. They will allow, subject to conditions, the public display of a wide range of anatomical human remains in the interests of education, training or research, including the health education of the general public.  We have had a thorough debate on the principles of the bill from stage 1 on and we have just had a full debate about how those principles are best applied in today's circumstances. The Parliament's support for those principles is to be welcomed. The bill is about respecting people's wishes by giving effect to them after a person's death; that respect is enshrined in the principle of authorisation. The bill modernises and replaces the unsatisfactory approach that exists in the current legislation and it gives us a system in relation to transplant matters that is fit for purpose in the 21 st century. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill be passed.

In response to a stage 2 amendment from Dr Jean Turner, I gave a commitment to look again at section 13(1), which provides for the steps that can be taken by managers of NHS hospitals and registered independent health care premises to preserve bodies for transplantation. Amendment 3 seeks to clarify that such managers will be able to move bodies or body parts to other premises only if authorisation is already in place. It will therefore not be permissible under the bill to transport a body or body part to other premises if authorisation for transplantation does not exist. Of course, in only a very few situations can a body be moved and still be available for transplantation, but doing so when no one has authorised transplantation might upset family members and could be viewed as disrespectful to the deceased. I believe that amendment 3 clarifies the point in the spirit of the bill, as it makes provision for those very unusual circumstances on the basis of authorisation. I move amendment 3.  Amendment 3 agreed to.

The purpose of amendments 8, 9 and 10, which seek to adjust an existing definition in and add a further definition to the interpretation section of the bill, is to clarify a number of issues that were raised in evidence or were highlighted by the Health Committee. Amendment 8 amends the definition of "tissue" in section 54(1) explicitly to define tissue as including skin, corneas and bone marrow. Amendment 9 adds the phrase "any derivative of skin" to the definition of "tissue sample", which will allow such parts of the body including hair and nails to be retained from a post-mortem examination. Amendment 10 is a technical amendment that is consequential to amendment 8. For the purposes of the bill, corneas will be included as a form of tissue, which reflects the way in which the transplantation community regards them.  Clarifying that skin is a form of tissue will allow living children and adults with incapacity to donate skin for the purposes of transplantation, subject to independent scrutiny by the Human Tissue Authority. It will also mean that adults with capacity will not be prohibited from donating skin. In the post-mortem context, the amendments seek to clarify the meaning of "tissue sample" in section 23(5), which lists the parts of the body that can be retained from a post-mortem examination. As a result, "tissue sample" will be understood as including skin and derivatives of skin, such as hair and nails. This group of amendments fulfils a commitment that I gave to the Health Committee at stage 2, and resolves the doubts that were raised about the status of certain types of human material under the bill. I move amendment 8.  Amendment 8 agreed to.  Amendments 9 and 10 moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to.

As Eleanor Scott said, the amendments stem from concerns that were expressed in evidence that the BMA submitted to the Health Committee at stage 1. As with other amendments this morning, we have sympathy with the concerns expressed and the motives that lie behind them, particularly in the context of transplantation, where there would—in a very few cases—be a risk of valuable organs not being used because there was no one to give the necessary authorisation. This is a complex area, but to some extent the matter is already addressed in Scots law. Section 7 of the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 allows parents to appoint guardians for their children in the event of the parents' death. That means that, if the parents die, the appointed guardian immediately becomes responsible and takes over parental rights and responsibilities. The guardian would, as a result, be classed as the person who had parental rights and would, therefore, in the circumstances that Eleanor Scott describes, be  able to give authorisation for a transplantation to go ahead. That outcome would, of course, require parents to have appointed a guardian under the 1995 act. In any case, we are committed to raising people's awareness of what might happen after a person's death. One issue that we will want to highlight, and which reflects Eleanor Scott's concerns, is that parents should always take the precaution of appointing a guardian who would have responsibility for their children after their death.

Public awareness raising clearly must start in the chamber. All of us who have children should have regard to their interests in the event that we die unexpectedly. Everyone in the chamber and elsewhere should be encouraged to do so, and to appoint a guardian to take parental responsibility if, tragically, the circumstances arise in which that is required. The point that lies behind the amendments is reasonable. However, the amendments have only been lodged at stage 3, and I fear that they do not achieve their intended purpose. I will highlight a couple of issues. First, the provisions would not apply to children for whom a local authority has parental rights and responsibilities, which in reality is a far more common occurrence than the car crash scenario that the amendments are intended to address. The bill was amended at stage 2 to address the Health Committee's recommendation that local authorities be prohibited from having the power to authorise any of the activities in the bill. Children for whom local authorities have parental rights and responsibilities would not be covered by Eleanor Scott's amendments. The changes that were made at stage 2 reflect the recognition—which we believe is right—that there will be occasions on which it is not proportionate to make provision for authorisation of organ donation on the part of a child. The other aspect that gives me significant concern relates to amendment 109, on the nearest relative list. As presented, the list includes in the hierarchy a parent of a child, but does not provide for circumstances in which that parent has, for one reason or another, ceased to have parental rights  and responsibilities. In some circumstances, a parent might have had his or her parental rights removed, for example if he or she had been involved in abuse of the child. It would be inconsistent to allow such a parent to have the right to give or withhold authorisation under the bill. Equally, there might be reasons why another relative did not have access to the child during their life, and in such a case the relative should not be given a role after the child's death. I fully recognise the purpose of the amendments, but I believe that promoting the appropriate mechanisms whereby parents can ensure that their children's interests are looked after in the event that the parents die is the way forward. I therefore oppose the amendments in Eleanor Scott's name.

Nanette Milne's amendments respond to very serious discussions at stage 1, but I do not believe that they are necessary or appropriate. I do not think that we should extend the organ donor register to become a register of both authorisations and prohibition; nor should we set up and run a separate register of organ donation prohibitions. Whichever vehicle was used to implement the amendments, it would run directly counter to the purpose of the bill, which is first and foremost to support people's wish to do something positive after their death. That is the principle behind authorisation. I recognise that there are people who do not want parts of their bodies to be used for the purposes in the bill and who might feel strongly about that. I fully accept the principle that their wishes should be respected, but I am confident that the bill will allow such objections to donation to be respected. The first safeguard in the bill is that nothing can happen if there is no authorisation by the person, or by their nearest relative or a person with parental rights and responsibilities. There can be no transplantation by default, nor—because of the decision that we made a few minutes ago—can there be any transplantation on the basis of presumed consent. The bill underlines that by bringing criminal sanctions to bear. If a clinician were to proceed without authorisation, they would face stiff penalties, including a fine or imprisonment, or both. Where there is no record of the person's wishes, we seek to address the concern that a family member might sanction a donation through ignorance by placing responsibility for authorisation on the person who was closest to the deceased in life and so is most likely to have the greatest awareness of the deceased's attitude to the issues. Section 7 makes it clear that where the nearest relative has "actual knowledge" that the person was unwilling for any part of their body to be used for transplantation, they must not give authorisation. The reality is that people who feel strongly about such matters will not keep their feelings to themselves. They will share their views  with their family and friends. If their views have a religious dimension, they will no doubt share them with others of the same faith. It is hard to envisage strong views on such a matter being unknown to any of those who might be asked. That would leave only the highly unusual case of a person living in isolation, either without any surviving relatives or, for some reason, unable or unwilling to mention to anyone close to them their own strongly held views on such matters. Of course, if people in that position object to organ donation, their wishes should be respected as much as anyone else's, but I do not believe that recording those wishes in a register set up for that purpose, or in the organ donor register, is the way to do that. In such cases, people can set out their wishes in their will, and they can also ensure that their views are reflected in the medical record held by their general practitioner. I think that the medical record is the best place for such views to be recorded, because if there was the possibility of somebody becoming an organ donor, the clinician would either contact that person's GP or, if they were unable to do that, consult the person's medical record. No clinician will proceed with a transplant involving an organ about which he or she is not fully informed. Recording wishes in that way is the key and can already be done routinely, either verbally or by writing to one's GP setting out one's objections and asking for the letter to be added to the medical record. I understand the concerns behind Nanette Milne's amendments, and I am happy to offer guidance to GPs to ensure that they include any such objection in a patient's record. I will tell GPs that any such objections should also be included in the extract from medical records that they provide to NHS 24. In the near future, the introduction of the electronic health record will provide a further vehicle by which an objection recorded by a GP can be accessed readily by a transplant co-ordinator seeking a donor. In addition, we are working with the General Medical Council on including in its "Good Medical Practice" guidance, which applies to all doctors, a provision making clear a doctor's duty to respect the wishes of his or her patients after death. I ask Nanette Milne to consider withdrawing her amendments on the basis of the assurance that I have been able to give today.

As you mentioned, Presiding Officer, the amendments in group 2 are technical or consequential amendments. Amendments 38 and 61 follow the amendments that were made at stage 2 to prohibit the withdrawal of authorisation for transplantation after it has been given by an adult's nearest relative or, in the case of a child, by a person with parental rights and responsibilities. Amendments 5 and 6 seek to ensure that an adult who is blind or unable to write is able to withdraw authorisation for post-mortem examination in writing through the use of a signatory and a witness. They complete the package of amendments that we have lodged to make provision for people in that category. Amendments 1 and 7 are simply drafting amendments. I move amendment 1.

Amendments 2 and 4 were lodged as a result of concerns expressed by the Wellcome Trust and the Medical Research Council to the Executive about the possibility that the bill would curtail investigations of bodies of historical interest. Much can be learned from the removal of a tissue sample from a body that has been held in an existing collection for many decades. If an ancient body is discovered preserved in a peat bog, researchers will naturally be keen to examine the body for the information that it might yield—for example, on the cause of death. Under the bill, such investigations might conceivably be held to constitute an offence, because no authorisation for such activities would be in place from the individual or from identifiable family members, for obvious reasons. We do not want scientists to have to investigate the family tree of a body in a peat bog before they undertake carbon dating of it. Therefore, amendment 2 disapplies the authorisation and offence provisions in part 1 in cases in which the person died at least 100 years before the day on which section 3 comes into force. Amendment 4 does the same in relation to part 2, on post-mortem examinations. The amendments are drafted broadly so that they will permit anything involved in relation to the body of a deceased person, where the person died at least 100 years before the day on which the relevant provision comes into force.  Amendment 2 moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to.

As many members have said, the most important principle in the bill is the principle of authorisation. We have put that principle in place because we recognise that the existing system of passive consent to organ donation is no longer fit for purpose. In modernising our human tissue legislation, we had a choice to make between a system that would replace passive consent with active authorisation, which is what the bill proposes, or a system which would presume consent on the part of people who do not object, which is what John Farquhar Munro's amendments would put in place. As Janis Hughes suggested, a time might come when it will be safe to presume consent on the part of people who have expressed no view. However, that time is not now. In my view, a change that is as radical as a switch to a system of presumed consent for transplantation could be introduced only if there were clear evidence of strong public and professional support for it. Although many members might welcome such a move, the evidence simply does not exist. As Mike Rumbles, Nanette Milne and others said, one of the lessons from disclosures about retention of children's organs after post-mortem examination is that, for many people, presumed consent is not consent at all. Many people are willing to donate organs and tissue after their death, but they want to have their say about what organs or tissue will be taken from their bodies and what that will be used for. That is why the fundamental premise of the bill is so important. The bill is based on the principle that people's wishes should be respected after their death. That means that it is for each person to make those wishes clear. If that has not happened, authorisation must be obtained from the people who were closest to that person in life and who are most likely to know his or her wishes. Without authorisation from the deceased or their nearest relative, transplantation cannot happen. On that basis, I hope that Stewart Maxwell will accept that what he says he wants will be delivered by the fundamental principles of the bill as it stands. Under Mr Munro's amendments, the only wish that people would be able to record would be to prohibit the removal and use after death of their body parts for transplantation. Where there is no prohibition, the adult may be deemed to have authorised the removal and use of organs but only—as Dennis Canavan pointed out—after their  nearest relative has also had the opportunity to object to donation going ahead. There are a number of grounds on which the nearest relative can object to organ donation, despite the fact that the deceased person had not registered their objection to their organs being donated. One of those is that transplantation of the deceased adult's body parts would cause significant distress to the nearest relative or to the deceased person's partner, parent, child, brother or sister. A clinician who was in urgent need of an organ would face a much harder task if Mr Munro's amendments were passed. Under the current system, which we wish to replace, he or she would have to seek the consent of the family of the deceased. Under the provisions in the bill, that onus on the clinician will no longer be required if a person has, before their death, authorised organ donation. The nearest relative would need to be consulted only if no such authorisation had been given. In that event, the nearest relative would be asked whether they knew the person's wishes and were prepared to authorise organ donation. Under Mr Munro's amendments, the clinician would always have to contact the nearest relative unless a specific prohibition had been registered by the deceased. The nearest relative could then object on the basis of the distress to themselves or another person in the family that would be caused by the transplantation. In other words, there would be not fewer barriers to organ donation—which is John Farquhar Munro's intention—but new barriers to organ donation. In practice, if a person wanted to donate their body parts, that positive intention could be ignored and overruled by the nearest relative on the basis of the distress that might be caused to family members.

That is precisely what the bill will do. It will place at the centre of the process the authorisation that has been granted by an individual, rather than an objection that might have been registered by that individual or another person, which is what would be required under a system involving presumed consent. It has been said that about a quarter of the Scottish population have put their names on the NHS organ donor register. Under the bill, their organs will automatically be available for transplantation after death. Under John Farquhar Munro's amendments, nobody's body would be available in that sense; every case would have to be checked with the nearest relative by the clinician, unless a prohibition was in place.  The approach that the bill takes is the right one. It will increase the number of organ donations, honour the wishes of the deceased and bring up to date the basis on which relatives are approached. This is a policy matter—it is not simply a matter of personal belief. I therefore urge John Farquhar Munro to seek to withdraw his amendments. If he will not do so, I urge Parliament to maintain the unanimity of support for the principle of active authorisation by rejecting his amendments.

I congratulate Iain Smith on securing the debate, which is on an issue of pressing importance for many. As Christine May said, cancer patients can face a period of anguish and anxiety before treatment has begun. It is therefore right that the Government sets targets to limit that period as far as it can. We have set challenging targets, including a target of two months from urgent referral by a general practitioner to first treatment. As has been pointed out, in the quarter to June last year, four out of 10 cancer patients in Fife were not treated within that target period. The challenge for NHS Fife is to ensure that it can meet its targets in future. Fife NHS Board can and, no doubt, will speak for itself, but it may be helpful to members if I indicate the current position. Progress has been made. Over the next few months, we expect to see continuing improvements in Fife and throughout Scotland. In Fife, as elsewhere, the Scottish Executive and its officials will continue to work closely with Fife NHS Board to support it in meeting its targets. That is a continuous and a continuing process. Members will be interested to know that, in response to the figures that have been debated this evening, my officials contacted the chief executive of NHS Fife on 6 January to discuss our concerns about the board's performance. My officials sought assurances that action was under way to rectify problems and they agreed to discuss problems with senior clinicians and managers. That was done by conference call on 16 January and it will be done again, in person, on 7 February. In all their engagements in supporting NHS Fife to meet the targets that we have set it, officials act for and on behalf of Scottish—Labour and Liberal Democrat—ministers in the coalition. These are not party-political matters and I am slightly disappointed in some of the tone and comment of a party-political nature in a members' debate on an area of common concern. I want to lay out the position as I understand it from our discussions with NHS Fife. Christine May referred to the fact that, not so long ago, breast cancer waiting times were 100 per cent on target in Fife. That figure slipped significantly to less than 60 per cent in the second quarter of last year. The cause of that disappointing result is largely a gap in surgical capacity following a retirement and the time taken to recruit a replacement. An increase in the number of referrals has put extra pressure on mammography time. Additional staff and extended working hours are now in place and a new  referrals system is being introduced to speed up the issuing of appointments. Elsewhere, there is a five-week waiting time for endoscopy, which is impacting on the two-month target for first treatment of colorectal cancer patients. NHS Fife therefore is considering the provision of additional endoscopy sessions for the short term and, in the long term, will review its management of surgical and medical capacity to see whether the two can be brought together to maximise the available capacity. On lung cancer, arrangements will be approved to shorten patient pathways and work is under way to make that happen. The targets that have been set are challenging for boards, doctors, nurses, support staff and everyone in the multidisciplinary teams who work together to deliver the best possible care for patients with cancer. It is important to recognise that each of the different tumour types needs different investigations and treatments and that every patient needs the assessment and treatment that are best suited to them. We are always concerned when problems arise but, in this case, we are pleased that NHS Fife has taken rapid action to restore services to their previous high level.

I accept that there can be a lag in the production of the statistics. I will come to Iain Smith's point in a moment, but it is important that members should not overstate the extent to which the waiting time figures here are behind those in England. People can be misled by the lag in publication of the statistics. For April to June 2005, Scotland was 74 per cent on target, compared with 77 per cent for England, not the 88 per cent that was mentioned, which was for the third quarter. The optimum targets that we have set are for the end of 2005, but the figures for that period are not yet available. I understand Iain Smith's point. We are of course keen to be as well informed as possible, but it is appropriate that boards take time to get the matter right and to ensure that they provide accurate figures. We will track and work with NHS Fife in its process of improving the figures. We look forward to receiving further information from the board in that regard. We have made significant investments in Fife and throughout Scotland. It is worth recording that many patients are treated within the two-month target, consistent with their clinical and personal  needs. As has been noted, in dealing with breast, colorectal and lung cancer, Fife was better than Scotland as a whole. I am confident that, with the measures that NHS Fife is taking, it can be again. For the period to June last year, there was a 74 per cent success rate throughout Scotland in relation to waiting time targets. We expect NHS Fife and other boards to drive continuous improvement. In response to Iain Smith's query about patients from North East Fife who are treated by NHS Tayside, I reassure him that there is no disadvantage for patients from Fife. However, as part of the process of examining how to address the situation in Fife, on 7 February my officials will meet NHS Tayside as well as NHS Fife, recognising the significance of that wider resource. We also recognise the role that the national waiting times centre in Clydebank, the Golden Jubilee national hospital, can play in supporting boards throughout the country.  All of us are touched by cancer at some time in our lives, if not personally then through our family and friends. We all agree that it is unacceptable for patients to wait any longer than is absolutely necessary for diagnosis and treatment of cancer. We look forward to sustainable reductions in waiting times in Fife and throughout Scotland. I give all members who have sought it the assurance that we will keep on the case and continue to work with NHS Fife to ensure that the situation that arose in the second quarter of last year is rectified as quickly and efficiently as possible.  Meeting closed at 17:34.

Unless I misheard him, Mr Brocklebank was complaining about the failure to meet Government targets but now he is saying that they should not exist. Could Mr Brocklebank clarify his position?

Will the member give way?

Had I been aware that Colin Fox wanted to intervene, I would have been happy to let him in. I challenge the member's proposition that, because we point out that it is an anomaly that pensioners who have good incomes get free prescriptions, we intend to change that.

We started with Colin Fox's speech, in which he asserted that 30 MSPs qualify for exemption from prescription charges because they are over 60, have a chronic condition, are pregnant or are nursing mothers. That is an example of the anomalies in the present system, which we recognise. However, Colin Fox's bill is not designed to limit exemptions to those who are on low pay. He said that it is unjust that one in four members is exempt from paying charges but, as Des McNulty said, his solution is to extend exemption to the other three in four members. That is hardly a blueprint for social justice and it is more than a debating point—it goes to the heart of the SSP's proposal. Because the system has anomalies and because some people who are on low incomes are not exempted, the SSP proposes not to reform the system or to exempt the people who have  been missed out, but to give tens of millions of pounds back to everyone who pays, including those who can afford to do so.

No. I am glad that Mr Sheridan has given me the opportunity to make that clear and to respond to points that have been made about free personal care. It might not have occurred to SNP members that free personal care applies to people who are over 60 in the same way as the exemption from prescription charges does. People ask whether we are consistent. We recognise that people over 60—even those who are on good incomes—have particular health and care challenges that younger people in general do not have. I will be absolutely clear. Some policy objectives are involved—[ Interruption. ] Shona Robison refers to dental checks from a sedentary position, so I will address them. Free dental and eye checks relate to our policy and priority of preventive care and of tackling illness before it happens. That is completely different from the proposition that drugs should be made free.

I will move on. Concern is felt about people who are on low incomes and who do not qualify for an exemption. Like Elaine Smith, we make it clear that we want to ensure that nobody is deterred from taking their medicine because they cannot afford to pay a prescription charge. As Margaret Smith and Roseanna Cunningham said, the extent of that problem is unclear and Colin Fox has not provided substantive evidence of that. However, we know that more than 20,000 people qualify for help for some medical costs on the ground of low income, but not for free prescriptions. We think that we can do something about that, which is why the issue was included in the consultation paper. We know that students and trainees are often at the lower end of the income spectrum, and we think that we can do something about that too. We recognise that some of the people who would benefit most from an annual season ticket system that would cover all their prescriptions for a year can struggle to find £93 up front to get that benefit. We want to explore how we can do something to enable people to receive that up-front benefit in the context of technological change in the next couple of years.

Students and trainees  receive relatively low cash incomes. I agree that there are exceptions to that rule, but we have a policy priority. We recognise the specific needs of older people and we want to increase access to higher education. I am disappointed that the Scottish National Party does not share that objective. [ Interruption. ]

We believe that our proposals are sensible and affordable in trying to meet the objective of widening access. We simply cannot accept the idea that additional support can be provided to people on low incomes only by providing free prescriptions to everyone else. That would not be a good use of NHS resources. It has been said that nearly £45 million a year comes into NHS boards' budgets as a result of prescription charges. That is a serious sum of money. Mary Scanlon asked about NHS dentistry. In Elgin on Friday, I announced the allocation of £30 million of additional investment in NHS board dental premises. In Fife on Monday, I announced a further £15 million for high street dentists to improve their premises. Such sums, which are not insignificant, will make a real difference to dental patients throughout Scotland. This week, we have committed £45 million to health priorities. We certainly want to invest in priority areas, but we do not believe that free prescriptions for those who can afford to pay are a priority. Not only would £45 million of revenue be lost to NHS boards, but—as has been said—demand for additional prescriptions and prescribing time would increase costs by millions of pounds. Of course, we cannot tell members today how many millions of pounds that increase would be, and we do not want to find out. There is a difference between reforming the system in order to extend exemptions to more people who ought to be exempted and removing all charges and generating unlimited demand. The Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain has said that there would be up to £245 million of extra costs. I do not want to find out from experience that the NHS is losing £245 million to fund a scheme whose benefits go to better-off members of our society. It has been said that we know in advance the conclusions that we will draw, but that is not true. The point of consulting is to draw out the evidence and to reach conclusions, which is what we intend to do. However, we are clear that we are not looking to spend money in the way that Alex Neil suggested. We are looking to target our resources on the most important health challenges, in the areas in which we can make the most difference. That is why we are consulting on exempt chronic  conditions and on people who receive low incomes, and why we are consulting across the board. We want to ensure that the reform of prescription charges that we propose is well founded on an adequate evidence base and that it will stand the test of time. We want a fairer, simpler and more affordable system, and we believe that abolition would give most of the benefits to people who can afford to pay; that it would impose unpredictable new costs on the NHS; and that it would divert precious resources away from the areas of highest priority. There are no pots of gold at the end of the rainbow. Choices must be made and reform, not abolition, is the right choice. I urge members to reject the bill.

I wonder whether Alex Neil welcomes the fact that we are consulting on precisely how we deal with the anomalies and that one of the purposes of our consultation is to assess the cost.

What evidence does the member believe we concealed?

rose—

I am sure that Shona Robison, having been present at the Health Committee, will accept that the committee asked that we bring forward this consultation at this time. We have done so to fulfil the commitments that we gave to the convener on 7 December.

Shona Robison is presenting the abolition of prescription charges as her party's position. Has she estimated the cost of that policy?

I congratulate Shona Robison on securing the debate. I also thank all the members who contributed in such a positive way to the debate on this important topic. Andy Kerr's involvement in the launch of the Tayside project is a mark of the Executive's recognition of the value of the approach that the project is taking and the work that it is doing. Palliative care as a concept was pioneered through the voluntary sector, which is still heavily involved in the provision and development of such care, particularly for patients with cancer. That is entirely appropriate; it allows us to mobilise in support of health care the compassion and experience of health service professionals and of the families and others who have a knowledge of the patient's experience. Marie Curie Cancer Care is one of the oldest and best-known of the organisations that work in this field. I understand that it opened its first hospice at Hill of Tarvit near Cupar in Fife in 1952. Therefore, it is fitting that Marie Curie Cancer Care, in its UK-wide campaign to assist more people to be able to end their days at home, has chosen Tayside as the site of one of its pilot projects. As members have said, Marie Curie Cancer Care has signed up an impressive list of partners, including Tayside NHS Board, the three local authorities—Dundee City Council, Perth and Kinross Council and Angus Council—as well as the Scottish Ambulance Service. That coalition of interests fits very well with the principles of palliative care, which are to address the physical, spiritual, social and psychological needs of patients, their families and their carers and to do so through partnership. The project has an interesting focus on increasing the opportunity for people to spend their last days at home. I accept that some people who would choose to die at home are not able to do so. However, the reasons for that are complex. Making support available around the clock will be a big help, but it is not the whole story. It is important that I say in response to some of the points that were made in the debate that resources should not be the key in this matter. We should recognise that being able to provide patients with choice is important. I will not respond to Shona Robison's request to sign blank cheques, but we will consider the conclusions of the Tayside project very carefully indeed.

Marie Curie Cancer Care makes the interesting proposition that one of the benefits of the Tayside project is that it could be cost-neutral because of the invest-to-save aspect to which Shona Robison refers. That will be a feature of the project at which we will look very closely indeed in our final assessment. We heard several very moving speeches about people who are reaching the end of their lives, and the project is about how services can be provided to individuals who are in that position. The responsibility of health care providers is to ensure that those services join up. We try to do that in all parts of the public sector, but the sensitivities of cases in this area are self-evident. It is also self-evident that it is easier to join up services when they are provided in a hospital or on a similar site, because the journey from patient to patient is shorter. Therefore, it will be harder to provide such services at home. It is important that when we carry forward such home projects we take on board the logistical challenges involved and realise that they are different from those involved in providing care in a hospital. Many of us may want to spend our last days at home, but we must recognise the position of families—that point was made in the debate. Families will not always know what the final journey will look like; they may not always know to whom to turn or when. In such circumstances, a Marie Curie nurse can make a real difference by reassuring families and by knowing whom to contact and what to say if further support is required. While recognising the innovative nature of the Tayside project, it is important also to recognise that palliative support already exists in various parts of Scotland. For example, there is a managed clinical network for palliative care in Forth valley. In many parts of Scotland, hospices provide support for out-patients and in-patients. We have made it clear to NHS boards that they must provide 50 per cent of hospices' agreed costs by April of this year. However, it is important to stress that hospices want to retain their independent status. The 50 per cent funding will be provided in a way that allows us to respect the wishes of those who are involved in providing hospice services. NHS 24 offers out-of-hours support and has developed arrangements to get access to special patients' notes so that it can deal quickly and effectively with terminally ill patients. However, I  am happy to acknowledge that the provision of dedicated Marie Curie nurses takes the service a step further. With the project, people in Tayside will know that, if they choose to die at home, they will be able to call on direct support when they need it. We should be proud of the ability of voluntary organisations to innovate and expand the frontiers of health care in such a way. It is also worth saying that such a project fits well with the principles that are set out in "Delivering for Health", which we published a few weeks ago, to make health care available as locally as possible at whatever stage in a patient's life and to respond to patients' needs on their terms. If the project is successful, it could transform the options available to people when they choose where to see out their last days. However, we must leave the door open to people to change their minds. By definition, the process of dying is often not easy and is not always what patients and their families expect. A patient may decide to die at home but find that they or their family simply cannot cope. Even with the best support from Marie Curie nurses, that can happen, and a patient or their family may decide that they need the support and back-up services that are provided in hospitals or hospices. As Shiona Baird said, we must ensure that, if patients change their minds, that decision is not considered a failure of care or of the family. We must also ensure that no stigma is attached and that the health service is able to respond quickly. We have rightly focused on cancer, but it is important to say that we must also make sure that we address the needs of terminally-ill people who do not have cancer. In palliative care, they can sometimes be overlooked, partly for clinical reasons—it is less easy to predict the course of death—but partly for cultural reasons, in that we tend to pay a good deal of attention to the situation of cancer patients and not realise that palliative care goes beyond that. I hope that the Tayside project will help us to take those aspects on board and broaden out beyond the care of cancer patients to the whole range of palliative care. I also look forward to hearing about the findings of Marie Curie projects elsewhere in the United Kingdom. Tayside has urban and rural areas and therefore the project will be instructive for us all, but I suspect that there will also be lessons to be learned from elsewhere, and I look forward to them. Whatever the outcome, I have no doubt that we will be able to take away important messages that will improve the quality of care that is available in Scotland. As I said a few minutes ago, it would not be appropriate to talk at this stage about future roll-out throughout Scotland. We need to let the three-year project run its course, prove the value of its  work and give us results on which we can make balanced judgments. However, the prospects are good. I give one final assurance that, should obvious and early lessons emerge from the project in the course of its three years, we will expect health boards to take those emerging findings on board and act on them.  In the meantime, like other members, I take the opportunity to wish Marie Curie Cancer Care every success with the development of the project in Tayside.  Meeting closed at 17:59.

We have introduced a range of policies that are designed to assist older people to live healthy and independent lives. When we launched "Delivering for Health" on 27 October, we emphasised the importance of strengthening and enhancing primary care services; of anticipatory care and management of long-term conditions; and of investing additional resources in disadvantaged areas to address health inequalities.  We have also undertaken a range of initiatives to encourage people of all ages to take action to improve their health and well-being by stopping smoking, drinking sensibly, eating a healthy diet and taking appropriate physical exercise.

I am aware of the matter that Mr Maxwell raises. He will recognise that it is properly a matter for North Ayrshire Council to determine. We have set a clear policy direction, which is that people should be supported to stay in their own homes, when that is possible, and to stay in supported care homes when that is the next best alternative. It would be inappropriate for central Government to dictate to local authorities how best they should secure that provision.

Individual national health service boards have primary responsibility for workforce planning. That responsibility includes the recruitment and training of specialist nurses who work with sufferers of long-term conditions such as Parkinson's disease. However, we have initiated a Scotland-wide review of community nursing, which will set the direction for creating a modern, redesigned community nursing service. The review is intended to contribute to the reduction of hospital admissions, improve the management of patients with long-term conditions such as Parkinson's disease, facilitate hospital discharges and support the care and treatment of patients in their homes and community settings.

We recognise the importance of the areas of specialism to which Margo MacDonald refers. We will take into careful consideration the findings of the reviews to which I and Margo MacDonald referred and will make decisions based on the evidence.

I certainly want to ensure that when our officials carry out the review, they take evidence from those with first-hand experience of what is required. I will, of course, pay due heed to the advice that they give me.

All national health service organisations have a duty to ensure that all staff have personal development plans, which includes identifying the specific training needs of members of staff. They also have a responsibility for nursing and midwifery post-registration education and for working in partnership with staff to ensure that they are supported and encouraged to maintain and develop their skills. Under the facing the future banner, we have committed more than £10 million to several nursing and midwifery initiatives during the past three financial years, because we recognise the importance of maintaining training opportunities in order to enable greater specialism in the future.

Waiting times have been reduced in the majority of NHS boards. An important part of the modernisation agenda focuses on monitoring and encouraging the reduction in waiting times and providing support to boards, where required. Boards that have not yet met waiting time targets will be supported to do so. Improvements have also been made across Scotland in audiology accommodation, information technology, equipment, staffing, training and the patient journey. We expect to meet our partnership agreement commitment that by March this year the NHS will be in a position to offer digital hearing aids in all cases in which they represent the most clinically effective option.

I do indeed recognise Susan Deacon's concerns about the position in Lothian. We have recognised the particular challenges there and have asked NHS Lothian to produce a clear and robust action plan in the course of this financial year to indicate how it will make further progress to meet the targets that have been set for it. Susan Deacon is right to highlight the importance of workforce and staffing issues. The Executive has provided funding support for the course at Queen Margaret University College to which she referred. That will involve a four-year bachelor of science course as well as a two-year fast-track conversion course for existing science graduates. We want to ensure that the course is a success in the way that the member describes. I will certainly ensure that our department pays close attention to ensuring that that happens.

We published guidance in April to implement recommendations from the fourth edition of "Health for all children"—Hall 4—which is a United Kingdom-wide review of child health screening and surveillance. Under the recommendations, there will be a minimum universal programme of health checks for every child in Scotland, with enhanced support for those families most in need.

I absolutely agree that it is vital that people should understand what is involved in the new recommendations. It is for that reason that we are producing a leaflet for distribution to parents across Scotland. Local health boards will adapt it to include local information. Boards will put in place implementation plans and work with staff to ensure that they understand fully the implications of the new recommendations that are being put into force. It is important to say that judgments will be made on the basis of the needs of families. Every family will receive the support that the assessment of that family's needs indicates that it requires.

That is either a complete misunderstanding or a misrepresentation of the position. The Executive is putting the focus on the families who most need support. It is possible to take an abstract position on the matter and say that support should be increased for some and, at the same time, remain unchanged for others. However, if we are serious about focusing resources where they are needed, we will have to follow through in practice. That is exactly what the recommendations will do.

Is the logic of what Carolyn Leckie has just said that any issue that is subject to public debate in the chamber is, by definition, appropriate for a public inquiry, whatever the cost?

All speeches have acknowledged the grief and suffering that have been caused to some hundreds of people who were infected by blood products. We, too, recognise the courage of those people in the face of adversity and the efforts of the many who have worked on their behalf. The Health Committee can take credit for having focused attention on the issue over the years. Scottish ministers have also played their part in providing significant financial recognition of the issue through the Skipton Fund. I was asked about the appeals procedure and I can report that, following our discussions with the Department of Health, it has advised that it will advertise early in the new year for members of the appeals panel. I am sure that that step forward will be widely welcomed. I have listened carefully to the arguments that have been made about the additional lessons that might be learned if we had a public inquiry into matters that took place some years ago. Many questions have been raised. However, although I welcome the fact that the Health Committee continues to take an interest in the subject, I do not believe that we have heard any convincing evidence that a public inquiry would provide practical lessons for the future. We have already put large amounts of detailed information into the public domain by releasing the  Executive's documentation on the topic, which covers the past 30 years. We have provided a full evidence base, but the evidence does not suggest that the key decisions and actions that were taken were unreasonable in the context of the scientific knowledge that was available at the time.

Carolyn Leckie echoes the point that Brian Adam made, and I will deal with that in a moment. However, it was bizarre to hear Shona Robison complain that we had put too much information into the public domain while she called for a full public inquiry. Our position is more defensible than that. In not releasing some documents along with the large amounts of information that were made public a few days ago, officials acted in line with the provisions of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. They extracted relevant information from the range of files that were examined and made that information public. However, internal communications and advice to ministers—which, in the main, do not bear on the substantive issues—were not made public. Several points were made about clinical judgments that were made 20 years ago, but the treatment of patients must be ultimately a matter for individual clinicians. The evidence suggests that clinicians acted in good faith, in the interests of their patients and in the light of the knowledge that was available to them at that time. Lessons have certainly been learned about the need to ensure that patients are fully involved in, and informed about, their own care and treatment. An example of that is the public consultation on "Hepatitis C: Proposed Action Plan in Scotland", which Helen Eadie mentioned. As she will know, the plan is mainly concerned with addressing public health issues and treating those with hepatitis C, rather than about people affected specifically by NHS treatment with blood products, but the plan is out for public consultation. The Scottish representatives of the Haemophilia Society have been given the opportunity to comment on treatment plans and awareness-raising initiatives, so we will certainly take into account any comments that the society makes, as well as the points that have been made by members today.

I would rather focus on the issue at hand, which is how to secure improvements for the future. That is the key issue to which priority should be given. With improved knowledge and improved products, the level of safety is now extremely high. There is little more to be learned about the safety of blood products today. As I said, the debate has moved on and the documents that were recently released have been considered carefully. As Helen Eadie and others said, undertaking a public inquiry is a serious business that involves time, effort and human and financial resources. A public inquiry should not be called for as a gesture of sympathy, or just in case there is something to be inquired into, but should be justified only on the basis of significant evidence that more remains to be learned. We have not heard such evidence this morning. Much more is known about blood-borne viruses today than was known 20 years ago. The Executive is as keen as anybody to ensure that lessons are learned so that such things do not happen again. We would not ignore compelling new evidence that suggested that more could be achieved by looking further into events in the past but, equally, we will not support calls for an inquiry in the absence of such evidence. All speakers have expressed their sympathy with those who have been affected by this tragedy, but I believe that the priority now is to ensure that the best quality of care can be provided in the NHS within the resources and the scientific knowledge that are now available to us.

It is important first to express the profound sympathy that everyone who has dealt with the matter feels for the individuals and families who have been affected. Whatever the circumstances, it must be enormously difficult to come to terms with living with a condition such as hepatitis C, which can be serious and distressing, and it must be even more difficult to accept with the knowledge that it was contracted as a result of medical treatment. As Carolyn Leckie suggested, it is important to be clear about the circumstances in which the situation arose. As we know, the events took place several years ago, when knowledge about blood-borne virus infections was much more limited. When the events took place, the basic science that is involved was not understood. There were indications that an unidentified virus existed that affected blood supplies and there was a scientific debate about its importance and what precautions should be taken, but it was only in 1989 that the hepatitis C virus was specifically and clearly identified. Heat treatment of blood concentrate products meant that they were safe from hepatitis C from 1987 and measures were in place to screen blood donations and safeguard blood supplies from hepatitis C by 1991. The development of knowledge about hepatitis C is largely a matter of public record. I am sure that members who have examined the matters in question will be aware that there was considerable debate in scientific journals and conferences at the time. Members will be aware that Andy Kerr met Scottish representatives of the Haemophilia Society earlier this year. At that meeting, he promised to release documents relating to the issue that the Executive held. That was done on 12 December 2005, when we released everything that had a bearing on the matter and which was not exempt under the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002. Some of those documents have already been referred to. Information has  been placed in the public domain where doing so is appropriate.

We have retrieved and collated 150 separate files in order to establish the position. More than 100 of those files have been placed in the public domain. We have taken steps to ensure as far as we can that hepatitis C cannot now be transmitted through national health service treatment with blood or blood products. Our approach to patient safety and communication is now much more precautionary than it once was. We have a real commitment to openness and we are committed to ensuring the safety of blood products and to communicating known risks as openly as possible. That is why, for example, we have invested substantial resources and have taken significant other measures in recent years to minimise the risks of new variant CJD to the blood supply. Last year, we and Government departments elsewhere in the United Kingdom established the Skipton Fund scheme to address the issues that are faced by those who are living with the consequences of what has happened.

I am aware of that. Shona Robison will be aware that a commitment to establish an appeals fund has been made and that that fund will be established. We are continuing to discuss bringing that forward with the Department of Health and are keen to see a fund in place as soon as possible. The Skipton Fund has been operational for 18 months. In that time, ex gratia payments have been made to more than 4,000 people, of whom 640 are resident in Scotland. Payments in excess of £12 million have been made to date to people with hepatitis C in Scotland who have contracted it as a result of treatment with blood or blood products by the NHS. Carolyn Leckie's motion calls for an independent public inquiry. It is worth emphasising that a number of inquiries have already been held on different aspects of the tragedy. There have been inquiries by the Health Department, which investigated the issues relating to the heat treatment of blood products and published its  report; by the Health and Community Care Committee, which concluded that there was nothing to be gained by further inquiry into the issues that have been raised; and by Lord Ross's expert group, which was instrumental in laying the foundations for the Skipton Fund. Our amendment argues that the main objective now is for the NHS to continue to implement the lessons that have been learned and to ensure that the supply of blood and blood products is as safe as possible for the benefit of patients now and in the future. I hope that that view will command wide support. I move amendment S2M-3767.2, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "expresses its profound sympathy for those patients who have been infected with Hepatitis C through NHS treatment with blood or blood products; welcomes the payments which are being made by the Scottish Executive to help with the suffering and hardship involved; notes that there have been significant improvements in knowledge and in the safety of blood products since these events took place; believes that there is now more information in the public domain and that the debate has moved on, and believes that the focus should now be on practical action which would benefit the future delivery of services or patient care."

NHS boards can draw on good practice guidelines on the prevention and management of hip fractures in older people and on the management of osteoporosis. Both those sets of guidelines were produced by the Scottish intercollegiate guidelines network.

NHS Quality Improvement Scotland recently produced a useful report, of which I am sure Linda Fabiani is aware. I know that the National Osteoporosis Society is holding a series of workshops around Scotland to help NHS  boards with the implementation of the SIGN osteoporosis guidelines, which are clearly intended as good practice advice, rather than as instructions to boards. It is appropriate that boards should take all that advice into account in determining how to proceed with the management of osteoporosis and related conditions in their respective areas.

We are working with partners to support carers in a number of ways, including the preparation of the care 21 report on the future of unpaid care in Scotland, which I helped to launch in Inverness in September. We will respond to the care 21 report early next year.

I am aware of the good work that is done by the Princess Royal Trust for Carers and other bodies that are involved in the Highland Community Care Forum. Although Maureen Macmillan is right to say that the position on the Highland Community Care Forum is under review, I understand that Highland Council and NHS Highland will make a decision this month. Clearly, it is for them to make the decision, but I agree with Maureen Macmillan that it is good practice for local authorities and health boards to involve service users and carers in the planning of local services.

As I said in my reply to Maureen Macmillan's supplementary question, responsibility in local areas lies with local bodies. Nanette Milne and I both had the opportunity to visit the Princess Royal Trust voluntary service Aberdeen young carers activity centre last week and to hear some of the concerns that were expressed. It is noteworthy that the recommendations in the care 21 report include a call for a national young carers strategy. We are all aware of the significant role that young carers play. As I said in my answer to Maureen Macmillan's question, we will respond to the report early next year. When we do, we will pay close attention to that recommendation.

NHS Quality Improvement Scotland has endorsed an appraisal by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Effectiveness on continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion for diabetes. The NICE report recommends that insulin pump therapy be made available as a treatment option for patients with type 1 diabetes for whom multiple-dose insulin therapy has failed and who are willing and able to use insulin pump therapy effectively. We expect national health service boards to implement the recommendations of that appraisal.

The issue is not financial in the way that Margaret Ewing's final point might imply. Essentially, the position is that my officials wrote to NHS boards in February to remind them of their obligations to implement the guidance. However, it is important to say that the therapy is not appropriate for all sufferers of type 1 diabetes. Insulin pump therapy can be dangerous if the patient does not, or is unable to, monitor it carefully and frequently. The criteria that are used are that multiple-dose insulin therapy must first have been tried and must have failed and that the patient must have the commitment and the competence to use the therapy effectively. Therefore, I regard the matter not as statistical, but as clinical—clinicians must make proper clinical judgments in each individual case. The guidance to boards does not require clinicians to prescribe the therapy, but says that, if a clinician judges that such treatment is the best treatment, the board must fund it.

The use of Tasers is conducted under strict police guidelines following rigorous testing, including independent medical assessment. The Executive has not issued guidance to health services, but the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland has provided information to general practitioners and hospitals on the treatment of people who have been subjected to Tasers.

I recognise that caution is required in those circumstances, which is why the police use Taser guns cautiously and only when they are the best option available to officers at the time. I welcome the information that ACPOS has provided to practitioners in the health service to ensure that they are aware of all the issues that the member mentions. The Defence Scientific Advisory Council sub-committee on the medical implications of less lethal weapons provided a statement on the medical implications of the M26 advanced Taser gun in an operational trial. It concluded that risk of death exists, but that it is much lower than that from conventional firearms. No option is risk free—any use of force in any circumstances by the forces of law and order carries some risk of physical injury. However, we can look to the police to exercise that use of force in a restrained and proportionate way.

I am sure that Dennis Canavan appreciates that those are matters for the Minister for Justice and the Justice Department. I have no doubt that they carried out their responsibilities in the usual way and in the best interests of justice and of the citizens of Scotland.

Phil Gallie makes an important point. It is worth noting that Tasers have been used on two occasions in Scotland. Sadly and tragically, the use of knives and guns in the committing of crime is far more frequent. That is an issue that all members of the Parliament should address as a high priority.

The Executive is making provision for expenditure by local authorities on community care totalling £1.6 billion in the current financial year. Of that, around £1 billion will be spent on older people.

When I published the latest delayed discharge figures yesterday, I said that I thought that it was important that health boards and local authorities continued to work together to address situations in which people who should really be able to leave hospital, either to enter a care home or to return home, are delayed in hospital. I recognise what Ken Macintosh said about people who have been assessed as needing personal or nursing care. We are keen to work with boards and local authorities to address situations in which they have encountered difficulties in delivering their responsibilities in that regard and we will continue to do so.

First, let me acknowledge the quality of this afternoon's debate. I have a strong sense of a consensus in the chamber both on the bill's general principles and on the sensitivities that we are required to acknowledge and respect if the bill is to make appropriate progress. That bodes well for the later stages of the legislative process.  In the past, certain problems arose because the Human Tissue Act 1961 had fallen out of date. As a result, we have designed the bill and suggested improvements to ensure that it accommodates technological advances and changes in attitude. I suppose that someone had to mention the bill's devolution aspects. As all the issues are devolved to the Scottish Parliament, the bill must be tailored to Scottish needs and the Scottish legal system. There is equivalent legislation in the Human Tissue Act 2004, which applies south of the border. Although the bill reflects Scottish circumstances, we have also worked hard at official level with colleagues in the Department of Health to ensure that the principles in both sets of legislation are the same and that there is, as far as possible, a consistent approach. We recognise that that is important both for members of the public and for health care professionals who will have to work with both pieces of legislation. The first issue to address is that of authorisation as against presumed consent. Although the bill quite deliberately separates off the issues to do with organ donation for transplants and hospital post mortems, we must recognise the lessons from cases concerning consent for hospital post mortems and apply those lessons across the board. Health professionals cannot presume consent on the basis of silence and we cannot allow decisions of that kind to be made on the basis of apathy. We need to relate authorisation to the views of the person involved as far as we can. It is not the case, as I think was at least implied in one speech, that that is simply a judgment to which we have come unilaterally. Carolyn Leckie asked whether we had sought wider views. Indeed, in July 2002, when the Scottish transplant group made its proposals to strengthen the existing system of opting in, we consulted on those proposals, and we consulted again on the transplantation consultation paper in June 2004. Responses to both consultations very much favoured the approach that is now enshrined in the bill. There has been a clear consensus in the chamber on the need to raise public awareness of the issues that are dealt with in the bill, particularly in order to increase the numbers of those authorising organ donation. That is certainly something that we are happy to take on board. The best kind of authorisation is clearly self-authorisation, so we want to make people aware of the extended opportunities that the bill will give them to express their wishes about what should happen to their bodies after death. The need for public awareness also applies to post-mortem examinations and we will consider how we can best go about making people more aware of the important benefits to medical  science, and therefore to the treatment of others, that can arise from post-mortem examinations. That is something that a number of members have said. We acknowledge the need to provide guidance on that to health professionals and I support the Health Committee's recommendations in that respect.

I acknowledge the importance of all that work and the significance of transplant co-ordinators, who clearly have already been playing a key role. We need to consider whether there are lessons to be learned from that to ensure that families are as well informed as they can be about post mortems. We have paid close attention to the views that were expressed both by members and by witnesses in the Health Committee's consideration of the bill at stage 1. As I indicated earlier, we will address some of those views in amendments at stage 2. In particular, I highlight the need to find an appropriate way to ensure that existing Scottish entries by adults in the organ donor register and other existing requests that were made verbally by adults will count as valid authorisations when the new legislation comes into effect. This may not be the right stage at which to explore in detail what approach should be taken to such amendments, but I think that we need to remove the requirement for existing written requests to be signed. We must also extend the scope of the provision so that it covers existing requests that have been expressed verbally. We will also want to consider how to allow the nearest relative to give verbal authorisation for transplantation. That reflects the concerns that were expressed by the Scottish transplant co-ordinators network, which wants to safeguard the current arrangements whereby authorisation is often given by phone. The Health Committee raised the difficult and important issue of what happens when a nearest relative wishes to withdraw authorisation for transplantation. I made it clear when I responded to the committee's concerns that we want to address the issue at stage 2. One of the options might be to introduce a cut-off point based on the risk to recipients, but there are obvious practical difficulties with that approach. Therefore, the best way forward might well be to introduce an amendment that ensures that, once authorisation  for transplantation is given by the nearest relative, it cannot be withdrawn. We will want to work with the transplant co-ordinators to ensure that if we go down that road, that aspect of the legislation is fully explained to families and any additional safeguards that are required are put in place. Some amendments may be made at stage 2 in relation to the nearest relative hierarchy. Kate Maclean asked whether people could vary the hierarchy. The key point is that if a person is clear about their own wishes, that takes priority over the wishes of any other person who may have an interest. The hierarchy is designed to be broad and to reflect current circumstances but, of course, the wish of the individual takes precedence over all that. Euan Robson asked about appeals under regulations that are made under section 15(4). We are working on how the appeals process will be taken forward. Although it is likely that the process requires to be included in regulations, it is likely to be a judicial process rather than one involving either the Human Tissue Authority or Scottish ministers. Roseanna Cunningham asked about the donation of part of a liver by a living child and about issues relating to skin and other matters of that kind. The definition of "regenerative tissue" that is included in section 15(7) does not cover part of a liver, so the bill makes it clear that "regenerative tissue", in the context of existing medical technology, means only bone marrow. The committee may want to consider the matter further at stage 2, but I think that we are clear as to how the bill will apply. A number of members asked about appropriate authorisation forms for children. I am happy to consider the matter, but I welcome the support for the drafts that have been brought forward thus far. We want to ensure that the requirements on families in what are stressful and traumatic circumstances are proportionate and reasonable, but we also want to ensure that there is clear protection and guidance for health care professionals. It is important that we get the balance right. Stewart Stevenson and one or two other members raised specific issues to do with imported organs for transplantation. It is important to be clear that that is possible only within the European Union. The other EU member countries with which such exchanges might occur have similar regimes to ours, which would equally prevent any payment for organs in those circumstances. A couple of members raised the issue of whether pathologists would be unduly penalised if they undertook a hospital post mortem for which a  failure to get proper authorisation might lie in the hands of others. It will be essential that a pathologist who voluntarily undertakes a hospital post-mortem examination has a copy of the authorisation form. That will be a requirement in order for the examination to go ahead. There is a defence under the bill that the person who undertook the activity "reasonably believed" that it was authorised. David Davidson asked about the legal basis for consent being given at the age of 12. I refer him to the Age of Legal Capacity (Scotland) Act 1991. In relation to transplantation, the child of 12 or over is assumed under the bill to be competent and so to be able to make a decision as regards authorisation. For reasons that have been well rehearsed, there are different provisions in different parts of the bill, as is appropriate. We will seek to amend some of the bill's provisions at stage 2. I have already mentioned the amendment that we will introduce in relation to museums. In relation to a child's bequest for anatomical examination, we will seek to amend the bill to require that authorisation is witnessed in writing by two adults who are able to confirm the child's understanding of the bequest. The bill covers specialised but very important and sensitive subjects. It is the first time that we have had this debate in the Scottish Parliament. As I say, I am heartened by the broad support for the bill from all parties. I am grateful to all whose work has helped us to reach this point. I believe that the bill encapsulates modern attitudes to the issues with which it deals and provides a proper legal basis for the open, proper and legitimate use of human tissue and organs, for the benefit of individuals, their families and the population as a whole. I commend the bill to Parliament.

Far be it from me as a minister to comment on the Parliament's  procedures, but while I recognise the importance of the convener's contribution, our mechanism is that ministers bring to the Parliament a bill that they have brought forward. Of course, the committee report informs the debate, but I believe that, technically, the debate is on the motion to approve the general principles of the bill.

The Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill, as members will be aware, is the outcome of a process of engagement with the public and with health professionals over a number of years. It began in part as a response to concerns about previous practices to do with retention of organs at death and post-mortem examinations. The Executive promised new legislation to address the issues that those practices had raised. That remains one of the main aims of the bill. The bill modernises existing legislation in a number of complex and sensitive areas: organ donation and transplantation from both the living and the dead; hospital post-mortem examinations; the use of tissue samples or organs that are no longer required for the procurator fiscal's purposes; and the donation of bodies for anatomical examination. The bill's provisions are fundamentally about bringing clarity to each of those processes, so that people will know what options are open to them and how they can express their wishes and have confidence that their wishes will be acted on. The bill is rooted in a strong process of consultation and seeks to respond to the views that we have elicited both from health care professionals and from the general public, while recognising that views sometimes conflict and that there is then a need for a balanced judgment. In taking the bill forward, we have benefited from advice from two expert bodies: the review group on the retention of organs at post mortem and the Scottish transplant group. Both groups drew attention to the shortcomings of the existing legislation—the Human Tissue Act 1961—which governs both transplantation and hospital post mortems. The key concern is that the 1961 act deals with transplantation and post mortems in essentially the same way. Both advisory groups recommended that they should be separated in any new legislation. Post mortems and transplants are very different procedures with very different histories, and they give rise to very different public perceptions. The structure of the bill allows us to reflect those differences in its constituent parts  and to put in place provisions appropriate to such very different processes. The bill starts out from the fundamental principle that when people express wishes about what should happen to their body after death, those wishes should be respected. When people do not formally record their wishes, the bill makes arrangements for identifying those closest to them in life who are therefore most likely to know what their wishes were. That principle is described in the bill as authorisation. It takes an active, deliberate choice to authorise something, which is quite different from the principle of consent underlying the 1961 act. Obtaining consent means establishing a lack of objection to transplantation or post mortem, or an absence of opposition to an act—almost a double negative—as the required grounds for positive action. By contrast, authorisation connotes a positive decision made by someone who is in a position to choose. I very much welcome the Health Committee's support for that concept. I believe that the reason why families were so upset about previous post-mortem practice was not because they were innately suspicious of doctors or prejudiced against research; it was simply because they were not asked what they wanted to happen and therefore felt unable to protect a loved one after death. That feeling, for obvious reasons, was especially strong when a child had died. The bill gives authorisation legal force and puts penalties in place for non-compliance with authorisation requirements, to ensure that proper authorisation is obtained and, once obtained, is adhered to in detail. That is why the bill has to go into a good deal of detail about the formalities associated with authorisation. Authorisation has to be given properly in each particular set of circumstances, so as to be beyond doubt. However, that does not mean creating a complex of bureaucratic hurdles to be crossed when a person knows what he or she wants to do. We recognise that many people will have already used the national health service organ donor register to record their wishes. It is our intention that existing registrations on the register will be considered valid authorisations under the bill.

The current registration process is simple and offers people the opportunity to indicate their wish that their organs be used for donation post death. We think that that is appropriate and that we should keep it simple and keep it that way. However, in this context, it is worth referring to the electronic health record that we expect people to have in future, which will give people the opportunity to express their wishes on a range of different subjects. Clearly, that is one area in which Mr Stevenson's inquiry could be addressed once the electronic health record is in place; it should be in place for everyone by 2010. The bill focuses on the requirements for authorisation rather than the mechanism by which that authorisation is recorded. We fully support the continuing use of the organ donor register. We expect it to continue as one of the main vehicles for recording people's wishes for years to come.

We intend to lodge appropriate amendments at stage 2 to ensure that full cognisance is taken of the register. I will come back to that point in the course of the afternoon. We acknowledge that people might choose other means to record their wishes—I mentioned electronic health records a moment ago. We want there to be flexibility in the ways that people can choose to record their wishes, both now and in the future, and that is why we have not specified in the bill any particular means of recording a person's wishes. In the post-mortem context, the authorisation requirements will be reflected in new standard forms. The bill's authorisation provisions will therefore be translated into a series of statements and tick boxes, along with provision for signing and witnessing. The forms will provide complete certainty about what has been authorised. In particular, they will give families a permanent record of what has been agreed. Similar arrangements will be made for the other contexts in which authorisation is required under the bill. The formalities of authorisation for transplantation in part 1 of the bill are less demanding than those for post mortems in parts 2 and 3. That reflects the nature of transplantation, which is often life saving and often happens following the sudden and unexpected death of a donor. It also reflects the fact that there has been no significant public concern about the  circumstances in which transplantation has taken place. As we know, that is not always the case with post mortems. Part 1 deals with transplantation from the living, as well as after death. Adults who are capable of making their own decision can act freely as living donors of tissue if that is what they want to do. When they want to donate organs or parts of organs, their decision will be subject to independent scrutiny. We intend to use the powers under section 49 to enable the Human Tissue Authority to provide that scrutiny to ensure that no financial inducement is involved and that the donor has not been subject to any form of coercion. When a person lacks the capacity to make decisions, there is even more need for protection. The bill therefore makes it clear that living children are excluded from any form of organ donation. That is a deliberate decision, based on the need to protect the child.

That is certainly our intention, whether it is done in the context of this legislation or under more general criminal law, which continues to apply. Children who are younger than 16 will be able to donate only regenerative tissue, which, in practice, means that they will be able to donate only bone marrow. When they wish to make such a donation, that process will be strictly supervised by the Human Tissue Authority. Again, I welcome the Health Committee's support for those proposals.

I will make my comment, but first I tell the member that we consulted separately on adults with incapacity, as the members of the committee are fully aware. The response to that consultation supports our overall aim of applying the principles of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 to the issues dealt with in the bill. That means treating adults with incapacity in the same way as any other adult so that when an adult expresses wishes before losing capacity, those wishes should be respected after death.  Roseanna Cunningham rightly raised the issue of domino transplants. We accept that children and adults with incapacity should be able to donate organs as part of a domino transplant procedure, subject to appropriate safeguards. Clearly, such circumstances arise only rarely. We want to protect the ability to make available for transplantation for a third party the healthy organ of a child or adult that is replaced as part of a wider transplantation. We will define the procedure and how it should be safeguarded in the bill as we progress. We will lodge amendments at stage 2 in relation to adults with incapacity and the donation of regenerative tissue. Again, that will be subject to scrutiny by the Human Tissue Authority, and it is consistent with our approach to living children and donation. Part 5 seeks to amend the Anatomy Act 1984, which provides a framework for the regulation of the donation of bodies for anatomical examination. We are taking the opportunity afforded by the bill to update some of the provisions in the 1984 act. As a consequence of extending the licensing arrangements for the public display of anatomical human remains, we recognise that there is a need to exempt bona fide museums. That point was discussed in committee. We will lodge an amendment at stage 2 to achieve that. The Health Committee was concerned about whether there was an arbitrary rule to safeguard the position in relation to remains that are more than 100 years old. In fact, the ability to exempt remains of some age from the licensing requirement is covered by the Anatomy Act 1984. Therefore, no separate provision will be required for remains that were in place prior to that act being brought into force in 1988. There will be no requirement for a distinct 100-year-old rule in relation to the commitments that I gave at committee, in which I know that members were interested. Although the bill is about a number of things, I highlight two of our objectives in particular. First, it is about restoring public confidence in the post-mortem examination process. It recognises that post-mortem examinations positively benefit the health of the living. I hope that this new legislation will allow those who were distressed by the previous practice of organ retention at post mortem to move on, in the knowledge that the law is being changed to ensure that future post-mortem practices will be based on active authorisation, which will itself be based on the wishes of the individual or of his or her family. Secondly, the bill is about modernising the legislative framework for transplants and organ donation. It builds on public support for transplants and allows the authorisation of organ donation in the context of strengthening the system of opting  in. The bill is intended to boost organ donation rates, for the sake of all those who are waiting for the new lease of life that a new organ can bring. Strengthening and modernising the existing system is the correct way to proceed. The lesson of Alder Hey is that we should not presume consent and that we should encourage authorisation. Clearly, that is the purpose and will be the effect of the bill. All those changes taken together can make a real difference. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Human Tissue (Scotland) Bill.

The debate has been full and constructive. I start by congratulating Mike Rumbles on securing this evening's slot. I fully appreciate why the work that is being done at Aboyne community maternity unit is valued by people in the Deeside area and am well aware of the value that local communities throughout the north-east place on such units. I have no doubt that the campaigners who are watching the debate in the gallery will continue to make the points that have been reflected so clearly in the speeches of members from all parties. I am grateful to members—especially Mike Rumbles—for explaining the nature of the decision-making process in such cases, but there are a few points that I want to stress. First, it is important to note that NHS Grampian is some way from making any decision on the future of the Aboyne unit or, for that matter, on any other maternity unit in Aberdeenshire. With respect to the Aboyne unit, it is worth noting that a new model of service delivery has already been developed locally and that the midwives who deliver the service have provided active leadership in that process. That model, under which the unit is open during the day and on-call coverage is provided during the night, is  being piloted and the findings will be reviewed at a public meeting in March of next year. Whatever the outcome of the pilot, it embodies the creative approach to delivering services that we are strongly in favour of.

Indeed. I think that that is one of factors that will be considered in the review of the present service. Because the model of delivery at Aboyne is still at a pilot stage, the Aberdeenshire community health partnership does not intend to review the sustainability of the Aboyne maternity unit until after the process is completed in March next year. As part of its change and innovation plan, the CHP is reviewing—or will review—community maternity services across the area. The process is still at a very early stage, however. The CHP is currently engaging with communities and exploring ideas about what might be done to deliver the right services safely and sustainably. If, after that process is completed, the CHP chooses to make proposals for service change, those proposals will be subject to a further, formal consultation. All those processes must of course be completed before NHS Grampian comes to a view. If, after that process, the board decided to close Aboyne, or otherwise to make major changes to the service, it would have to satisfy the Minister for Health and Community Care that it had followed the proper procedure and had taken all relevant considerations into account. Because of the way in which services are delivered and decisions are made, the final decision would lie with the health board. I wish to reflect on some of the points that have been made in the debate on the relationship between the type of service that is being provided and the broader direction of health policy. As has been mentioned, our framework for maternity services stresses our commitment to provide services that are family centred, locally accessible and, often, midwife led. The framework goes on to stress the importance of patient choice, with women having a greater say about where and when they want their child to be delivered. We want to develop that approach in the context of "Delivering for Health", our response to the Kerr report, which stresses the principle of services being "as local as possible" and "as specialised as necessary".  In response to a further point that arose in the debate, following on from our response to the Kerr report, we are establishing a ministerial advisory group to consider a wide range of issues, including the framework for maternity services and the work of the expert group on acute maternity services. From next year, NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will review all services in that context. We are committed to maintaining services as locally as possible while ensuring that we offer sustainable, high-quality specialist services. We need to acknowledge the changing demands on the service as a whole. We cannot consider single services in isolation. For example, the birth rate at Aboyne has increased, but the birth rate is, more generally, predicted to decline over time, although we are seeking to do something about that, ensuring sustainable demographic growth over the longer term. One of the critical points in the Kerr report and in our response to it is the importance of recognising and accommodating the challenges of having an aging population and the growing incidence of chronic conditions, while looking to NHS boards to consider the best use of their resources and to respond to all the challenges that they face as locally as possible.

Using that sort of principle, we could wait for ever to make any decisions. We would not want to encourage boards simply to put decisions off. We recognise that services must constantly evolve and that it is primarily the responsibility of individual NHS boards to ensure that that happens. In discharging that responsibility, boards must ensure that any changes are implemented with the active involvement of the local community and, as far as possible, with the support of the local community. The report of the expert group on acute maternity services highlights the importance of stakeholder engagement and that of achieving consensus in the development of new services.

I would be happy to ensure that NHS Grampian sees the Official Report . We are of course in regular contact with all NHS  boards to ensure that they understand the implications of national policy for local service delivery, although we look to boards to make decisions on local delivery for themselves. We are in no doubt that community maternity units have a key role in the future delivery of maternity services across Scotland. Equally, we recognise that there is no one model that will be appropriate in all geographic and demographic circumstances. Clearly, the situation of an acute hospital at the centre and community maternity around the spokes of the hub, so to speak, is in line with policy. I agree with the point that Carolyn Leckie made: enabling home births with proper support should be regarded as a positive choice and not as a downgrading. Home births are another form of midwife-led service that works. I am happy to write to her on the distribution of consultant and midwife-led services across Scotland. As ever, my parliamentary answer to which she referred was a factual response; it is for health boards and not for ministers to design and deliver services on the ground and to maintain the statistical information to back them up. It is right that NHS Grampian has undertaken this process of pre-consultation. The approach is to be welcomed. I do not fully accept Shiona Baird's view that service users should never have to campaign to secure the services they want; I think that the opportunity to express views and influence decisions should be welcomed as part of an active, thriving democracy. In this case, the community has already taken the opportunity to make its views known. When the innovative service model at Aboyne is reviewed next year, and if a further formal consultation follows on from that, I encourage the community that uses the facilities to continue to make its views known. I have no doubt that it will do so.  Meeting closed at 18:01.

We take expert advice on these issues from the Committee on Medical Aspects of Radiation in the Environment. The committee's 10 th report, which was published in June, found no excesses of childhood cancer around 13 nuclear power stations across Great Britain.

That is a curious question in the context of Mr Ballance's earlier question. If I understand him correctly, he is asking about access to information on leukaemia clusters. I recommend that he read the reports that have been made available. I can confirm that COMARE is currently looking at the wider picture of leukaemia clusters and cancer distribution in order to establish whether there is a wider pattern.

I have no reason to doubt the substance of what Mr Gallie has said about the position a number of years ago, although I cannot vouch for it directly. However, I can confirm that such clusters as have been found are not located primarily around nuclear power stations. Clusters have been found around one or two nuclear establishments such as Dounreay, which is a civic nuclear research site that is in the process of being decommissioned, but the number of people who are affected in those clusters is very low. It is by no means clear that a common link explains the causation of leukaemia in those locations. Part of the reason why COMARE is looking at the wider picture is to establish whether there is a pattern. A number of possible explanations for the clusters have been advanced, including the explanation to which Mr Gallie referred and other explanations that focus on movements of population and so on. Clearly, it is important to establish whether there is a common cause and, if that is the case, to take action. Equally, it would be entirely wrong to act on suspicions or suggestions that were not backed up by evidence.

The act contains a range of provisions that are at various stages of implementation. We will continue to monitor them to ensure that they are achieving what was expected when the act was passed.

I saw comments on the matter attributed to Mary Scanlon in a newspaper the other day. My written answer to her question is accurate. It is not for ministers to interpret the law, nor should it be. It is for the courts to interpret the law. I do not think that Mary Scanlon should take issue with anything in my answer, because it clearly reflects the proper protection that is afforded by the division of powers between the executive and the judiciary. However, I do not think that Mary Scanlon and I disagree on her point on the policy. The law was intended—and it was so written—to require assistance with the preparation of food to be delivered as part of free personal care. We made that clear to local authorities. A number of local authorities are not acting in line with that requirement and we are keen to ensure that they understand their legal obligation to do so. A  meeting is taking place as we speak between my officials and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. They are exploring why some local authorities have reached an erroneous conclusion on how the law should be applied and we will carry that work forward in the proper way.

Again, we are exploring that with the local authorities. We have had indications that, in one or two cases, the kind of thing to which Shona Robison refers is indeed taking place. We want to ensure that no one who is entitled to free personal care is charged for a service that the law says ought to be provided free. The monitoring that we are undertaking involves both direct discussions with local authorities, as providers, and substantial research to establish what the position is.

On 20 October, Rhona Brankin and I announced the Scottish Executive's commitment to develop a strategic framework for environment and health. That will cover a number of environmental areas that can impact on health, including air pollution. The framework will be a cross-cutting initiative and the national health service will be a key stakeholder in its implementation.

The purpose of the strategic framework that Rhona Brankin and I announced was to allow us to do that. We want to make early progress on that. In the first instance, we are focusing on asthma and cardiovascular disease, on both of which air pollution, among other things, has an impact. Therefore, we will want to identify what needs to be done and take action in order to deliver the necessary improvements.

Local  authorities are implementing a free personal care policy that delivers real benefits to frail elderly people across Scotland. We are currently examining the implementation of the policy in a detailed way. If we conclude that there are specific deficiencies in the implementation of the policy, we will work with our partners to put those right.

I can confirm that erroneous guidance was issued and that that fact was drawn to the attention of councils in September last year, with the clear advice that they should correct any error in their implementation that might have followed from that. We want to ensure that all local authorities are following the law in a consistent way. As I mentioned to Mary Scanlon, we are doing that in discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and individual local authorities.

The proposed changes are part of work by NHS Grampian to redistribute beds between surgery and medicine to match bed usage. The board's view is that the changes will deliver an improved service for patients and will have no adverse effect on waiting times for cancer treatments or anything else.

Of course one always listens to clinicians' views, but one also looks to the health board to fulfil its responsibility to manage such matters properly. The occupancy rate for beds in medical wards is about 100 per cent, compared with about 70 per cent for beds in surgical wards. The board's view is that its duty is to find the best balance that ensures that surgery continues to be delivered and that the beds that are available for medical uses are put to those uses.

rose—

As was announced in March, we will be addressing dentists' remuneration next year. Does Mary Scanlon welcome the additional £37 million for primary care dental services that I announced today?

Does the member accept that dentists have business decisions to make and that the decision to deregister a patient is taken by their dentist alone?

I agree that retaining dentists in the NHS is a critical issue, but will the member accept that the BDA shares our view that there must also be an increase in the total number of dentists?

What would Nanette Milne do to encourage dentists who will not return "whatever is on offer", to use her words?

I agree completely—it would be entirely inappropriate to portray the vast majority of dentists in that way. What is the Scottish National Party's view of the difference in principle between the BDA's approach and that of the Executive? We believe that additional funding should be given to dentists who are committed NHS dentistry, but the BDA does not.

It is important to clarify for the record that the parliamentary answer that was given to Stewart Stevenson stated specifically that it referred to dentists' gross earnings from NHS work.

Today's debate and announcement are about delivering good news to national health service dentists and patients. We will provide dentists who are committed to treating all categories of patients on the NHS with the rewards and incentives that they deserve.

That is a very early intervention from Mr Morgan, but of course I will give way.

If Mr Morgan will be patient, he will hear what the good news includes. The good news is intended to encourage dentists to stick with or, indeed, to come back to the NHS and thereby to enable patients to access NHS dentistry where they want it. In March this year we published our three-year action plan for improving oral health and modernising NHS dental services. We have committed a record amount of new and additional funding to support delivery of the action plan.

My answer to Mr Swinney is the same as my answer to Mr Morgan: if he will have patience, he will hear what we are going to do now. The additional funding amounts to an extra £45 million in this financial year, rising to £100 million next year and £150 million in 2007-08. Cumulatively, that is additional investment of £295 million in oral health and dental services. Of that total, £237 million will go towards supporting primary care dental services—in other words, to the high street dentist. I will outline today how we intend to invest the additional money that we are committed to spending in the current financial year.

There have been three interventions so far in which members have asked me to pre-announce my announcement. My answer to Mary Scanlon is that if she listens to what I say about what we are investing, she may make her own judgment about how successful it will be in providing an incentive to dentists to return to the NHS. We will spend £4 million this year and £29 million will be provided over the four year action-plan period to support improvements to oral health. In particular, we wish to build on the most recent figures for children's oral health. The national dental inspection programme confirms the best-ever oral health among 5-year-olds and shows that the measures that we are taking now are already having a positive effect. However, there is more to do.

I must make some progress, but I will give way later if members' questions have not been answered. Two consultants in dental public health are working with NHS boards to develop our agenda. We are actively recruiting staff, including oral health promoters and dental health support workers. Most NHS boards are already well on their way to meeting the nursery school tooth-brushing target, with in excess of 70,000 children brushing daily. Several boards have started to extend the programme into primary schools that have the highest need. We have two programmes in place—one in the west of Scotland and one in the east—to improve oral health among young children and to target those who have the worst  dental health by offering additional preventive care by dentists and dental care professionals. In addition, we are providing £29 million over the action-plan period—£4 million of it this year—to support improvements to education and training in the dental workforce. A number of measures are already in place to achieve that end. The dental schools will achieve an output of 135 dental graduates from next year and will exceed that target by 2008, with a potential 180 graduates by 2010.

I will answer that directly. To support the expansion, we are funding additional senior staff linked to the outreach programme for each dental school. A new bursary scheme is currently being finalised; it will be tied to a commitment from students to work in the NHS for five years after their graduation and it will be offered from next year. We are also expanding existing training in order to deliver more than 200 new dental nurses in 2006-07 and 250 in 2007-08. We are now producing the first ever dental therapists trained in Scotland. Courses are already in place in Glasgow and a new one started this month in Edinburgh. We will match the increased output from the dental schools with vocational training places for all dental care professionals. A number of additional measures are currently being developed; for example, the clinical effectiveness programme that is based in Dundee.

I accept the member's point. We have made a commitment to consult by 2007 on the need for a third dental school. I will move on from education to primary care dental services, which is the nub of many of the questions that have been asked this morning. This year, we will provide £37 million in new and additional funding to support primary care dental services. We are well on course to exceed the commitment that we made some months ago to double the general dental practice allowance this year. Last year, that funding amounted to £4 million and since publication of the action plan, we have made two quarterly payments totalling over £5 million through the allowance, which supports dentists' practice costs. We have also increased  the remote areas allowance to £9,000 a year and are extending it to more practices. We have already made available in this financial year £5 million to assist with practice improvements. Half of that money is targeted at meeting decontamination requirements. Central purchasing contracts have been arranged for dentists through Scottish healthcare supplies and we are currently finalising contracts for clinical waste disposal. Critical and central to all those measures is our ensuring that the significant additional funding for primary care dental services goes to dentists who remain loyal to the NHS or to those who choose to return to the NHS in response to the incentives that we provide. I will share some comments that relate to discussions with the British Dental Association Scotland, which is the nub of Shona Robison's amendment. I assure members that officials have been in regular contact with the BDA and the profession more widely since and before publication of the action plan. I met Robert Donald, chairman of the Scottish dental practice committee—which is the negotiating committee of the BDA—and his officials at the beginning of October. I made it clear to Robert Donald, as I make clear again today, that the additional money that we are providing beyond the increase in the general dental practice allowance is intended to encourage dentists to stick with the NHS. Our position—that we require a commitment from dentists to treat all categories of patients in order to access the extra funding—is non-negotiable. I have made that position clear, both publicly and in meetings with dentists, since then. It is important to be clear about those discussions with the BDA. Clearly, we want the BDA to support our proposals enthusiastically; after all, it represents half the profession in Scotland. It is a significant player and we want it to be on board. However, as the BDA has been unable to agree to the principle of NHS commitment, it has been necessary for me and my team to move ahead and to define the commitment in more detail. Yesterday, I made our position clear publicly—for the benefit of MSPs and our constituents who are finding it difficult to access services—and directly to the BDA. I will reiterate what I said yesterday to ensure that everyone is clear about it. The test of NHS commitment is that a practice needs to treat 500 NHS patients and 100 fee-paying adults per dentist, and its gross NHS earnings must be at least £50,000. Practices need to maintain or increase their registration profile to continue to qualify for the additional allowances.

I will give members the details of the package, because doing so might provide an answer to the question that several members have asked about whether we will succeed in getting more dentists back into the NHS. We have signalled our intention to dentists to introduce reimbursement of the current market rental of dentistry premises to NHS-committed dentists. Valuations are under way, and in the December payment schedules we will make an interim payment of £4 million towards those valuations and that reimbursement. Final payments will be backdated to April 2005. Moreover, to reward dentists who are committed to NHS dentistry, we will again double the general dental practice allowance to 12 per cent of gross NHS earnings. That represents a further investment of £7 million in NHS-committed practices. Since I took up this ministerial post and assumed responsibility for dentistry, I have sought to engage with dentists throughout Scotland and their representatives. Although there has been disagreement in some areas, we have reached clear agreement on others. For example, many dentists are concerned about the costs of decontamination, which must be met. Although we have already made £2.5 million available this year to address those costs, we realise that some items in the dentistry statement of remuneration are particularly affected by the need for decontamination. As a result, I announce a further increase in the item of service fees, mainly for root-canal treatment, which will provide more than £1 million to support delivery of those critical services. I also announce a range of increases of up to 70 per cent in the continuing care and capitation allowances, which will provide an additional £10 million in a full year to support registration of adults and children in the NHS. Moreover—this is not relevant to this financial year—we will introduce from next April an allowance of £9,000 per dentist to dentists who serve disadvantaged urban areas to match our existing commitment to practitioners in remote and rural areas.

Given the time, I really must make progress.  The current NHS system already provides additional financial support for treating children who have learning disabilities. By doubling the continuing care payment—which will mean an extra £2.8 million a year—we will extend that provision to adults in recognition of the additional time that is required to treat such patients. Furthermore, from early next year, as part of our drive towards prevention, we will spend £2.8 million a year to make fissure sealants available to all children who have permanent molar teeth. We are making those significant investments in order that we reflect the value that we place on NHS-committed dentists and the services that they provide. My vision for the future, which is shared by other Executive ministers, is of an NHS dentistry service that is delivered, in the main, by motivated and well-rewarded general dental practitioners. I realise that there is a place for a salaried service and we have invested significant funds in that. However, I acknowledge the point that has been made by many people to whom I have spoken that the future delivery of effective NHS dentistry depends on high street dentists' continuing commitment, and on attracting back dentists who have chosen to reduce their NHS commitment. I believe that that combination of measures and the requirement for commitment to the NHS to access this significant additional funding will persuade many dentists that they will be better off either sustaining their commitment to the NHS or coming back into the service if they have chosen to go elsewhere. The record funding package and the measures that I have outlined today demonstrate our continuing support for NHS dentistry to the benefit of patients and practitioners. I move, That the Parliament notes the widespread concern about loss of access to NHS dentists; endorses the view that public resources should be focussed on the provision of NHS dentistry available to all and measures proven to improve oral health; welcomes the progress that has been made to date in implementing Improving Oral Health and Modernising NHS Dental Services in Scotland ; recognises the positive developments in improving oral health, supporting dental education and training, increasing the workforce and supporting primary care dental services, and acknowledges the vital contribution which NHS dental services make to health improvement and patient care.

We expect national health service boards and their partners to take account of clinical guidelines, such as the report to which the member referred, in the planning and delivery of child mental health services. In every case, clinicians should take all relevant factors into account, including the age of the patient, before deciding on the best care and treatment option.

No, but as I said, we expect the points made in the report to be taken into account in the delivery of service. In doing that, health boards will operate in the context of the significantly increased resource that we are making available to supporting children and young people with mental health problems, and to identifying and addressing issues of depression for all age groups.

When we published the "Delivering for Health" report two weeks ago, we made it clear that we now expect NHS boards and regional planning groups to use the Kerr report to drive their service change programmes. We also set out a range of actions for regional planning groups, and a Health Department letter will be sent to the relevant parts of the NHS in Scotland to reinforce which actions we expect to be done by which specific dates.

I am happy to be able to confirm that we will indeed look to the centre for telehealth to deliver the kind of benefits that Maureen Macmillan outlines. We have asked Grampian NHS Board to produce proposals for it to act as a centre of excellence in telemedicine to serve the NHS in Scotland. The purpose of that will be to provide technical and common standards in support of telemedicine to ensure that the help that is provided to those who are working in rural and remote locations is backed up by specialists at central hospitals in the way that Maureen Macmillan has described, and that that help is given on the basis of clinical protocols that ensure safety and efficiency, while respecting patient confidentiality.

The Scottish Executive Health Department is represented on the main stakeholder advisory group and remains committed to supporting its work. In determining future policy, the Executive will take into account the work of the group and advice from the Health Protection Agency.

I can assure Dr Jackson that members of the stakeholder advisory group on EMF—which involves all manner of interested parties, from Government to the private sector to community organisations—are determined to work together towards an agreed outcome on its considerations. I look forward to the group's  interim recommendations, which should be available to Scottish ministers early next year.

I refer Mr Crawford to my answer to Dr Jackson. We are certainly aware of the Draper report, which is the reason why we and UK Government colleagues have undertaken the SAGE process. The stakeholder advisory group will allow us to have the best available advice, which will be based on the consideration of evidence both from the UK and elsewhere in the world. That is why I look forward to those recommendations early next year, on which further decisions can then be made.

In the "Delivering for Health" report that was published last week, we undertook to promote more systematic, continuous and local care of people with long-term conditions. We expect that to result in fewer unplanned admissions to hospital, more appropriate and accessible local care services and greater support to enable patients, with their families and carers, to take a more active role in managing their conditions.

Representatives of the British Association of Dermatologists and the Skin Care Campaign Scotland wrote to my colleague Andy Kerr recently to make those suggestions, which we will consider and respond to in the usual way. The Kerr report and our response to it enable us better to deal with the conditions that Kenneth Macintosh mentions and with other chronic conditions that an increasing number of people in the community face. We will progress the commitments that were made during Mr Macintosh's debate on the subject a few months ago.

We are conducting the review of prescription charges. As a member of the Health Committee, Mrs Milne will be aware that it is looking into the matter. I expect to report to the committee on 29 November, when I will bring her up to date on the position.

The latest figures suggest that good progress is being made. The incidence of smoking recorded at first antenatal booking has decreased from 29 per cent in 1995 to 23.8 per cent last year. We are therefore on course to meet the national targets of 23 per cent in 2005 and 20 per cent in 2010.

I am certainly aware of it. Mr Robson may be aware that the stop for life project in Livingston recently won through to the final round of the United Kingdom national Quit awards for the best and most innovative smoking cessation scheme. It is one of the schemes of which we can be proud. We want similar initiatives to be taken across Scotland. In the context of this morning's health debate, those are precisely the sort of measures that we can take, focusing particularly on the most deprived areas.

As Shona Robison has acknowledged, the thrust of health policy is to tackle health inequalities. Smoking during pregnancy is one area in which there is a particularly marked inequality: rates have fallen in all areas, social classes and neighbourhoods, but they have fallen faster in more affluent areas. The points that were made this morning about the need to target the interventions that we make in the community on those areas where they will make the greatest difference and reduce inequalities are reflected in this policy area.

We have given health boards new powers to deploy salaried dentists to address loss of access to national health dental services in their local areas. NHS Dumfries and Galloway is making full use of those powers. We have also put in place additional funding of £295 million over three years, much of which will be used to encourage general dental practitioners to continue to provide NHS treatment to all categories of patients.

Absolutely. NHS Dumfries and Galloway will be able to take advantage of future recruitments. The dentists who have been assigned and whose appointment I announced a week or two ago were 12 of 32 highly qualified dental practitioners whom we hope to recruit from Poland in the next few months. They will be employed by health boards across Scotland. The 12 in the first batch have been allocated, as the member mentioned, but Dumfries and Galloway did not apply for them. However, two further groups of 10 will arrive for whom NHS Dumfries and Galloway will be able to apply. We have deliberately given health boards powers to address those issues in whatever way best suits their needs. I know that NHS Dumfries and Galloway is actively pursuing the matter to ensure that patients in Dumfries and Galloway have access to NHS dental services. That is something that we want across Scotland.

That is an extraordinary statement from the Conservative party. I am taken aback to discover that it thinks that such matters are decided on a party-political basis—quite the contrary. Mr Fergusson should be aware that whoever is responsible for dentists choosing to withdraw NHS services from their patients, it is not the NHS and it is not NHS Dumfries and Galloway. There needs to be a clear focus on why some—although by no means all—dentists are choosing to deregister NHS patients. The NHS, with the funding that we provide, is seeking to ensure that those patients are not denied access to NHS services. Dumfries and Galloway NHS Board is one of the boards that are exploring a whole range of options in order to make up the shortfall caused by the decisions of some dental practitioners. One of the methods that NHS Dumfries and Galloway is pursuing involves putting in place contracts with  IDH, which has set up some 200 NHS dental practices south of the border. That is a good model. The contracts are for five years—there is no possibility of deregistering patients after three months' notice, as might happen with general dental practitioners. If those five-year contracts are put in place, they should give great reassurance to Mr Fergusson's constituents and others in Dumfries and Galloway.

Mr Morgan should cease misrepresenting the position. The position is that individual dental practitioners are legally entitled and empowered to choose to withdraw NHS services; that is not about a legal requirement on the part of the NHS. The NHS is, however, required to make dental services available and that is what NHS Dumfries and Galloway is seeking to do. I am sure that it would welcome Mr Morgan's support as well as the support of member of the Executive parties.

Good progress is being made in line with the timetable that was announced in March and I expect to be able to report on further progress in the next few weeks.

The answer to the first question is that I have engaged in discussion with members of the British Dental Association and a range of other dental practitioners to ascertain their views of the kind of investments that we are making. It is important to emphasise the point that I made in answer to an earlier question, which is that we are investing record sums—£295 million over three years—to improve dentistry and oral health in Scotland. By the third year, we will be investing £150 million more than we have invested  this year, of which £120 million—80 per cent—will go to high street dentists. I made it clear in writing to every dentist in Scotland last week that the bulk of that additional funding will be made available to those dentists who maintain a commitment to the NHS and continue to treat adults as well as children on the NHS.

That is an interesting question, to which I will come in a moment.

I note that Shona Robison is also interested in the question. I take the opportunity that Mr Rumbles has given me to reflect on the constructive working partnership between the Executive and Optometry Scotland, which allowed us to make yesterday's announcement on free eye tests and on a new engagement with NHS high street opticians to provide a door through which all patients with eye health issues can come into the NHS. That is exactly the kind of thing that we want to see. Some dentists are committed to the NHS, whereas others have clearly chosen to reduce their commitment to the NHS. In making it clear that the money is intended to improve oral health and to improve access to NHS dentistry, we have said in writing to the BDA that the measurement of commitment—the bar, as Mr Rumbles put it—will require that dentists treat adults as well as children and fee-paying adults as well as exempt adults on the NHS. We have not specified the requirement in more detail than that. I regret very much that, unfortunately, the BDA is unable to support even that principle. I hope that it will change its view and come round to support NHS dentistry. If it does that, we will be able to make good progress on other issues with it.

Since 1 April 2004, the Scottish Executive has offered 49 grants to help towards the setting up of new, or the expansion of current, NHS dental practices under the Scottish dental access initiative. The grant offers range between £50,000 and £100,000 per practice. In addition, as I have said, we are investing £295 million over the next three years in dentistry and oral health. We will seek to use that record funding to secure access to NHS dentistry as well as to improve Scotland's oral health.

I agree with Maureen Macmillan and accept the point that she makes. The initiative that NHS Highland has taken, which is in parallel with that taken by NHS Dumfries and Galloway, to talk to IDH about putting in place NHS dentistry services in its area is very much to be welcomed. Highland NHS Board is one of the health boards to have taken advantage of the new powers that they have had since April to seek their own solutions by appointing salaried dentists and by talking to potential suppliers. That is a good thing. Other areas have been mentioned, but it is well known that Highland has a particular problem with access to NHS dentistry, beyond the issues that are faced elsewhere. We welcome that initiative and think that it is the right way to go. I have made no secret of my deep concern that a small minority of dentists have chosen to force patients to queue in the cold out on the street to register at practices where in many cases they have been patients for all their adult life. That is greatly to be regretted. I do not think that that represents the approach of the great majority of dentists in this country. We want to give support and encouragement to dentists who remain committed to the NHS and to their patients.

I am very concerned that a small number of dentists have chosen to treat their patients with such disrespect as to deregister them without providing them with alternative options. The funding that has been put in place and the powers that have been given to health boards will be taken up by, among others, NHS Fife, which is putting in place a number of salaried practices throughout Fife. I encourage NHS Fife to proceed with that as quickly as possible.

This has been an important debate, although I am sorry that Stewart Maxwell spoiled a rather good speech with his final rhetorical flourish, because we have discovered that there is a quite a lot of support for quite a lot of what we propose to do in response to the Kerr report. Of course, Scotland is not alone in facing the dual pressures of having an aging population and a growth in chronic disease. However, we are feeling those pressures more acutely and earlier than many other countries. A recent academic paper on care for chronic conditions reported that "most healthcare systems have not kept pace with the decline in acute health problems and the increase in chronic conditions ... most healthcare today is still trying to manage chronic problems using acute care mentality, methods and systems." That is what Kerr's report and our response are designed to change, because an acute care approach to dealing with chronic conditions simply will not work. Because those pressures are so marked in Scotland, we have the opportunity to  take a lead in finding ways of dealing with them. That is what the paper that we have published today will allow us to do.

The emphasis that I have placed on chronic conditions does not take away from the emphasis throughout the Kerr report and in our response to it on early intervention in dealing with conditions of all kinds. Several members asked about dates and timescales. I want to be clear about one thing: the paper that we have published today is not the launch of a consultation. "Delivering for Health" sets out a detailed programme of action for the next five years, with actions with clear timescales allocated to named organisations. We will report on progress and members will be able to judge that progress. Euan Robson and others asked how we will monitor delivery of the objectives. We have set up a delivery group within the Health Department that will focus on that monitoring. The public and annual reviews that we have conducted this year for every NHS board will also provide a clear focus for boards that are reporting on progress to ministers and their local populations. As David Davidson seems to have picked up some interesting ideas over his breakfast, I will clarify that there are no proposals for full-scale reshuffling of health boards or for local authority hospitals. I hope that Mr Davidson will find more time to read the documents that we publish rather than stories in newspapers. One of the key issues that was raised by several members, Duncan McNeil in particular, is the importance of tackling health inequality and recognising the increasing gap in life expectancies. It is important to make the point for the record that, with one exception, life expectancies are going up everywhere in Scotland, but the gap is increasing because more affluent communities are more likely to endorse and take advantage of some of our messages about improved health and more healthy lifestyles. We acknowledge that we have to tackle that growing gap and that it cannot be allowed to continue to grow. We also know that we are in a good position to do something about the situation. We believe that  the Kerr proposals that are endorsed by our response will allow us to do that. In 2006, we will pilot anticipatory care approaches in some of our most deprived areas, with a view to rolling them out to all our most deprived areas wherever they might be. We will focus resources in primary care on case finding, health screening and preventive interventions for people who are at high risk of ill health. The focus will shift from fixing and mending to anticipating and preventing. We will put NHS Scotland at the forefront of international practice by the end of 2007 by providing intensive and co-ordinated care to those who need it in their own communities. By doing that, we will also improve the quality and speed of acute services, which will allow them to focus on people who need acute services and to reduce pressures from people who would be best cared for in the community. Have a heart Paisley has been mentioned. It is a good model and lessons can be learned from it at local and national level. However, it is precisely that kind of intervention that goes out to people in the most deprived communities, finds out why they are not accessing the services that exist, and then does something about it. We need to redesign services in that way to make them more accessible and to ensure that they give people, even those in our most deprived communities, real choices that they do not have at present. We also recognise that it will be increasingly important to support self-care and self-management to ensure the independence of people who have long-term conditions. In that respect, we acknowledge the valuable contribution of family members and other carers, and we expect NHS boards to support them in their role. In 2006, we will establish a Scottish long-term conditions alliance to support patients' self-management and we will work with that alliance to ensure that patients and carers have the necessary skills and knowledge. Moreover, we will expand primary care by investing in community health centres, which can provide day-case surgery and diagnostic, rehabilitation and outreach services, and will accelerate the development of practitioners who have special interests and extended roles.

We will roll out the proposals over the next year and we will ensure that the alliance brings together people who are already on the front line, dealing with patients. However, we must focus on the patient, rather than create a new bureaucracy and, in order to take a co-ordinated approach to management of  long-term conditions, we must ensure that the alliance also includes people who experience such conditions. As Andy Kerr said in his opening speech, we will implement certain changes to make further progress on waiting times in Scotland. For example, we will treat day surgery rather than in-patient surgery as the norm, improve referral and diagnostic pathways and actively manage admissions, discharge and follow-up after leaving hospital. Starting in 2006-07, boards will develop a three-year plan to introduce those changes, which will increase the health service's productivity and the return on our health spending. On the cost implications of the Kerr report, which several members raised, we were encouraged by the fact that Andrew Walker, the health economist who examined the proposals for us, concluded that they could be delivered on a cost-neutral basis because of the shift in the balance of spend. However, we also recognise that, having already made available record levels of resources, we must get the best possible value for them. Members also highlighted ICT. Such technology will enable better service delivery and allow us to connect different parts of the health service for patients' benefit. The Kerr report suggests that we should seek to procure a common NHS system by 2008; however, we have gone beyond that recommendation with this morning's announcement that we will seek to begin the procurement process for such a system by 2007, with a view to implementing it by 2010. Moreover, we are in the shorter term pressing ahead with a number of work streams to complement that objective. For example, we will ensure universal uptake of the community health intake number by June 2006; the implementation of a national accident and emergency management information system by January 2007; and the national roll-out of picture archiving and communications systems—or PACS—by June 2007. Janis Hughes asked whether the new Stobhill and Victoria hospitals will be able to use such systems. When those hospitals open their doors in two years' time, they will be fully equipped with modern and effective PAC systems and an IT infrastructure that will support the single patient record system as it is introduced over the period 2007 to 2010. We will ensure that both new hospitals will have the best possible technology and full IT integration from the outset. We are also discussing with Grampian NHS Board an outline plan for a national centre—or, as some might see it, a centralised service—for telehealth; we expect proposals to be made  shortly. As I have shown, we are looking to develop services in a number of ways. One or two issues that members raised have already been covered in the debate. Euan Robson comprehensively responded to queries about neurosurgery, and I simply reiterate his point—and the point that Shona Robison made in her opening speech—that we are talking about a managed clinical network. Decisions have yet to be taken and we want to develop the best possible service.

We will continue to implement the conclusions that we have reached. Indeed, we have set out a clear framework in that respect. In December 2006, we will publish a delivery plan for mental health, which is another important issue that members raised, and we also expect to have published by December 2006 a comprehensive report on standards of care in remote and rural areas. What we have heard this morning indicates a very broad consensus on, and support for, the direction of travel that has been set by the Kerr report and our response to it. I particularly welcome the wide support for improving health service delivery by separating planned and unscheduled care. The steps that we have highlighted in "Delivering for Health" show how we can turn the vision in the Kerr report into reality. I hope that people with an interest in Scotland's future health will move away from tired old arguments about how we can keep services the same and instead engage in a real and worthwhile debate on how we can make them better.

Does the member accept that, in fact, the report recommends the delivery of a single national service on three levels, with a prime site but with the national neurosurgery service delivered at a number of sites, precisely as described by Shona Robison earlier in the debate?

Does Ms Robison accept that that already happens and that clinical need is the first consideration of clinicians, which means that the majority of patients do not have to wait at all when they are in urgent clinical need?

NHS boards have made good progress in implementing the standards set out in "A Scottish framework for nursing in schools", in co-operation with education authorities, community health partnerships and a wide range of health and education professionals. NHS boards will be able to build on that in the future development of the service.

We are very clear that we need to make further progress in this area. At the same time, it is important to say that the approach in Scotland is very much one in which the public health nurse is the professional in the school. We no longer have school nurses such as those of us who were at school some decades ago might remember and imagine. We are doing things in Scotland in a way that has not as yet been done in England to the same extent—although England is moving in that direction. We are broadening the skills and capabilities of nurses in schools to cover the whole range of public health issues and to work as part of a wider public health team. It is towards those aspirations that we will encourage boards and their partners to continue to strive.

It is a serious issue. I am not aware of any change in policy on the approach taken by nurses who work in schools. Their role is to operate within a wider team; it is no longer focused on inspection, as was once the case. That is the right direction of travel. At the same time, it is important that the whole public health team takes some responsibility for ensuring that no new public health threats arise on school premises.

I thank Marilyn Livingstone for lodging the motion and congratulate her on securing today's debate. I also thank all the other members who have spoken and contributed to it. The debate is very valuable, not least because it gives me the opportunity on behalf not just of Andy Kerr, who has taken a close and active interest in this area, but of other ministerial colleagues who have taken a similarly active interest in it, to acknowledge the work of members of the cross- party group on survivors of childhood sexual abuse and of the groups that have worked with the cross-party group and with us on the issue. It also gives me an opportunity to say, on behalf of the Government, to the survivors of abuse that we are listening and that we want to work to help them break down in a very public way the wall of silence around abuse. Sexual abuse and the trauma that results from it have been hidden by the silence of the victims, but in recent years many more survivors have spoken out about their experiences. That can only help them and others who might otherwise be at risk of abuse. It also helps policy makers to respond by developing a strategy to support adult survivors, to give them a voice and to work to protect children. Those who have spoken in the debate have commented on the history of our involvement with the issue, from the establishment of the cross-party group through to the setting up of a short-life working group to examine the care needs of people who have survived childhood sexual abuse and to consider its links with mental illness, alcohol and drug abuse, physical abuse, domestic violence and homelessness. Ministers have considered the short-life working group's recommendations and agreed that we need a national strategic approach to develop better local services. We have established a survivors fund of £2 million to pump prime activity. We will call for bids for demonstration projects, to which a number of members have referred. We have agreed to establish a survivors network, which will include survivors and professionals who will work with them, to help people find a voice. We have also set up a survivors reference group to help us implement action. The group met for the first time earlier this month. It is designed to be—and is—an inclusive group: it includes adult survivors, social and clinical care representatives, and members of voluntary organisations. The role of the cross-party group is also reflected in the membership of the group. It is for the reference group to develop the detail of the wide strategic approach that we want to take to achieve lasting progress. We have provided some ideas on that and today I have made other thoughts on the issue available to Marilyn Livingstone as the convener of the cross-party group. I will make those thoughts widely available and they will form part of the agenda for the next reference group meeting. It is also for the reference group to consider how best to use the funding. Far be it from me to suggest that members take their bids elsewhere, but I am sure that they will welcome the fact that the reference group will set the criteria, consider the applications and disburse over the next two  financial years the funds that we have provided. I have no doubt that the reference group will be aware of the particular strengths of the voluntary sector in this regard, as Margaret Mitchell suggested, and that it will be aware of the work in Fife, the Highlands and elsewhere when it considers the bids. The policy will link with a number of initiatives in the Executive. It falls naturally into the work of the national programme for mental health and well-being as it links into mental health promotion, the prevention of mental illness, tackling stigma, reducing the risk of suicide and enabling recovery. Our aim is to improve access to and the quality of services for adult survivors in Scotland. We aim to encourage better joined-up working among health, social care, education, community and voluntary organisations to improve access. We recognise that the earlier people access services, the better is the chance of their risk of illness and suicidal behaviour being reduced and of aiding recovery. We want to increase public awareness of childhood sexual abuse so that people will feel more comfortable about disclosing the experience at an earlier stage and thereby reduce the risk of longer-term damage to their physical and mental health. As Marilyn Livingstone said, citing Anne Macdonald, there is useful experience to draw on from the work on domestic abuse and other matters. We have heard during the debate about the many difficulties that people who have been victims face. The problems are immense and the reference group intends to address them. There is an enormous need for people to work together and it is our expectation that that will happen. Our approach is also reflected in what is being done through "Respect and Responsibility", the national sexual health strategy, which contains a number of actions to address issues related to sexual abuse, including issues for adult survivors. As has been said—the number of ministers who were referred to at the outset reflects this—the effects of childhood sexual abuse are not the sole responsibility of the Health Department: they extend to the departments with responsibility for education, justice and communities. We recognise that barriers can exist between services and that overcoming them can be a challenge. I am convinced that the strategic approach that we have suggested is the best way to achieve that aim. On the health and community care side, we will scope what community health partnerships and managed clinical network structures can do to make survivors aware of the benefits that they may be able to offer. We will also commission  NHS Education for Scotland to undertake self-help training and public awareness raising. I acknowledge the work that has been done by the cross-party group and by the short-life working group to create greater awareness and I welcome the continued support throughout the chamber for the work of the reference group in taking forward that agenda. In the past four years, we have sought to listen to survivors, who I know have often felt that their needs have gone unrecognised, and to begin to dispel the many myths that surround sexual abuse and its impact on society as a whole. Those are challenging commitments. We are working towards them, but we recognise that we cannot afford to be complacent when dealing with these issues. The commitments are not end points or even horizons; they are markers in our progress towards the bigger purpose of enabling survivors to live their lives to the full. Nothing less than that should be our goal.  Meeting closed at 17:45.

The Executive and its partners continue to work to improve mental health services. Significant service improvements have been made as national health service boards and local authorities have worked together to deliver the framework for mental health services in Scotland and to implement the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. However, all parties recognise that further improvements must be made in the future.

I certainly agree that the earliest possible intervention is the best result both for patients and for staff who provide the appropriate treatment. I also agree with Marilyn Livingstone's specific point about the importance of occupational therapy. This year and last, we have provided £400,000 to attract former skilled professionals, including  occupational therapists, back to practice. We recognise that that process needs to continue and that it is important to assist and support carers in dealing with such matters. Indeed, I expect next week to announce and publish the results of the care 21 project's investigation into the future needs of carers.

I am confident that we will have the necessary systems and services in place by 5 October. We will continue to work with health boards and local authorities to ensure that fit-for-purpose services are in place across the spectrum of mental health needs.

For some of the issues to which the member refers, action is not required immediately or to the same extent as in other cases. For instance, the provisions on appeals against the level of security for patients will not come into force until May next year, but measures are being taken to deal with that issue. We recognise that the recruitment of psychiatrists is a long-term issue. Measures are in place to try to address the issue, but we realise that some of them will be delivered more quickly than others. However, we recognise the importance of that matter. On the needs of younger patients, health boards are required, in making provision, to have regard to the age-specific requirements of those who are under 18. I believe that every board will be able to achieve that, but the means by which they do so will vary from area to area. In some cases, discussions are on-going within boards and between boards and the Executive on how that will be addressed.

NHS Quality Improvement Scotland has ensured that advice from Scottish experts is available to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence during its current consultations on  drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. NHS QIS will publish its advice on whether the NICE recommendations should be implemented by the NHS in Scotland in due course.

I am very aware of the concerns surrounding the issue. Earlier this week, I met the Scottish dementia working group, which is made up of individuals who are diagnosed with dementia. The group expressed its concerns to me very clearly. I am happy to give Janis Hughes the assurance that she seeks. NHS Quality Improvement Scotland will give careful consideration to the issue and I will take a close and active interest in the advice that it produces.

We recently began an assessment of the implementation and operation of the policy of free personal care and we will make its findings public in due course.

We will maintain the policy of free personal care for which we are responsible and we will seek ways to improve its implementation. We will not tell the DWP how to do its job.

We are investing in ensuring that care can be provided at home and I know that local authorities are doing the same. I hope that those investments will have the outcomes to which Mr Swinburne refers.

Twelve million pounds has been allocated over the three years from 2003-06 under the Executive's choose life strategy to fund activities and organisations that support people who are at risk of suicide. We committed a further £8.4 million to continued suicide prevention action in 2006-08, and last week during international suicide prevention awareness week I increased that funding commitment by a further £250,000 over that period.

I am happy to give that assurance. The applied suicide intervention skills training that is provided under the choose life programme is internationally regarded as a model for providing that kind of support, both to those involved professionally with people at risk of suicide and to those such as school dinner staff, home helps and others who come into contact with  people who may be vulnerable. We certainly want that work to continue.

Andy Kerr discussed dental services with NHS Fife at its annual review in Glenrothes on 17 August 2005; I discussed dentistry with the national health service board chairs at their regular meeting with ministers on 29 August 2005; and there are regular meetings at official level to discuss the implementation of the action plan for improving oral health and modernising NHS dental services in Scotland.

I am aware of the position in St Andrews and I hope that NHS Fife is successful in putting in place those access arrangements. The key thing is that there should be access to continuing care under the NHS wherever possible. For that reason, I share Mr Smith's concern at the actions of those dentists who have withdrawn or  reduced the level of services that they provide under the NHS. That is why we have brought forward a range of plans to ensure both that NHS dentists are properly rewarded for their contribution to the NHS and that the funding that we provide is used to reward NHS dentists.

Our discussions with NHS Fife on those matters will continue. We will certainly take into account both the levels of existing access to NHS services and the wider health and deprivation position of communities that are affected by dentists who withdraw their services from the NHS.

Does Mr Rumbles accept that, since we last met in the chamber to discuss these matters, the first of the new practice payments, which are significantly higher than the rates under the old arrangements, have been made? They were made at the end of July. Does he also accept that all the vocational training places in rural areas that were announced as part of the action plan are now filled and that negotiations are on-going with the dentists' professional representatives on the implementation of the remaining aspects of the plan?

Amendment 18 is merely technical and moves section 14 of the bill to after section 21 to reflect its widened scope. Amendment 27 concerns the right of appeal under section 50(3) of the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000, which provides a right of appeal for "any person having an interest in the personal welfare of the adult" with incapacity in relation to any treatment that has been decided on between a medical practitioner and the adult's proxy decision maker. That gives extra protection to the adult on decisions that are made about his or her medical treatment. Section 30 of the bill introduces into the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 a new, additional right of appeal for the medical professional who has primary responsibility for the medical treatment of the adult. That recognises that a person's general practitioner may have cause to question a decision that is made by another relevant professional person, such as a dentist. Amendment 27 makes it clear that the new right of appeal for the GP applies in cases in which discussions about treatment take place between one of the other new categories of people who can issue a certificate and the proxy decision maker. In such cases, the medical practitioner will be able to intercede on behalf of the adult if one of those other professionals and the adult's proxy decision maker have made a decision on treatment with which the GP does not agree. Amendment 30 is a technical amendment that tidies up an inaccurate reference elsewhere to the Public Health (Scotland) Act 1897 as a consequence of amendment at stage 2, and amendment 31 is a minor formatting amendment. I move amendment 18.  Amendment 18 agreed to.

The amendments in this group are similar to amendments that Nanette Milne lodged at stage 2, when they were debated in committee. For the avoidance of doubt, I make it clear, as ministers did then, that it is our policy intention that a requirement for disclosure of information will apply equally to relevant professionals who are applying to join a list and practising professionals who are already on such a list. The provisions of the bill are drafted in such a way as to lead to that outcome. Professionals who are applying to join a list will be required to disclose the necessary information before their application for inclusion on a list by an NHS board is considered. It will be up to the individual concerned to obtain and provide that information, and there is no prescribed timescale as such. For those professionals already on an NHS board list, arrangements will be put in place to define a reasonable period within which they should submit relevant information when required to do so by the NHS board. However, it is simply not appropriate to define such a period in the bill. The issue must be discussed with the relevant professional bodies. Nanette Milne does not advocate putting such a precise timescale on the face of the bill, but she does seek to require the same timescale to apply to existing and new practitioners. Since there is no timescale as such for new applicants in the bill, there cannot be one for existing practitioners. Therefore, her amendments could not achieve the result that she intends.  We want to ensure continuity of patient services and to make certain that practitioners and their patients are not disadvantaged by the requirements. I cannot be precise on the timescale for implementing the requirement for persons who are already listed. Those details have still to be discussed—and are best discussed—with the relevant professional bodies. However, I can assure Nanette Milne and other members that that will be completed as quickly as possible, without creating unnecessary additional burdens on any of those involved. Nanette Milne's purpose can be achieved without amendments 19 to 22. Therefore, the amendments are not necessary and I hope that, in light of my assurances, she will withdraw amendment 19 and not move the other amendments. We will move the matter forward as quickly as we can.

As announced at stage 2, we have asked a group under Laurence Gruer to examine such matters and we have commissioned research to start in September. Unfortunately, I cannot provide Mr Monteith with the results of that. If we were in such a position, we would take a slightly different view today. We have made it clear that the intention is to undertake that research. Mr Rumbles suggested that amendment 1 would increase the minimum age to 18. It would not. The amendment would give ministers the power to raise the age if the research showed that doing so would be effective. Effectiveness, which is critical, was at the heart of the speeches by John Home Robertson and Irene Oldfather. Provision has been made for action when shopkeepers or others sell tobacco or tobacco products to underage people. Fines of up to £2,500—level 4 on the standard scale—are  possible; the same applies to those who permit smoking in no-smoking premises. Mike Rumbles asked how we could make a change in the age limit effective. Duncan McNeil's comments on the effectiveness of age limitations elsewhere were telling. Before we take any measures that use the proposed powers, we will return to the Parliament under the affirmative resolution procedure.

This is my first contribution to this debate, so it is appropriate for me to acknowledge Stewart Maxwell's support for the bill throughout its parliamentary stages and for the contribution that his member's bill made in terms of flushing out a number of the key issues and concerns surrounding the introduction of legislation on smoking. His bill allowed evidence to be taken that established beyond doubt the harmful effects of environmental tobacco smoke and helped to move on the argument to where we are today. The amendments in group 7, including Mr Maxwell's amendment, recognise that a key objective of the bill is to discourage young people from starting to smoke in the first place. Duncan McNeil and his colleagues on the Health Committee deserve a good deal of credit for the progress of the bill and Mr McNeil's stage 2 amendment gave Scottish ministers powers to vary the legal age for buying tobacco. Duncan McNeil made a powerful case that that could be an important contribution to the process of reducing the numbers of young smokers.

From the beginning, we have made it clear that we first want to be sure that there is strong evidence that varying the legal age of tobacco purchase will be effective in its stated aims. We have also been clear that any order to give effect to such a change will be subject to the affirmative resolution procedure in the Parliament. That is the effect of amendment 28, which meets our commitment at stage 2 to take this course. Building on Duncan McNeil's stage 2 amendment, Stewart Maxwell's amendment 1 will  allow ministers, responding to further research on the issue, to send a strong message by raising and maintaining the legal age of tobacco purchase if—but only if—such a measure is to shown to offer an effective way of discouraging young people from taking up smoking. Depending on the further research that we have commissioned in this area, the provision is an important and valuable tool that might help to reduce the high level of young people who take up smoking. I am therefore happy to commend Mr Maxwell's amendment 1, as well as amendments 28 and 30.

The most recent available figures show that, at 31 March last year, just over 50 per cent of adults and 70 per cent of children were registered with an NHS dentist in Lothian. NHS Lothian is currently considering the appointment of salaried dentists to improve access to NHS services across its area.

Mr Home Robertson is, of course, right to say that what matters for patients is access to services. That is why I am delighted that we have been able to put in place such a substantial additional funding package. My predecessor Rhona Brankin opened the Chalmers dental centre recently to provide access to emergency dental treatment for patients in East Lothian, Midlothian and Edinburgh. The deployment of salaried dentists, to which I referred, is part of the answer. We also need to work with existing dental practices in order to sustain access to those services, both in Mr Home Robertson's constituency and throughout Scotland.

As I said, the comfort that I wish to bring to Mr Home Robertson's constituents in East Lothian and to other people across the South of Scotland is through encouraging greater access to dental services. Measures are being put in place to secure emergency treatment, but Mr Gallie is right to say that we want people to have access to a range of other NHS dental services. That is why we will work hard with the dental profession and its representative organisations to secure support for the measures that we have put in place. The action plan brings forward the biggest increase in support for dental services since 1948.

Individual NHS boards around Scotland are taking a number of initiatives to recruit dentists from elsewhere. That is part of the wider package, along with the work that we are doing to train, recruit and retain dentists here in Scotland in the NHS. We will continue to attend to that on-going project.

Our policy on the NHS Scotland stores operation is to simplify the current arrangements by moving to a national logistics infrastructure, in order to improve all aspects of the physical supply chain at local and national level, in line with the efficient government initiative.

I understand that the new, centralised operation is likely to be located in Lanarkshire rather than in West Lothian. The purpose of the measure is to ensure that we secure the best possible value for money for the taxpayer. The move will not involve redundancies and will happen with a minimum of relocation and with full redeployment of the staff involved. The additional resources that will be freed up as a result of the new approach to operating the system will be put to good use, to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of our logistics operation. The new approach will not take away the opportunity for local suppliers to continue to enter into contractual arrangements with their local health boards.

Borders NHS Board is reviewing health services in those areas and is actively seeking the views of local people and NHS staff.

It is entirely to do with service delivery. I am interested that Mrs Grahame is ahead of the local NHS board in having reached a view on what is required in this case and I would be interested to know what additional resources she thinks are needed. I am certainly not in a position to judge whether additional resources might be required. That is a matter for Borders NHS Board, which is why it is consulting local people and NHS staff to determine how best to deliver services. The idea that, before that process has been undertaken, a member can stand up in the chamber and tell the Parliament that a certain amount of additional resources ought to be provided, regardless of whether they are required, seems to me to be bizarre.

Yes, I will. I also commend Mr Robson for his constructive engagement with Borders NHS Board. I wish that others in the chamber would take the same approach.

The responsibility for dealing with an application to spread sludge on land and ensuring that it would pose no risk to public health lies with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. Several NHS boards have sought and received generic advice from Health Protection Scotland on the health issues associated with that practice.

I am pleased to say that the responsibility for reading and coming to conclusions on such reports lies with SEPA rather than with ministers and I have every faith that SEPA will carry out its responsibility in the usual way.

I am as pleased as my colleagues are that I do not need to take all the time that is available. The evidence from this afternoon's debate suggests that I will not require to use up all the time. The bill has attracted widespread support because it will assist in protecting Scotland's environment and will encourage public participation in doing so. [ Interruption. ]

The bill has attracted widespread support because it strikes the right balance between providing a robust framework for protecting the environment and keeping bureaucracy to a minimum and because of the range of support mechanisms that will be put in place to ensure effective delivery of its provisions. There is broad support for the bill's general principles and its overall approach, but there are issues that members have asked us to respond to. Before I deal with those matters, I want to take issue with Alex Fergusson's claim that, like others, the Conservatives have simply raised particular concerns. In my view, there is a clear difference between the Tory approach to the bill and the constructive concerns that other members have expressed. That takes me back to Alex Johnstone's opening speech. I thought that Richard Lochhead did not fully understand the import of that speech, which I interpreted in a much more negative way than even he did. Mr Johnstone argued that it was a good thing that development in the past just happened, without any strategic assessment of impacts on the environment having been made—not that he mentioned the environment much. It was put to Mr Johnstone that it might be better for us to put in place public transport access to airports before they were developed, instead of having to spend the money that is required to do so afterwards. Sadly, the Conservatives were not convinced of the wisdom and prudence of that approach.

Mr Johnstone's intervention further demonstrates that he is missing the point. The issue is the costs and benefits over the piece. If strategic environmental assessment is carried out first and properly, vastly more will be saved than the process of carrying out the assessment could possibly cost.

I am saying that we should subject all strategic plans and programmes to environmental assessment, precisely in order that we may have the benefit of foresight, may see what will happen and may take into account environmental impacts before we begin. I thought that Alex Johnstone provided the best example of a laissez-faire, let-it-happen attitude until I heard Mr Scott's speech. John Scott appeared to take the view that our policy on environmental assessment should not be decided either in the Scottish Parliament or at Westminster, but should be driven only by European Union directives, and that we should do on the environment only what the European Union tells us to do. Richard Lochhead suggested that Europe has led on environmental matters and, although I do not want to detract from the contribution that it has made, I will say that Labour and Liberal Democrat members believe that we should build on what comes from Europe in order to address specific Scottish needs.

However, John Scott said in his speech that we needed to pilot what we are doing in order to assess the impact of strategic environmental assessment. He missed the point that the European Union directive that was put into regulations last summer requires strategic environmental assessment to be carried out of all plans that have come forward since then. The pathfinder project that has been described allows us to make an assessment now of what the bill's  impact will be when its provisions are implemented. Fourteen plans, programmes and strategies are subject to strategic environmental assessment at the moment. Ten are from local authorities, one is from the structure plan committee in the Clyde valley, one is from a national park authority, one is from Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd and one is from the Deer Commission for Scotland. All the assessments that are being carried out currently will precisely inform strategic environmental assessment in the future.

The point of the bill is that it extends the requirements to every plan, programme and strategy that comes forward in the public sector. If Mr Johnstone pays more attention at future meetings of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, he will find a fuller answer to the question that he has just put to me. Maureen Macmillan and others asked about the difference between strategic environmental assessment and environmental impact assessment. That is an important point. Strategic environmental assessment applies to strategies, plans and programmes. As I pointed out to Rosie Kane, environmental impact assessment applies to individual projects and schemes. A number of members have referred to Scottish Water. Scottish Water exercises functions of a public character, so strategies, plans and programmes that it brings forward will be caught by the bill in the same way as those that are brought forward by other public bodies will be. That does not mean that every local scheme will be caught by the bill—those will be covered by EIAs, which already exist. We have set out clear definitions of how the provisions will apply but, as has been said, we will ensure that greater clarification is provided where matters are still not clear to committee members. We will consider what further refinement of the provisions in the bill might be required and we will consider administrative support mechanisms. We will seek to respond to the committee's recommendations on a number of matters, in particular the need to enable responsible authorities and their staff to adopt the change of culture that is required in how they examine issues in order to implement the bill successfully. We want to minimise bureaucracy and ensure that there is as light a touch as possible. Because of that, we have put in place pre-screening procedures, which will be carried out by the plan owner and will determine whether a plan or programme might have a significant environmental effect. We will not require strategic assessment of  schemes that will not have a major environmental effect.

I understand the point that the member makes. I think that most people would understand fairly clearly what "minimal" means and what "significant" means, but we will use the guidance to spell that out if that is required. For example, an effect on land that is of no particular environmental value is clearly different from an effect on land that has an identified and understood environmental value. In order to improve the transparency of the process, we will consider the creation of a register of decisions that are made at the pre-screening stage, to make it clear when a project does not have to undergo strategic assessment. We will look to move to the scoping stage as quickly as possible when it is clear that an assessment will be required. We want to use the gateway to help us to minimise bureaucracy and to implement SEA in a way that is helpful to those who are responsible for implementation. We want that to happen without the imposition of statutory or bureaucratic burdens. We want the gateway, as a body that is already working on the existing SEA proposals, to be able to carry out that function.

The bill makes it clear that the consultation authorities are the Scottish ministers, SEPA and SNH. That is because those authorities—in the case of the Scottish ministers, through Historic Scotland—bring to the table the expertise on environmental matters that we believe is required. It is our intention to go forward on that basis. As I have said, we are clear about what will be covered and what will require assessment. We are also clear about who will be involved in the assessment. We want to ensure that the bureaucratic burden on those involved is kept to a minimum, but we also want to ensure that practitioners are fully aware of the requirements that are placed on them. The UK regulations on transboundary effects, which Rob Gibson and one or two other members mentioned, provide for consultation on such  effects. The results of that consultation will be taken into account in the SEA of any Scottish plan that has transboundary effects. The same will apply at UK level.

If the UK Government produces a plan, programme or strategy that applies across the United Kingdom, the UK legislation will apply. If a plan, programme or strategy is produced that has effect only in Scotland, the Scottish legislation will apply. I hope that that important distinction was made clear earlier. The bill will be good for the environment by providing environmental protection and helping us to tackle climate change. It will also strengthen public participation in public policy decision making. It will do all that on the basis of an effective balance between a light-touch regulatory regime and a robust enforcement and quality assurance framework. The bill is backed up by a dynamic package of support mechanisms that are designed to husband resources and to provide as much assistance as possible to all those people who are involved with the new requirements. The principles of the bill are a key component in supporting our wider strategy of sustainable developments taking on board social, economic and environmental benefits along with greater public participation. I commend them to the Parliament.

Does the member accept, as an example, that the flood prevention schemes that local authorities propose are specifically and precisely required to take into account the impacts, and likely impacts, of climate change?

Does Ms Kane accept that under existing legislation such housing developments are required to undergo environmental impact assessment?

I have asked for an interim report on options from the forest crofts steering group following its meeting on Monday next week. I will publish a further report and recommendations later this year.

I will read with interest responses from people outwith the crofting counties to the consultation on the draft Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill. I am aware that on the island of Arran there is a significant body of opinion that it would be helpful for the community to move in the direction of establishing forest crofts. The critical point is that we are seeking to give communities the opportunity to have more say over the use of the land on which they live. Eleanor Scott will be aware that on Monday the Forestry Commission Scotland will launch its national forest land scheme, which will enhance opportunities that were created by the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003.

Mr Gibson should be aware that Monday's meeting is the first at which all the parties that are now involved in the steering group will get together, but that the core members of the group—the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department, the Forestry Commission and the Crofters Commission—first met on 7 March. Monday's meeting is not about starting work but about expanding the work that is being done by including in the steering group both  Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Crofting Foundation, to represent the views of working crofters. We are treating the matter as significant. We recognise the logic of progressing it alongside crofting reform and new opportunities for forestry land to be used for affordable housing, which will be the subject of the announcement that will be made on Monday. I hope that Mr Gibson will agree that that is a coherent agenda of improved opportunities for rural and crofting communities.

We are providing grant support to councils at the increased rate of 80 per cent of eligible costs of approved flood prevention schemes in Tayside and throughout Scotland, and we are working with a range of stakeholders to improve awareness of and preparedness for future flood risk, particularly in the light of climate change.

I am certainly aware of the matter, as Mr Fraser wrote to me about it earlier this year. The position is simple. Councils have discretion to take action on flood protection in any circumstances in any place. The grant support for flood prevention schemes, to which I referred, does not cover agricultural land. However, a scheme on agricultural land that is designed to protect non-agricultural properties will potentially attract grant support, on the basis of the assessment of costs. In any case, the local authority has discretion to take any measures that it wishes to take to deal with flooding.

We are supporting a range of actions to promote green space and environmental improvements in urban  areas. They include the community regeneration fund and the associated regeneration outcome agreements for disadvantaged neighbourhoods; the woods in and around towns initiative, which is led by the Forestry Commission Scotland; and the greenspace for communities initiative, which is core funded by Scottish Natural Heritage and draws support from local partners for the work of the local greenspace trusts. In addition, planning policy seeks to protect and promote open space in urban areas.

We certainly want local authorities and others to come forward with projects and programmes that recognise the balance between environmental, social and economic initiatives. The measures to which I referred in my initial answer—such as the regeneration outcome agreements, which are particularly pertinent to urban areas—encourage environmental investment as part of social and economic regeneration.

I expect to receive shortly a comprehensive report from the regulatory review team, which has been looking at ways of making the regulatory regime more fit for purpose without compromising environmental or consumer concerns. The international comparative cost study, which we are part funding, will reach its conclusions soon and allow us to make further progress in increasing the competitiveness of Scottish aquaculture.

I am aware of the views of multinational companies that are located in Scotland and I will meet such companies in the next few days to discuss issues to do with competitiveness. It is clear that free trade must also be fair trade and the measures that are being pursued through the European Union are intended to protect small companies in the marketplace from unfair trading practice in the EU. The measures will also ensure stable prices and stability in the marketplace, which will benefit all the producers who operate in Scotland, whether they are multinational or Scottish-owned companies.

On our position in relation to the European markets, the key issue is that we already have a premium for Scottish products, as a result of our good reputation for the environmental quality of our water, for example. Our priorities in carrying that forward are to ensure that the European market remains fair and, of course, to ensure that we maintain our excellent reputation for high environmental standards, which assists in the marketing of Scottish produce.

Where Scottish Water believes that the waste water infrastructure is inadequate to support a proposed new development, it will advise the local planning authority accordingly. We will require Scottish Water to publish an annual report on the strategic capacity of its water and waste water networks as of 1 April 2006.

A local authority may already impose planning conditions in approving a development that would require the developer to address constraints of the kind that Janis Hughes is concerned about. The developer would normally do that in partnership with the local council and Scottish Water. As of the next investment period, developers will be required to meet all the local network costs, subject to the usual arrangements for discounting for Scottish Water's future income. There will be a new alignment similar to that which applies in England and Wales; developers will automatically be involved in paying for necessary infrastructure improvements.

In my statement to Parliament I made it clear that the new investment programme will require that the strategic network costs be met by Scottish Water and that local network costs be met by developers. That will be subject to a reasonable cost contribution from Scottish Water to reflect its income from that new infrastructure during the first 12 years of its life.

We expect Scottish Water to work with local authorities and others under the quality and standards III programme to identify realistically what projects are likely to come on stream first and to address those needs first.

The Parliament approved the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003 two years ago. Last week, as Mr Lochhead said, the Environment and Rural Development Committee considered in some detail the latest annual report on the implementation of the legislation, as well as the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2005, which are required to bring the act's provisions into force. The point of the act is to control, in line with the European water framework directive, a whole range of activities that may impact on the water environment; the point of the regulations is to put those controls in place. We asked the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to assess levels of risk to our inland and coastal waters. Its analysis has shown that about 45 per cent of our waters are affected by pollution, abstraction or engineering works. The regulations will allow us to address those impacts and to protect the water environment and the quality of  our water, which is precisely what is vital to the whisky industry, the bottled water industry and many other Scottish industries. The measures are proportionate, targeted and risk based. Let me enlighten the chamber as to some of the figures. Approximately 145,000 activities impact on our water environment. Of those, about 50,000 will require only to conform to general binding rules. There will be no need to register or apply for a licence; there will simply be a need to conform to rules that are in the public domain. A further 80,000 activities will require only to be registered with SEPA—on the off-chance that there may be a cumulative impact—in order for them to go ahead. That leaves about 15,000 activities of such a scale or effect that they will require a licence from SEPA, which is only about 10 per cent of the total number of activities. SEPA must carry out a risk assessment of the activities that are most likely to pose a serious threat in order to determine the appropriate tier of control. The point of having a volume-based threshold is to allow a full risk assessment to be triggered to establish what level of control will be appropriate in the longer term. If the assessment finds that there is no significant impact, there will be no need for significant regulatory control.

Mr Lochhead may feel that we have not had proper parliamentary scrutiny, but I assure him that, following the two-hour debate last week, I take a different view. It is worth noting that his proposal to the Environment and Rural Development Committee that we delay and fail to implement the regulations straight away was roundly rejected when committee members heard the evidence and understood the issues at stake. SEPA needs to know about the scale of abstraction and its impact on the environment in order to make a judgment. We will ensure that SEPA considers borderline cases—those cases in which the scale of impact by volume may not be reflected at an early stage in the risk assessment process. That means that controls on some activities may be reduced so that a licence is no longer required. We will ensure that charges are reduced accordingly when it is found that a licence is no longer required; we will also ensure that rebates are provided when that is appropriate. Ministers, not SEPA, will make the judgments on cost-effectiveness. We will continue to engage directly with the whisky industry and all other  stakeholders. We will also report back to the Environment and Rural Development Committee as the regime is rolled out.

The new croft house grant scheme replaced the former grants and loans scheme on 1 January, and priority areas under the scheme were identified earlier this month. The effectiveness of the new scheme in supporting the renewal of crofter housing will be kept under review.

I can certainly give Mr Morrison the assurance that we have kept a close eye on the matter and that officials, including the head of the department, have been to Uist to see the challenges for themselves. Measures have already been put in place to allow support for the renewal of fencing, and additional payments have been authorised for those crofters who had previously reached the limit of their usual eligibility under the crofting counties agricultural grants scheme, taking into account the impact of the January storms on those crofters. We shall continue to consider innovative and imaginative ways of ensuring that those needs are met.

There is no reason why crofters anywhere in the crofting counties of Scotland should not apply for the scheme. Mr Gibson will be encouraged to hear that, in the first three months of this year alone, there were more applications under the new grant scheme than there were for the whole of last year under the former scheme. A total of 124 applications were made for a sum of approximately £2 million in assistance to housing over those three months.

I congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing this debate and on her constructive approach to the issue. I acknowledge the enthusiasm of the proposal's supporters and I recognise that the proponents of reintroduction want not just a favourable decision but an early decision, to enable the quarantine process to begin, so that Norwegian beavers can be released in Scotland in the spring of next year. It is important, however, not to underestimate the range and complexity of the issues raised by SNH's application. There are some serious questions to be answered before such a reintroduction can go ahead and we will agree to it only if and when we are certain that the answers add up. I take this early opportunity to lay to rest the suggestion, made this evening by Rob Gibson, that Scottish ministers have been responsible for undue delay in the progress of the application. As I said in the Parliament a few weeks ago, Allan Wilson asked SNH for further information in support of its application in December 2002. That further information was supplied in February 2005. It was, of course, entirely a matter for SNH to determine how quickly it brought that forward, but I should say that SNH has not been among those averring that Scottish ministers have been the cause of delay. Ian Jardine, the chief executive of SNH, wrote to my officials in February, stating that "due to other pressures on SNH during this period I have not prioritised this work." That letter is available to anyone who visits the SNH website, so there is no question that  ministers have attached a lower priority to the application than the applicant has. At the same time, ministers would rightly be criticised if we allowed ourselves to be bounced into making decisions that we thought would be popular in the short term, without regard for longer-term impacts. Instead, we must address the issue in a careful and measured way, assessing the known or likely risks against the potential benefits. Scotland has not had native beavers in the wild for some hundreds of years. They were referred to by Hector Boece of Aberdeen university, among others, hundreds of years ago. To reintroduce them after that period of time would be a significant step and one that might not readily be reversed. Such a project could have serious consequences if there were inadequate consideration of the evidence or if the wrong conclusions were reached. Alex Johnstone and George Lyon mentioned alien species such as the American mink, but Fergus Ewing reminded us that even the humble hedgehog has caused damage to biodiversity where it has been introduced inappropriately. No one would have thought that the introduction of perhaps four hedgehogs from Glasgow to Uist some 30 years ago would give rise to what is now a serious and adverse impact on our rare wading bird populations in those islands. The hedgehog population in Uist remains at least 5,000, in spite of SNH's management measures, with many more born each year. Breeding performance among European beavers is equally successful. The Swedish example shows an increase from six animals reintroduced from Norway in 1922 to more than 100,000 today. Fergus Ewing asked about the aspects of the SNH case on which Allan Wilson sought information. There are three main aspects, all of which have been touched on in today's debate: the ecological, the economic and the legal. Key to the ecological case is ensuring that we are not introducing a risk for Scotland's existing wildlife and habitats. SNH recognises that its proposal has associated risks that need to be addressed. One of those is the salmon parasite Gyrodactylus salaries, which has spread in Norway since the 1970s and has led to contamination of around 40 rivers and a similar number of fish farms. The Norwegians believe that aquatic animals such as beavers may have been one of the ways that the parasite spread through their river system. In more than 20 cases, they have released poison into the river in order to kill off infected fish, but in some larger rivers no means of eradicating the parasite have been found. In the light of that, it may be better to ensure that any Norwegian beaver is completely  free of GS in Norway before it sets off for a new life in a Scottish river than to rely on a period of quarantine in the United Kingdom to solve the problem. The proposal has, as Nora Radcliffe said, potential economic benefits for Scotland and, as George Lyon said, for Argyll in particular. I am keen to ensure that that aspect of SNH's case is properly taken into account. We need to understand potential benefits, but we also need to determine whether there might be negative implications. As we know, country sports contribute about £200 million in visitor revenue to the Scottish economy each year. A large part of that benefit is from angling. In assessing whether the potential economic benefits of reintroduction outweigh the potential damage to existing sources of income, we will need robust evidence both of how the potential extra tourism could be realised and of how potential adverse impacts on freshwater fishing could be contained. Of course, SNH proposes a trial, under controlled conditions, in an area without significant salmonid populations, but the findings of a trial must be relevant to future activity and scientifically rigorous in all respects. We cannot limit consideration of this case to Knapdale alone. We must look further—as SNH has done—at where the beavers may spread if the trial is a success and leads to their wider reintroduction. We must also examine the long-term management and financing of the proposal, given that it would be funded largely from the public purse. I am currently awaiting revised costings from SNH for what it wishes to be a seven-year trial. I should mention one particularly unusual aspect of the case, which has been mentioned in the debate. It would be usual for the reintroduction of species to be taken forward by bodies such as RSPB Scotland, for example, and for SNH, as the statutory adviser to Scottish ministers, to comment on such applications. In this case, however, SNH is acting not as the adviser but as the applicant. Non-departmental public bodies such as SNH were set up for good reasons. We believe that it is right in general for ministers to be able to seek advice from such bodies, which have day-to-day responsibilities in implementing Government policies and are accountable through ministers to the Parliament, but also have detailed and expert knowledge of their subject areas. It is absolutely in order for SNH to act as the applicant when it believes that it is serving an important natural heritage interest by so doing. However, by definition, its so doing means that we are not able to turn to it in the usual way for expert advice. Fergus Ewing suggested that we had asked SNH to advise on its own application—that is not the case. We are not able to do that,  because SNH is the applicant. That clearly has implications for our process of examining and considering the application. In the final analysis, it is the responsibility of ministers to give full and well-informed consideration to all the evidence before they reach a conclusion. There must be no rush to judgment and no easy options: our objective in the matter is simply to get it right.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

I hesitate to offer information. Perhaps Mr Gibson can tell us at what stage and to what degree he believes that there has been a delay on the part of ministers.

A great deal. The air quality strategy sets national objectives that are either equal to or more stringent than those that have been set by the European Community directives and which will be worked towards by the Executive in partnership with local authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and other interested parties.

We work with local authorities on meeting their requirements under the air quality management areas. Mr MacAskill refers to two areas where those requirements might apply. Local authorities are required to develop air quality action plans only where there is an issue over whether they can meet the targets that have been set for them. They will be funded in the usual way for matters for which they have legal obligations and we expect that to continue. We also provide funding for other important aspects of  the delivery of the policy, such as vehicle emissions testing and supporting the use of emission-reducing equipment.

The Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department has engaged fully with equine organisations and interests since it first consulted in June 2000 on proposals to extend the requirement for horse passports to all equines. Several meetings have been held with stakeholders, two further consultation exercises have been undertaken and publicity campaigns have been carried out. A news release was issued and public notices were placed in the national and local press to highlight the coming into force of the new regulations earlier this week.

I find that a quite extraordinary proposition. The horse-owning and operating community—those people with an interest in horses—has been aware of the intention to introduce horse passports in this format for some five years. I do not regard that as an inadequate period of time. Yesterday, the Conservatives sought—unsuccessfully, I am happy to say—to persuade the Parliament to take no further action on the implementation of the regulations. I hope that, in asking their question today, they have helped to advertise even more widely to the readers of Scottish newspapers the fact that the regulations are now in place.

There are some differences and Ross Finnie or I will write to Sylvia Jackson on that matter. However, the essential point to make is that horse passports are part of a regime that is common across not only the United Kingdom but the European Union. It is designed as a public health measure and will be given full effect in accordance with the regulations that have been approved by the Scottish Parliament following the debate in the Environment and Rural Development Committee yesterday. Of course, there has to be recognition of the fact that horses will travel from Scotland to the UK and other parts of the EU, which is why the application of those measures across the EU as well as the UK is essential.

Yes. I was pleased to announce the first consents to the community right to buy at Crossgates in Fife on 28 February. A number of other rural communities are currently making progress with registering an interest in land and with raising funds to allow them to put their plans in place.

The legislation is designed specifically to be available and appropriate for rural communities throughout Scotland. It also provides for late registrations. That provision does not change; it remains part of the act. The requirements for late registration are different from those that are made timeously, and there are criteria in the act that need to be met whenever an application is made. It would be essential for ministers, in considering any application, to ensure that it meets those criteria.

I congratulate Shiona Baird on securing the debate and highlighting the new farmers market at Stonehaven and other farmers markets throughout the north-east and the rest of Scotland. As a regular customer of the monthly Aberdeen country fair on Belmont Street in my constituency I can, like others, vouch for the quality and variety of the produce that is available and the contribution that such markets make to promoting choice for consumers. Farmers markets are good news for consumers. They also contribute to the kind of change that we look to farmers to make. Sarah Boyack mentioned the agriculture strategy. In that context, we look to farmers to make changes as a result of reform of the common agricultural policy. Farmers in future will need to be more responsive to the requirements of the market. Farmers markets provide an ideal opportunity for producers to meet customers face to face. There is no better way to reconnect agriculture with the market than through direct contact. Hopefully, that will also contribute to increased understanding of the food production process among children and adults who live in urban Scotland. We welcome farmers markets in principle, but we also support them in practical ways. We provide funding in excess of £300,000 a year to the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society, which in turn supports the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets in providing practical advice to those who are setting up new markets, such as those at Stonehaven and Balerno. We also support many individual businesses through our food grants schemes, with more than £28 million of grant assistance to agricultural food businesses in the past four years. Shiona Baird mentioned Jamesfield farm. Organic Meat and Products (Scotland) Ltd, which is based there, is a good  example, as it has received grants of more than £350,000 to help to meet consumer demand. Procurement issues have been mentioned. We are taking action to encourage the use of local food in schools, hospitals and other public services. Our guidelines on public sector procurement encourage public bodies to ensure that suppliers meet appropriate farm assurance standards and to secure local fresh and seasonal produce of high nutritional quality in the interests of Scottish consumers.

I point Mr Scott in the direction of the research that we published last week, which he should be able to access fairly readily on the Executive's website. As well as estimating that that market is worth some £85 million, it highlighted some of the trends in the market and some of the obstacles that prevent local producers from getting access to it. The research was clear and we accept its conclusion that it is key that we increase awareness among producers of the opportunities that exist for tendering and competing in the marketplace, as that could make a serious difference. Those who award public contracts cannot discriminate between Scottish produce and food that comes from elsewhere purely on the basis of country of origin, but there are significant opportunities for Scottish suppliers to compete with other suppliers on an equal footing, on the basis of quality, value, freshness and reliability of supply. Our priority is to ensure that Scottish suppliers are as well informed as possible about those opportunities. We are exploring the possibility of giving consumers more information by introducing country-of-origin labelling for beef that is sold in restaurants and other food-service outlets. We also want to give consumers elsewhere a greater choice of Scottish produce and more opportunities to enjoy it. Everyone knows about the value of outstanding exports such as whisky and salmon, but the farmers markets offer good examples of other types of Scottish produce that we would like to export, for which there are ready markets elsewhere in the UK and abroad. As well as encouraging local producer-to-consumer direct marketing, farmers markets are relevant in the context of efforts to promote opportunities for Scottish producers nationally and internationally. If we are serious about consumer choice, we need to recognise that consumers will continue to  choose to shop at supermarkets and convenience stores, as well as at farmers markets, which represent a growing sector. In that regard, there are some important issues to be addressed. Quality and traceability matter, but so do quantity and range. We want retailers of all kinds—not only in Scotland but throughout the UK—to stock as much Scottish produce as possible. My colleagues and I speak to supermarkets and other retail interests to reinforce that message and the more general message of sustainability. Regardless of how successful our local producers are, we will continue to need to bring some foods into Scotland, both so that we can eat more fruit and vegetables to improve our health and so that we can enjoy a wider variety of produce than can be obtained seasonally in Scotland. We should not underestimate the importance of providing consumer choice. At the beginning of my speech, I mentioned the Aberdeen country fair. I should also mention last month's international market in Aberdeen, which attracted some 70 stalls from different parts of Europe and some 70,000 shoppers, who typically bought speciality produce from continental countries that would not otherwise have been so readily available. That is another example of producers selling directly to consumers, even if in that case the producers were not local. That, too, should be welcomed for some of the reasons that I have outlined. The Executive's view is that farmers markets can make a significant contribution to providing what consumers want. We welcome their contribution and that made by farm shops—which some members have mentioned—and local food initiatives. Through direct selling to consumers, they all play their part in cutting the length of the supply chain between producer and consumer.

I have not yet had the opportunity to sample the produce at the market to which Mr Harper refers. I imagine that the civil servants at Victoria Quay who are kept hard at work but who have the occasional opportunity to venture outside will take advantage of the opportunities that the market offers. I am happy to applaud the growing success of farmers markets.

I do not want to go into the detail of the discussions that are taking place on the land management contract. I know that John Scott is well aware of the process of negotiation that is going on internationally on the subject and also of the Scottish Executive's efforts to ensure that the process brings environmental and health benefits to producers and consumers in Scotland. I suspect that his suggestion is one of the options that Ross Finnie is considering. Clearly, farmers markets are a vital part of the spectrum of activity that makes up the thriving Scottish food industry to which I have referred. On behalf of the Executive, I am happy to applaud the best efforts of all those involved in the farmers market movement and more generally in the production, marketing and selling of Scottish food.  Meeting closed at 17:01.

I have confirmed in recent weeks two new sites and the extension of one existing site for capercaillie. On 7 March, I announced 11 proposed further additions to Scotland's network of special protection areas, including seven new sites, three boundary extensions and the addition of a qualifying species at an existing site. Further work is being done on possible new or extended sites for the golden eagle and certain species of seabird.

I am happy to confirm that the work that we do in providing protection for species and habitats has wider benefits for biodiversity in general, as well as for those specific species and habitats. I am happy also to confirm that we will continue to work with colleagues throughout the Executive in promoting the biodiversity benefits, the economic benefits and the tourist numbers that those species and habitats can attract.

We are continuing discussions on future arrangements for less favoured area support from 2007 with the stakeholder working group, which includes  representatives of crofters and farmers and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. Further work on mountainous area status and related issues will be taken forward following the latest meeting of the group earlier this week.

The views of bodies such as the Scottish Crofting Foundation on mountainous area status are known to us and have been fed into the discussions of the stakeholder working group. We are keen to identify the most effective way to ensure that LFA support under the new regime is developed in a way that delivers particular support to the most fragile areas. Mountainous area status is one option for doing that; there may be others that reflect, for example, the land capability classifications of agricultural land. We would not want to go for an option that excluded fragile areas that happen not to be mountainous, but we recognise that many of the most fragile areas are in upland parts of the country. We will continue to explore the issue. Following the recent meeting that I mentioned, we have undertaken to do further work on all those options, including mountainous area status.

The negotiations on the rural development regulation and the less favoured area scheme continue. In the first instance, agreement is required on the rural development regulation framework within which the LFA scheme will be developed. One of our priorities is to maintain LFA status for most of the Scottish land area that currently enjoys it. As soon as we can report to Parliament, we will do so.

Executive officials meet the Scottish Equestrian Association regularly and I am confident that those meetings will assist the SEA if it chooses to take the lead in developing a strategic approach.

I am not apprehensive about that. Our general view is that, because circumstances in Scotland are different from those in England and Wales, the equine sector's requirements to make progress are different. It is important for the equine sector to be able to access all the interested sections of the Executive, whether that means my department's animal welfare section, the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department or the sports division of the Education Department. The Executive covers several interests. Officials from all the relevant sections participate in the meetings that I described and ministers maintain a dialogue among themselves about the issues. I am not concerned that direction has been lost. However, if the Scottish Equestrian Association believed that it should do more, from within the sector, to develop a strategic approach, we would offer it our co-operation and advice.

I expect that if the equine sector felt that further action was needed on that issue, the matter would arise in the meetings that I  have described. Should it arise in that forum, we would respond to any request.

Local authority returns prepared by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency show a recycling and composting rate of 7.97 per cent in 2002-03, rising to 12.1 per cent in 2003-04 and to 16.6 per cent from April to December 2004.

We are keen to encourage swift progress around the country. We are conscious of the achievements of West Lothian and the positive projections to which Bristow Muldoon referred, which show West Lothian not only reaching but probably exceeding the targets that have been set for 2006. That is very welcome. We encourage all the authorities in Lothian and the Borders to work together to expedite the delivery of their plans as early as possible.

Under the provisions of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and other legislation, local authorities and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency have powers to tackle environmental problems resulting from demolition activity. The legislation is not currently under review.

As Fiona Hyslop says, the HSE, as well as local authorities and SEPA, has a role to play. We expect all the agencies with responsibilities not only to fulfil their remit but to ensure that the work that they do is joined up and that there is no gap in statutory provision. The case that the member highlights does not incline me towards a different view of the legislation, but I am happy to check the current state of play. I know that there have been discussions between SEPA and the local authority concerned and I am happy to ensure that those continue.

Where planning control or an environmental consent has been breached, planning authorities and regulatory bodies such as the Scottish Environment Protection Agency have the powers to deal with consequent environmental damage. Those powers are kept under review.

I have no doubt that the review of planning will consider issues of  enforcement, as well as many of the other issues that have been aired in the chamber in the recent past. The Environment and Rural Affairs Department is happy, as always, to engage in discussion with colleagues on those matters. Powers are available to local authorities to intervene when a developer has failed to maintain land properly in circumstances such as those that Cathie Craigie describes—in other words, when a developer has acquired a site but has not developed it. There is a requirement on the developer to maintain that land properly. If they fail to provide proper maintenance and the condition of the land adversely affects the amenity of the neighbourhood, the local authority has the power to serve a notice requiring the developer to take action. There is already provision for that, but the planning consultation process that is under way will yield other enforcement options.

Specific requirements govern the spreading of sewage sludge on land, to ensure that there is no adverse environmental impact. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has powers to act if it thinks that the spreading of sewage sludge is compromising good environmental conditions, and the agency recently used those powers. However, it is important to recognise that the spreading of sewage sludge on land, if it is done safely and properly, offers a far better means of disposal than does land filling and is therefore encouraged, as long as the necessary environmental conditions are met.

The Executive publishes an annual report on the administration of the common agricultural policy in Scotland, which includes statistics on payments of subsidy. Ross Finnie announced in January that we will publish details of recipients and subsidies under the new single farm payment scheme, which became operational on 1 January, and the new rural development regulation schemes, such  as the land management contract menu scheme, which came into operation this month.

We are certainly not operating a system that is inferior to the one in England. However, we are operating a system that is different from the one in England. The Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002 applies in Scotland as, of course, does Scots law. In the situation that the member identifies, as with every other case, we take legal advice on how the law applies. For example, the cases of individual farmers or crofters who are sole traders are subject to the provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998, which protects information that relates to individuals. The basis on which subsidies were provided in the past under the CAP included the protection afforded by confidentiality. However, our intention is that under the regime that replaces the CAP, individuals' names and subsidies will be made public.

The Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority is currently engaged in an extensive consultation on proposals for new byelaws for Loch Lomond. I expect the authority to submit draft byelaws to ministers in December. If the draft byelaws are approved, revised byelaws will be introduced early next year.

We have already made it clear to the park authority that we will assist it in bringing forward byelaws as rapidly as it can do  within the rules that govern the process. Clearly, a proper process of consultation must be followed, which is why the timetable that I described was set. However, as Jackie Baillie said, there is an issue to do with interim provision, in relation to which we have had fruitful discussions with the park authority. I expect those discussions to continue.

The measures that the park authority decides to take are a matter for the authority. We provided additional resources to allow the authority to increase ranger presence on the loch during the summer. That will allow the authority to enforce the existing byelaws, which limit speed and promote responsible behaviour on the loch. We will discuss with the park authority any other proposals that it brings forward in relation to how it is managing within the terms of existing byelaws. The priority is to bring forward the new byelaws as quickly as possible, which is why we have provided additional resources for that process.

We are continually looking at ways to improve flood prevention measures, and all planning guidelines are reviewed as required. We have no plans for an early review of Scottish planning policy 7, on planning and flooding, which was published last year following extensive stakeholder involvement and wider consultation.

Mark Ballard will be aware that a process must be followed in making and announcing decisions on specific projects. I was delighted earlier this year to open a new flood prevention scheme in Edinburgh. I look forward to seeing the full range of evidence to allow me to make a decision on the Water of Leith scheme, as it is one that has taken some time to get to its current stage. However, our overwhelming commitment in this process is to design flood prevention schemes that have the desired impact—namely, that they reduce the risk of flooding. A balance must be struck in all of that, but it is one that we will strike in the usual way, taking into account all relevant considerations.

I begin by disappointing Alex Fergusson: his plea for Galloway is not on my agenda this evening. I congratulate John Swinney on securing this debate on the Cairngorms national park. The boundaries of the park were approved by MSPs in December 2002 and the national park authority took on its full powers on 1 September 2003. Rightly, the Cairngorms National Park Authority has focused on getting established—from finding offices and recruiting staff to drafting its first corporate plan. It has developed an effective organisation and laid a sound foundation on which to build. It has progressed several excellent projects, one or two of which have been referred to in passing, in areas such as building partnerships with communities, sustainable tourism, biodiversity and economic development. That is what it exists to do. Our first priority should be to support the board of the new authority in turning into reality the aspirations and objectives that the Parliament set  out. That means supporting the four primary aims that are set out in the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000, which cover areas such as natural heritage, the sustainable use of resources, enjoyment by the public and social and economic development. It also means accepting the outcome of the debate on boundaries that we had two and a half years ago and letting the national park authority get on with its job. Highland and east Perthshire are beautiful parts of Scotland. I have not had the pleasure of climbing Beinn a' Ghlo or Carn Liath but I have been up Glas Tulaichean and had a good look from the top of that hill at part of the area to which members have referred. I understand entirely why residents might wish to have the importance of that area recognised by inclusion in the park, which is why it is important to remind members of the full process that Ross Finnie and Allan Wilson followed to ensure that ministers got the boundary right.

John Swinney invites me to put the cart before the horse. I would rather describe the process and then describe the conclusions that it reached. SNH produced a comprehensive report following consultation in 2001. A number of the respondents to the consultation felt that the nationally important features of the natural heritage were concentrated in the mountain core at the heart of the Cairngorms and that such a smaller and less diverse area would make for a more effective management unit. Therefore, ministers initially consulted on a park area based on the smallest of SNH's three identified options: the mountain core and the straths of central Strathspey and upper Deeside. That consultation attracted almost 500 written responses, and ministers accepted that there was a case for extending the park area to include significantly larger areas. Therefore, it was increased by more than 50 per cent to some 3,800km 2 , which made the park easily the largest national park in Britain. The final designation order was approved by the Parliament and included significant additions in Laggan, Dalwhinnie, Glenlivet, Strathdon and the heads of the Angus glens. I accept that parts of highland Perthshire were assessed as being of significant natural heritage  quality and that one or two of the areas that were included in the park were considered not to be of the same quality, but it is important to stress the point, which was made at the time, that ministers were looking for a coherent and workable boundary, and the boundary was defined on that basis. Ministers also took the view that to include a larger area than was included would have increased the number of interests and organisations with which the national park authority had to deal and would have increased the planning and administrative complexity of its task. Members have talked about the number of planning authorities and suggested that there is a political explanation for ministers' view that a large number of planning authorities would increase the level of complication. There is nothing party political about that; their view simply recognises the fact that the more authorities were included in the area, the more complex the national park authority's task of conducting its work would become. Although I hear the points that have been made, at this stage it would not be right to put at risk the progress that the authority has made. Clearly, the work that it has done on producing a national park plan over the past two years would have to be suspended, which would have an impact on the national park's credibility and raise doubts about its future direction. There would be disruption to the organisation due to a requirement to reorganise or reconstitute the board and to restructure committees and, therefore, considerable uncertainty among staff. However, the national park authority should not ignore the broader geographical context in which it operates and I expect it to be mindful of the interests of people in the surrounding area. I urge those in highland and east Perthshire who are enthusiastic about inclusion in the national park to put aside their concerns about boundaries for now and instead to channel their efforts into supporting the park's development and helping to make it a success.

Yes.

As I said, the number of local authorities that are included in the area is relevant not in a party-political sense but in relation to planning powers and the relationship between the planning processes that are carried out by local authorities—structure plans, local plans and so on—and those that are carried out by the national park authority, including the local plan for the national park area. Given that planning authorities remain development control authorities for the purposes of the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 in relation to the Cairngorms national park, the matter is relevant for the administrative boundaries. Given that the initial proposal was for a much tighter national park area centred around the massif, we are dealing with an extension beyond what was inherent in the Cairngorms design—namely the inclusion of the Angus glens—rather than the exclusion of an area that was initially intended to be included.

I acknowledge that point and I do not throw up my hands in horror any more than any of the board members do. It is not a case of saying that highland Perthshire does not in any way qualify. As I have said, highland Perthshire shares features with the areas included in the park—I have made that point and explained some of the reasons for the decisions that were made. It is important to acknowledge the critical significance for any new organisation of being able to establish itself, to settle in and to put in place structures that will last. There is no closure on the question of the boundaries. Neither I nor my predecessors have taken the view that there is a holy grail that defines what the national park should be and that there is no question of that ever changing. We have said that the quinquennial review, which applies to all public bodies and which will take place in 2008, may consider the park boundaries. Ministers would still have to form a view on whether a  change was justified at that time, but we are clear that then, with a stronger, well-established organisation, a national park plan in place and real improvements on the ground, the national park authority would be far better placed to accommodate any proposed extension of the boundaries. That would be better than stopping in its tracks the process of establishing the authority and asking it to start again. I come to the issue of world heritage status. Reference has been made to whether the current boundary will impact on the attainment of world heritage status for the Cairngorms. The Cairngorms are already on the United Kingdom list of potential world heritage sites, which was drawn up in 1999. The area that was nominated then centres on the Cairngorm massif—an area that is well within the current boundaries of the national park. It is certainly our view—and that of others—that the Cairngorms stand a far stronger chance of being designated a world heritage site by placing emphasis on the pre-glacial and post-glacial geological features of the massif, which are of recognised international importance. In any case, the first priority in making progress on such a designation is to get the national park established and to make it clear that there is a commitment to it. We believe that we should press on on that basis.  Until we reach the quinquennial review, I believe that we should all put argument and disagreement about the boundaries firmly behind us. Two years on, the priority must be to get the park firmly established in the interests of the areas within the park and the neighbouring areas. I urge all those who value the benefits that a national park can bring to get behind the Cairngorms National Park Authority in its efforts to secure sustainable development in the area and to make a real difference to both our national heritage and local communities.  Meeting closed at 17:45.

I, too, congratulate Phil Gallie on securing the debate and I acknowledge the representations that I have received on the issue from him, from Cathy Jamieson, who is the constituency member, and from other members who have contributed to the  debate. As has been said, I met a number of members about the matter a few months ago and I would be happy to do so again if requested. Indeed, both Ross Finnie, as the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, and Jim Wallace, as the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, have discussed the issues with Cathy Jamieson in the recent past. Let me assure members that the decision to withdraw funding from the Hannah Research Institute was not taken lightly or suddenly. It was taken after lengthy and careful consideration of the situation at the Hannah over a number of years. My department and colleagues elsewhere in the Executive have over the years tried to find ways in which to improve the prospects of the institute. Unfortunately, the most recent visiting group report in 2003 indicated that little progress had been made since the report of the previous visiting group in 1999. Clearly, that was deeply disappointing but, equally clearly, SEERAD had to make a decision on future funding in the light of the evidence of progress, or the lack of it.

No, the comments were wider than that. I will return to that matter in a moment. The starting point was the report of the 1999 visiting group, which was highly critical. It pointed out that the research focus was not consistent with the SEERAD research strategy that was published in 1999, which emphasised a need for increased relevance to end users. However, recognition at the Hannah that its traditional areas of strength were no longer required was slow in coming. The institute's response—I emphasise that it was the institute's response—was to seek to reorient towards biomedical work. My officials in SEERAD sought to help it do that, but always made it clear that relevance would remain of critical importance. The approach had to be firmly tied to the Hannah's status as a research institute, with a clear strategic focus on end users. That is of fundamental importance. That end-user focus is the difference between an institute of the type that SEERAD can support and a university department that is doing blue-skies research. The 2003 visiting group was again extremely critical. Its report showed that the concerns that the department had expressed four years previously had not been addressed. The Hannah fell short of the standard expected of a SEERAD-funded institute in five of the seven areas in which it was assessed. The report was the most critical  that SEERAD had ever received on the work of any of the research institutes that it funds.

The department encouraged connections not only with the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning and the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council, but with the Health Department, which has an interest in these matters. Unfortunately, the chief scientist at the Health Department, who has most interest in the kind of biomedical research that Alex Neil described, also seeks relevance to end users. He came to the conclusion that the type of basic science that was being undertaken at the Hannah across the board did not meet that requirement.

No one has said or is saying that the science that is being conducted at the Hannah Research Institute is of no value. The important point is whether it is being conducted in the right type of institution. I will come on to that point in a moment, because clearly the kind of work that can be done in a directly funded Government institute, such as those that SEERAD funds, is different from the research that will be done in universities and other institutions that are funded from elsewhere. In January, we revised our strategy to increase the emphasis on the need for end-user relevance. The fundamental problem that we face is that the divergence and discrepancy between the work that is generally being done at the Hannah Research Institute and what we require of SEERAD-funded institutes has grown, rather than diminished. Of course, that has implications not just for the Hannah Research Institute, but for all the other SEERAD-funded SABRIs. They all face the same challenge—to refocus and adapt their research efforts to meet the department's evolving requirements.

I cannot take an intervention, as I need to make some progress.  Regrettably, the Hannah Research Institute has not been successful to the same extent as other institutes have been in adapting, developing the content of its research programmes and positioning itself to respond to the changing research environment. As I said a few moments ago, it has also not positioned itself to meet the requirements of the Health Department's research profile. As has been said, the Hannah Research Institute's research is closer to the profile of university-type research. That is the basis on which the Environment and Rural Affairs Department has offered transitional funding for three years beyond the end of this financial year. Transitional funding will allow scientists from the Hannah to develop their research elsewhere and put them in a position to seek sustainable support from other, more appropriate funders. We have received a number of proposals, the majority of which are for work with the University of Glasgow. They will be submitted to peer review, in the manner practised by the research councils, on both quality of science and value for money. If the proposals are successful, the skills and knowledge of the scientists concerned will remain in the Scottish science base, which reflects our commitment to achieving that. However, the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council is not allowed to fund the institute on a free-standing basis, as SEERAD did in the past. The transitional funding is designed to give scientists an opportunity to transfer to more appropriate funding sources.

The transitional funding is intended to open doors to other sources of funding. Its purpose is to allow the scientists to attract funding from other sources. I agree that, as Irene Oldfather said, it is important to ensure that the best use is made of the transitional funding and I undertake to ensure that my officials continue to discuss how it can best be used to sustain science of merit where there is a basis for doing so. It is important that we have a joined-up approach and that we support scientific research in future, but that does not mean that all science must be funded whatever its value or that change in the science base or the way in which science is funded should never happen. The Scottish Science Advisory Committee has clearly advised  us that many areas of the science base in Scotland are fragmented and not achieving their potential because of a lack of critical mass. We certainly want to assist in achieving that critical mass and it is worth making the point that we will increase the SEERAD science and research budget for research, advisory and education activities by £7 million between 2006 and 2008. However, our first commitment on those funds is to distribute them on the basis of evidence on where they would achieve the best results. The point has been made that such changes have an impact on the local economy and I assure members that my colleagues who have responsibilities for enterprise and the enterprise network will continue to strengthen activity to grow the Ayrshire economy's knowledge and enterprise base. That is an important issue, but it is a different question from how the Environment and Rural Affairs Department commits and spends its available funds for end-user relevant research. It is a matter of regret when an institute that has done good work ceases to be in a position to attract such funding, but I hope that the transitional support that we have made available will allow the scientists who are conducting work at the Hannah Research Institute to find other sources of funding and to continue to work in the Scottish scientific community in future.  Meeting closed at 17:57.

SEPA has statutory powers to regulate water pollution under the Control of Pollution Act 1974, as amended. The entry or discharge of sewage effluent to controlled waters is illegal, unless it is authorised by a consent that is issued by SEPA. Consent standards are established from the requirements of a range of legislation. SEPA also has statutory powers to issue notices to prevent, minimise, remedy or mitigate the effects of polluting discharges on the environment, and powers to report offences under the Control of Pollution Act 1974 and other legislation to the procurator fiscal, with a recommendation for prosecution.

I do not agree with the fundamental proposition that SEPA lacks adequate powers. Rosemary Byrne will know that under the provisions of the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003, SEPA has an overview of the pollution of waters. That is clearly significant, as is the act to which I referred earlier. The water investment programme that we outlined in Parliament last month provides for significant investment in improving the standard of waters around Scotland's coastline and of its internal waters. The solution is to maintain activity in the way that SEPA has done. SEPA maintains a close watching brief and is effective in dealing with issues when they arise.

Adam Ingram should be aware that waste management licence exemptions are required for the kind of spreading that has been discussed. It is worth restating that when it comes to how we deal with sewage, recycling it and using it for constructive purposes, such as on land or for burning for energy, are far preferable options to landfill and other forms of disposal. Rather than seeking to inhibit the proper use of sewage sludge for recycling, we should seek to enable it to happen in a way that is controlled and monitored—as it is by SEPA—but which allows that waste to be disposed of in as environmentally beneficial a way as possible.

The simple answer is that we are not underfunding SEPA; we are making provision for SEPA to carry out its statutory duties, in relation to the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003 as well as its other statutory duties. As I said in my earlier answer, the  provision that we have indicated for Scottish Water over the coming investment programme period will allow the investment of significant sums to improve water quality in our rivers and around our coasts.

I am glad that Phil Gallie agrees that landfilling of sewage sludge is not a preferable option. That is why we support other forms of disposal, including its proper use on land and in burning for energy. The decision to which Phil Gallie referred has been made in court and it is not for me to comment on the merits of judicial decisions. However, that decision does not prevent Scottish Power from burning sewage sludge at Longannet. Although it puts new regulatory requirements on that process, it does not prevent disposal of sewage sludge by that method.

SNH made its proposal in January 2002. Ministers asked the organisation for more information in December 2002, which was provided in February 2005. We will reach a decision when we have had the opportunity fully to consider the facts of the case.

As I said, the original application was made by SNH some years ago, but the additional information for which SNH was asked in 2002 was provided only last month. I am sure that the member agrees that information that has taken such a long time to assemble clearly requires to be considered with care. The situation  with regard to the application is unusual, because SNH usually acts as our adviser on such applications, whereas in this case the organisation itself is the applicant—a situation which poses unusual questions. However, the main consideration from ministers' point of view is that we should explore all the potential impacts of such a development before we make a decision.

A group of stakeholders who have been examining access to freshwater fishing reported to a meeting of the freshwater fisheries forum in February. The options are being reviewed in the light of  comments that were received at the forum and feedback that was received from forum members.

Scottish Water's primary responsibility is for the supply of water and sewerage services—that is what the Scottish Executive expects it to do. In considering future arrangements for the waters to which Mr Canavan refers, Scottish Water has kept in close contact with local communities.

It is encouraging that members have acknowledged that there are limitations on what I can say in response to Bruce McFee's motion, largely because of the central place in that motion of reference to a funding application that has not yet been determined. Trish Godman is, of course, far better placed than I am to comment on what is an appropriate motion for a members' business debate. I note that members have indicated their support for Lapwing Lodge in the context of the Renfrew and Inverclyde scout association's application to the local capital grants scheme of the Scottish rural partnership fund. I have received and replied to letters that have been written in support of that application by members who have spoken in the debate and by my colleague Hugh Henry, so I am obviously aware that an application has been made. However, I should inform members that a total of 48 applications to the scheme from 22 council areas throughout Scotland have been received for the 2005-06 round. It is a requirement that all applications receive support from their local authority. In that context, it would be invidious of me to comment on the Lapwing Lodge application or on any other application for funding at this stage. An announcement on the outcome of the round will be made as soon as that can be done. I want to say something about the aims of the local capital grants scheme to which the motion refers. It is a competitive scheme that is aimed at funding projects where it is clear that communities  will derive benefits through providing or improving a facility that would otherwise not be available locally. Schemes must be accessible to all ages and interest groups in the community. Projects in rural and urban areas are eligible for funding. That said, because of the location of the scheme in the Scottish rural partnership fund, the presumption is in favour of rural projects. In all other respects, however, projects are assessed on a fair and equal basis. The local capital grants scheme is one element of our Scottish rural partnership fund, which is a fund that we put in place to support development of rural communities. A number of members asked questions about access to funding and the appropriateness of the mechanisms for obtaining access. The Executive carried out a consultation last year not just on the local capital grants scheme but on the whole Scottish rural partnership fund. The aim of the consultation was to identify whether the fund is delivering its objectives and whether it is doing so in a way that applicants can access. We acknowledge that there are areas in the fund as a whole that merit re-examination. We want to simplify its structure and provide better support to applicants. Ministers are collectively considering the results of the consultation and I expect to announce the results later this year. Of course, we recognise the important role of voluntary organisations in Scotland. As members have said, significant sums of money go to the voluntary sector from rural development funds and from other parts of the Scottish Executive. We recognise the particular role that the voluntary sector plays in supporting youth projects. The sector has an important part to play in encouraging more active involvement of young people in their communities. Groups such as the scouts and guides play a valuable role in helping young people to develop their personal and social potential through active citizenship and social engagement. That is why the Executive provides support, for example, to the Scout Association through support for its core costs in Scotland. Clearly that funding has benefits for all the association's activities across the board. In looking at the future of the Scottish rural partnership fund and how it should be reformed, the Executive wants to see whether we are doing what we ought to be doing in enabling communities to address their local needs. Our review has made it clear that community-led rural development is valuable, which is also the case in urban areas. We want to ensure that the benefits are built on and sustained through continued improvements to the fund. I hope that that work will help to address some of the wider funding issues that members have mentioned in the debate.  Meeting closed at 17:27.

We will publish a voluntary code of practice on odour control in April and we will consult on a statutory code in the autumn with the intention of bringing it into force in April 2006 in line with the provisions of the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill. As I said in my statement to Parliament on 9 February, I have set Scottish Water the objective of minimising odour nuisance at 35 waste water treatment works as part of the quality and standards III investment programme, pending the implementation of the statutory code.

I am pleased to hear that matters at Dalmuir have improved. The intention behind introducing the code is to tackle existing problems and to give developers guidance on the measures that they need to put in place when developing new plant. I am happy to assure Des McNulty that I expect the regulator, Scottish Water and its contractors to ensure that any new plant is constructed with that in mind and that necessary mitigating action is taken at existing plant.

If Mr McGrigor reflects on my initial answer, he will recognise that the introduction of a statutory code of practice and the instruction to Scottish Water to minimise odour nuisance at several existing plants are intended to tackle existing problems and to put in place guidance to prevent such problems from arising at new plant.

The Scottish Executive supports the introduction of the fisheries management plan for the border Esk that is proposed by the Environment Agency. The duty to introduce rod licences is imposed on the Environment Agency under the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Act 1975.

David Mundell should  understand that primary legislation is primary legislation and that the Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Act 1975 does not provide the Environment Agency with discretion over whether to introduce rod licensing for salmon and trout. The member should also understand that the Scotland Act 1998 did not transfer responsibility for the issuing of rod licences from ministers of the Crown to Scottish ministers because the issuing of such licences was never a ministerial function but one that was imposed on the Environment Agency under primary legislation. Therefore, transferring that role to Scottish ministers was simply not an option.

The Environment Agency's management of the River Esk in the Borders is no more an historical anomaly than the management under Scottish law of the River Tweed's last 10 miles, which are in English territory, or the management of the River Till, which is a tributary of the River Tweed that the Tweed acts placed under Scottish law even though the river is entirely within the county of Northumberland. Those are not historical anomalies but demonstrations of the fact that river catchment areas are managed as river catchment areas, not divided by administrative boundaries.

I agree with Elaine Murray's description of the legislative basis of the regulations. The Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Act 1975 requires the imposition of rod licensing, although the conservation, management and exploitation of fisheries are regulated under other legislation. Consequently, although it might be  possible to defer the management plan for the river—I see no particular advantage in doing so, but it would be possible—it would not be possible to defer the introduction of rod licences on the same basis because those are imposed under a different piece of legislation. In law, the Environment Agency is required to proceed with the introduction of rod licences.

As Jeremy Purvis will know given his origins on the north bank of the Tweed, on certain sections of the River Esk, the north bank is in Scottish territory and the south bank is in English territory. The idea that it would somehow make more sense to manage the two banks of the same river under entirely separate legislation does not seem very sensible to me.

I welcome this debate on an important issue. I was pleased to hear Nora Radcliffe say that responsible deer management should be planned and carried out collaboratively. I was also pleased to hear that view being echoed in a number of other speeches—it is certainly one that the Executive supports. We want effective local deer management throughout Scotland. That should be supported by best-practice guidance that safeguards essential animal health and welfare and public safety. Effective management is important; it produces benefits that are clear to see for landowners, land managers and local economies. Of course, if it is done properly, it also produces benefits for the ecology of areas. Deer management can be undertaken in a number of different ways, but it is important that in planning deer management, the approach that is taken is open and careful. Clearly, primary responsibility for good land management must rest with the owners and managers of the land. As members have said, deer are wild animals that roam widely over a range. If they are to be properly managed, it is essential that the work be done by neighbours who work together, openly and in collaboration, in order to achieve effective controls. I welcome and support the concept of deer management groups or similar arrangements that cover a particular range. A number of the existing deer management groups have demonstrated how effective their work can be. Clearly, Scottish Natural Heritage and the Forestry Commission Scotland—which are funding the preparation of deer management planning—play a role, as does the Deer Commission for Scotland, through the professional advice and support that it provides.  We welcome the examples of successful deer management groups and successful planning by them. Of course, deer management groups do not cover the whole of Scotland, sometimes for good reasons. In some areas, the problems that are caused by deer are less severe, so there is less need for such an approach. In addition, in some areas different collaborative mechanisms have been put in place, such as looser affiliations of owners, occupiers and other interests. Where they work, we support them. There are also statutory panels under the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996, which examine deer-related road accidents in Glencoe and Ullapool. Those arrangements are appropriate in those cases, and we welcome the involvement of a wide range of stakeholder bodies, but they have a specific and limited responsibility. What matters is not how many deer there are in Scotland—today's debate has illustrated the wide range of views on that—but the impact of deer on particular sites. The work that has been done by the Deer Commission for Scotland in partnership with us, the Forestry Commission and Scottish Natural Heritage has been helpful in identifying priority sites and developing management plans for them. In many cases, that has involved working directly with the affected estates.

That is a completely false characterisation of the policy and approach of the Forestry Commission. It has responsibility for management of the wider biodiversity of the habitats for which it is responsible, which it exercises well. It is disappointing that one or two members have sought to continue old arguments, rather than look to the future. I encourage all those who favour sporting and other uses of deer as a resource to concentrate on looking to the future and supporting the principle of effective deer management on a partnership basis—an approach that is supported by, for example, the Scottish Gamekeepers Association in its involvement in the steering group on best practice in deer management.

We want to encourage such practical propositions that will address the issues, such as that which Fergus Ewing mentioned. There has been a change in the approach to fencing, as was noted during the debate, which is right. The appropriateness of fencing should be addressed case by case and area by area. The key is in maintaining focus on the priority areas in which we should take action.

Deer cost us a significant sum through damage caused by accidents. The panels to which I referred that were set up under the Deer (Scotland) Act 1996 were established to address that problem in the areas where it is most significant. The actions in Glen Feshie—which Nora Radcliffe did not mention and which I do not welcome other members raising—have been fully examined in the past. There is a published report that made it clear that the actions were justified, that there were no serious failings in public safety, food safety or animal welfare, but that there were lessons to be learned. We expect the Deer Commission for Scotland to implement those lessons and carry the report's conclusions forward. We also recognise that many others who are involved in management of deer, including the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, have significant contributions to make to implementation. We encourage and support the SGA's continuing involvement in many of the steering groups that have been set up, such as the one on best practice. We also encourage continuing development of deer management groups, and we recognise that they can bring together, on a voluntary basis, all those who have stakes in the future management of deer. The Deer Commission for Scotland, under its new chair and new board, is already developing plans for investigating the wider impacts of deer outside designated sites. Through the Forestry Commission and SNH, we will continue to provide incentives for specific management operations in support of our wider policies and to protect designated sites. The Deer Commission will continue to monitor for serious degradation and damage. It, the Forestry Commission and SNH will not hesitate to use their combined regulatory powers to address damage where that is proved to be necessary, but the best way to avoid intervention is active and effective management of deer through positive collaboration between neighbours in the interests of the land and locality. We strongly encourage that approach.  Meeting closed at 17:51.

Earlier today—indeed, only some 45 minutes ago—the Parliament completed consideration of the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill. The bill gives clear powers to ministers to set Scottish Water's objectives and to determine the principles that are to be applied in setting charges. It also establishes a water industry commission with a new duty to set limits on water charges. Those limits must comply with the principles on charging that ministers set and provide Scottish Water with sufficient charge income to meet its objectives and to deliver its services at the lowest overall reasonable cost. Subject to the bill's enactment, the commission will be established later this year and will determine charge limits for the period 2006-10. Today, I am publishing our objectives for Scottish Water's investment programme for 2006-14 and the principles of charging that are to apply from 2006 to 2010. Those objectives and principles are the result of two years' work and respond to concerns about protecting water quality, dealing with sewage flooding and odour from treatment works, addressing constraints on new development and ensuring that charges are stable, fair and affordable. They also reflect the water industry commissioner's work to date on the strategic review of charges. The commissioner has stressed that customers should be asked to pay only for investment that can be delivered efficiently. He has advised that Scottish Water should be capable of delivering a programme as large as any that is delivered by any other water company in Britain without compromising efficiency and without average charges having to go up by more than the expected rate of inflation between 2006 and 2010. We have set objectives and principles of charging that take that advice into account, that address what we have learned about customer and stakeholder priorities and that apply the principles of sustainable development. In guiding Scottish Water's investment programme, we have set the following objectives: to achieve the maximum affordable improvements in public health and environmental protection standards; to support housing and economic  growth throughout Scotland through investment in new infrastructure capacity; and to ensure that charges are affordable, stable across the period and sustainable. To ensure that we get as much as possible by way of affordable improvements in public health and the environment, we will ask the water industry commission to identify, as part of the strategic review of charges, the largest capital programme for Scottish Water that would be consistent with efficient delivery and stable prices. We have split our investment objectives for 2006-14 into two categories. First, there are essential objectives, which Scottish Water must fulfil. They are: to improve the quality of 530km of rivers and coastal waters; to improve the quality of drinking water for 1.5 million people throughout Scotland; to tackle constraints on new development by allowing an estimated 120,000 new homes and more than 4,000 hectares of land for commercial development to be connected to the public networks; to take action on odour from 35 waste water treatment works with the aim that they will all conform to the statutory code of practice on sewerage nuisance that we intend to introduce under the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill; and to remove more than 1,100 homes from the risk of sewage flooding. Secondly, there are desirable objectives. We will ask the commission to determine how many of the desirable objectives can also be delivered without compromising our goals of efficiency and stable charges in accordance with the priorities that we have set. Those priorities are: improvements in the water quality of more of our rivers and coastal waters; further reductions in the risk associated with lead in drinking water; improvements in water pressure for almost 6,000 properties; and improved standards of service in areas of poorer asset performance. All the objectives that I have just mentioned are important, but I will say a little more about tackling development constraints. Our consultation proposed that, where new development requires additional local capacity, the cost of providing it should be met by the developer, and it should be for Scottish Water to remove constraints on development caused by a lack of capacity at a strategic level. That approach was widely supported and I confirm today that it will be applied from 2006, striking the right balance and ensuring that both the public purse and the private developer pay their proper share to enable new development to happen. Having set out our investment objectives, I want to set out how the costs of meeting them will be shared among Scottish Water's customers. I confirm the principle of harmonised charges. Customers in any given group will continue to pay  the same rate for the same service, wherever they are in the country. That goes a long way towards making charges affordable for households and businesses in more remote and inaccessible areas. We have paid careful attention to concerns about the affordability of water charges for people on low incomes. We will maintain the 25 per cent discount on charges that single adult households currently receive, and we will help low-income families by introducing a new 25 per cent discount on charges for households with two or more adults that receive council tax benefit. The new discount will be introduced on 1 April next year, and its cost will be met by the abolition of the discount on water charges that is currently available to the owners of second homes. We will make changes to how businesses pay for their water and sewerage services. We commissioned independent research into claims that non-domestic customers are paying more than their fair share of Scottish Water's costs. That research has found that there is an imbalance of around £44 million a year. It would not be in the interests of Scotland's long-term economic growth and prosperity for that imbalance to continue. Therefore, we will require the water industry commission to set charges for 2006-10 in such a way as to reduce that imbalance in the manner that is calculated best to minimise the impact on household charges. The water industry commissioner has estimated that that can be done in such as way as to keep average household charges pegged to inflation, while average business charges will rise at a rate below the rate of inflation over a four-year period. That rebalancing exercise will bring the £44 million of excess charges on business to an end, without unreasonably penalising anyone else. Over and above those changes, we intend to consult business on the introduction of more widespread metering and a more equitable approach to surface water drainage. Our aim is to introduce a fairer approach in those areas from 2010. So far, I have concentrated on how the customer will contribute to the cost of water services. The taxpayer will also make a contribution by providing public funds for investment up to a total of £200 million a year in each of the years from 2006 to 2010. Up to £182 million of that annual funding will be available to Scottish Water in the form of lending by the Scottish Executive. The level of that lending will be subject to the water industry commission's assessment of how much is required to fund Scottish Water's capital programme in a sustainable manner. It is important that bills for today's customers are not kept artificially low by bequeathing an  unreasonable burden of debt and servicing costs to future generations. In addition to that lending, we will make available a total of £14 million per year for housing, the details of which will be announced in due course by the Minister for Communities. The investment objectives published today are challenging, but they are achievable. The programme of investment that I have outlined today bears comparison with the most ambitious programmes yet undertaken south of the border. While average charges in England and Wales will rise by more than 20 per cent in real terms between now and 2010, average charges in Scotland will not rise in real terms at all. The Scottish ministers proposed—and the Scottish Parliament agreed to—the creation of Scottish Water three years ago. Today's announcements and the plans that we have presented show that that was the right decision. Those who work for and who regulate our publicly owned water business here in Scotland have achieved a great deal in the past three years. By delivering the objectives that I have outlined today, they will achieve a great deal more in the future.

I assure John Swinney that the figures that I have published today are based on our best estimates in conjunction with the work over the past two years of our partners, the quality and standards III board, which considered that question among others. With reference to the national planning framework and other documents, we believe that our figures show the kind of quantum that we need to address. However, the principle is more important than the estimate. The principle that we are establishing today is that Scottish Water will meet the development requirements at a strategic level over the period. We estimate that 120,000 homes and 4,000 hectares of commercial and industrial land will be needed. If Scotland's population increases by more that we expect it to and if Scotland's economy grows even faster than we expect it to, we will revise our estimates.

Those are important points and I will address the last one first. The answer to the question of which elements of infrastructure development will be met by developers and which by Scottish Water is in part technical and relates to the distinction between part 3 costs, which will be met by the developer, and part 4 costs, which will be met by Scottish Water. In essence, part 4 costs are for strategic provisions, such as new water treatment works and waste water treatment works. Part 3 costs can include the cost of sewer mains to connect a new development to the water and waste water treatment works. The principle that I have established is that the developer will pay part 3 costs, but Scottish Water will calculate the income that it expects to receive over the first 12 years of the new development and will subtract that from the cost that it expects the developer to pay. Therefore, there will be a Scottish Water contribution to the part 3 costs, but it will relate to the income that Scottish Water expects to receive as a result of the new development being put in place. On engagement with the land-use planning system, which is what Sarah Boyack's other question was about, we are encouraging Scottish Water to engage more proactively in the planning process. Part of the detailed background to today's announcement is a requirement for Scottish Water to produce an annual strategic network capacity and development plan, which will allow both local authorities and other stakeholders to see where the strategic network and capacity are being taken forward. That will be a transparent process that will allow all concerned to address those issues better in the planning system.

The body responsible for ensuring that Scottish Water—and everyone else—meets its obligations under the act is of course the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. That is as it should be. We will require the water industry commission to indicate to us the level of charges that will pay for the investment that is required for Scotland to meet its obligations under the act and the water framework directive, which inspires and forms the basis of the act.

I look forward to seeing Conservative candidates go up and down the country, telling voters that the Conservative party in the Scottish Parliament believes that they should pay money to business in lieu of past charges on business. That is not at all our intention. Our intention is to ensure that domestic and non-domestic customers pay their appropriate share of the cost of water provision. I think that business will welcome today's announcement that we want to move in that direction, but we want to move in that direction in a way that is sustainable for all concerned. The objective that we have set, and that I will seek to ensure that the water industry commission sets, is to have corrected the tariff imbalance by 2010 and to have a balanced approach to charging and investing in services.

It is disappointing that, on the afternoon on which the Parliament has passed—I am sorry, I should not presume. It is disappointing that, on the afternoon on which Parliament has considered the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill and expressed broad support for its principles, including the principle of having a publicly owned water company, in the form in which Scottish Water exists, with the amendment  relating to retail to business, the Scottish National Party wishes to use a guerrilla tactic to promote other forms of ownership. Public ownership of the water industry works. That is why we will continue to ensure that Scottish Water delivers in the way in which it has done. It has shown clearly that, as the WIC has advised us, it is as capable of delivering a capital programme as the private sector companies in England and Wales are. Scotland should be proud of that, as should Scottish Water's staff and management. With proper regulation to ensure that the customers' interests come first, I believe that we will continue to achieve the objectives that are set out in today's statement.

I am, but it is, of course, essential that we continue to apply regulatory pressure on Scottish Water to encourage it to continue to do that. In recent months, Scottish Water has been investing more than £1 million a day, and it will invest something in the order of £500 million in the current year. We believe that that is a significant achievement. On the basis of that achievement, we have made the assessment that it can continue to deliver that level of investment without impacting on charges in real terms. That is why we have made the announcement that we have made today. Of course, within the framework that the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill will set, we will continue to maintain the pressure to increase efficiencies to ensure that all of our objectives can be delivered at the lowest reasonable cost to all concerned.

We have learned from the Q and S II process, but I do not think that the balance of the different forms of investment was wrong in Q and S II. The fundamental point is that we simply did not recognise at the time, as we do  now, the level of infrastructure capital investment that was required. In the objectives, we have set capital investment targets—including targets for dealing with development constraints and the need for new infrastructure—and we have built into the process a degree of flexibility, as I said in answer to a previous question. We are establishing the principle that we will meet development needs and we have estimated what that means for the number of properties and so on. The water industry commission will give us an indication of the charging that that represents, but we are clear that we will have a continuing ability to respond to changes in development pressures over the eight-year period. That is built into the process and provides the flexibility that Maureen Macmillan seeks.

The final point is interesting, but it is essentially for planning authorities and local authorities to consider. In response to Sarah Boyack, I mentioned that we expect Scottish Water, in producing its annual report, to engage with local authorities in the land-use planning process. We also expect it to engage in the community planning process, which is clearly a forum in which a number of issues to do with appropriate development and appropriate sites will be addressed. On affordable housing, I simply encourage Ms Fabiani to wait for Malcolm Chisholm's announcement, which will be made shortly.

It would be interesting if we put to the business community the proposition that there should be an overnight change from the current system of billing for water for non-domestic premises to a new system. It is clear that a number of businesses feel hard done by, because they consider themselves to be low users of water  and that they pay a higher charge. If that is the case, it probably follows that a comparable number of businesses that are high users of water are paying less than they will under a metering system, simply because both types of business are paying a standard charge. We are giving business notice that we intend, in four years' time, to have moved to a position in which we can introduce metering for non-domestic customers and surface drainage charges that relate to the area of the surface being drained. We do not propose to do that overnight, and I do not think that business as a whole would welcome our doing so. We are saying that we have listened to concerns that business has raised, that we are addressing issues to do with tariff imbalance and that we are giving notice of how we intend to deal with other issues.

It is worth bearing in mind the fact that, for all businesses, there are significant fixed costs for the supply of water and the removal of sewage. Those costs will be sustained in any case. As I said in answer to the previous question, we are likely to come to the strategic review of charges for the next charging period—which is 2010-14—in 2009 or so. At that point, we will consider how we can put in place a different basis for charging. For now, the basis for charging will remain the same and we will address the tariff imbalances between the domestic and non-domestic sectors. However, the water industry commissioner has been asked to begin work now on how we will introduce a system of charging for the future.

The minority report to which Jim Mather refers was disagreed with at the time. In the context of this afternoon's statement, that is all that needs to be said.

Yes. The annual report on the network capacity that we will ask Scottish Water, in its strategic capacity, to publish will form the basis for Scottish Water's work with local authorities, other stakeholders and its regulators, including SEPA, to address the issues that Des McNulty raises. I am encouraging Scottish Water and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to address some of those issues in a memorandum of understanding, to allow, where possible, an early start to be made on tackling those issues.

If Frances Curran had noted the lending figures that I mentioned, she would have observed that the level of Scottish Executive lending to Scottish Water will rise by something in the order of £30 million a year over each of the four years. That is part of the answer to her question. We commissioned Stone & Webster economic consultants to consider the costs of supplying water and sewerage services and how the requirement to meet those is reflected in charges. The consultants reached that figure after considerable investigation. Their report will be published, and I invite Frances Curran to read it.

It is very kind of colleagues on the front benches of other parties to give me the opportunity to speak even sooner than I had anticipated. It has been a good debate—short and to the point—and I thank members sincerely for the contributions that they have made today and during earlier stages. With my colleagues, I am especially grateful to the members of the Environment and Rural Development Committee for their thorough and helpful consideration of the bill at stage 1 and for their support for the amendments that we lodged at stage 2 in response to their stage 1 report. As we have heard, those amendments have produced benefits both in boosting the powers of waterwatch Scotland and in providing a statutory basis for action to deal with odour and other sewerage nuisance. I also thank the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, which carefully and constructively considered the bill. The role of the Public Petitions Committee has already been mentioned. The process was also strengthened by all those who took part in the consultations on the bill and who submitted evidence to the committees. Whether they represented consumer groups or businesses, local authorities or regulatory experts, they all contributed to the bill. Some of that input came from those who run our water industry day in, day out. Those include Scottish Water, the water industry commissioner for Scotland and other regulators, and the convener and members of the water customer consultation panels, which are soon—happily, as we have heard—to be known as waterwatch Scotland. I thank all those who have been involved behind the scenes in drafting the bill and in supporting the parliamentary process, and I thank the Presiding Officer for accepting manuscript amendments late in the day. As has been said, the bill's passage through Parliament has been remarkably smooth. That may have surprised some commentators, but it  reflects the broad consensus that exists—in spite of the dissent at the ideological margins—around our policy in support of the water industry. It is important to remember what we are seeking to do. The bill protects Scottish Water and public sector delivery of water and sewerage services and provides a measured response to the Competition Act 1998. It sets out clearly that the carriage and delivery of water and sewerage services will continue to be the responsibility of Scottish Water. That protects public health not because, as Alex Johnstone suggested, we think that the private sector is reckless in such matters, but because there is a self-evident and defensible case for saying that water and sewerage services are most safely and surely delivered by a single public sector provider. The bill sets out just as clearly that household customers will continue to buy their water only from Scottish Water. It provides a licensed, orderly and managed way to introduce competition for retail sale of water to businesses, but it also provides the stability and certainty that Scottish Water needs to continue to deliver its vital services in the years ahead. The SSP talked about multinational water industry sharks "nibbling away", and about European Union pressure to privatise Scotland's water. Frances Curran wants Scottish ministers to resist that pressure to privatise. I assure Parliament that, if we ever get pressure to privatise from that direction, we will resist it; however, no such pressure exists. In the meantime, the SSP will have to go fishing for sharks somewhere else. We have a broad consensus around the proposal for Scottish Water to continue as a public sector water and sewerage services deliverer. The changes that the bill makes to strengthen the regulatory framework and to set a transparent and accountable system for determining Scottish Water's objectives and charges have been welcomed. As Sarah Boyack said, the bill sets the scene for the statement that I will make later this afternoon on Scottish Water's investments and the principles of charging. Those objectives will determine what Scottish Water delivers; it is important that that delivery is affordable to customers.

Although the bill sets the context for the statement that I will make later this afternoon, I know that members will not expect me to anticipate that statement. I am sure that John  Swinburne will make a point of being here to listen to what I have to say on those matters at that time. Scottish Water was created three years ago in response to the need to bring greater economic efficiencies to bear on our water industry. Since it was established, it has reduced its operating costs by more than £1 million for every week that it has been in existence. That is clear evidence of the capacity of the public sector to deliver efficiency. The framework that is provided in the bill will continue to provide the economic rigour that will ensure that Scottish Water continues to deliver the efficiency its customers deserve. I commend that framework and urge members to support the motion.

The amendments in this group make minor changes to section 18 of the bill, which amends the Water Industry (Scotland) Act 2002, on Scottish Water's charges. Amendment 9 requires ministers to send to the office of the water industry commission for Scotland a copy of any guidance or directions issued or given to Scottish Water. That ensures that the commission is aware of all ministerial requirements on Scottish Water, which it is required to take into account in exercising its various functions in relation to Scottish Water's charges.  Amendment 10 amends new section 29E of the 2002 act to clarify that the commission can consent to a departure from a charges scheme where a customer has done, or has agreed to, something that reduces or increases the cost of providing services. For example, a customer who takes untreated raw water from Scottish Water may continue to be eligible for a reduced charge under the departure provisions of the bill, although, strictly speaking, they have not taken an action to reduce the charge of serving them. As with all departures, the commission would have to be satisfied that the departure was justified in the circumstances of the case. Amendment 8 is a minor drafting refinement. Amendments 22 and 23 are also relatively minor and consequential, but they were lodged late due to an oversight. I am grateful to the Presiding Officer for allowing them to be lodged as manuscript amendments. They are required in the light of amendments made at stage 2, which inserted new section 17A relating to Scottish Water's duty as a supplier of last resort to continue providing sewerage services directly to customers where arrangements between a licensed provider and a customer have come to an end. The amendments ensure that, where the continuity-of-supply arrangements operate, the occupier of the premises will be liable directly to Scottish Water for any charges made for the provision of those services. I move amendment 8.  Amendment 8 agreed to.  Amendments 9, 10, 22 and 23 moved—[Lewis Macdonald]—and agreed to.

Far be it from me to wind up Alex Johnstone, but he will not be surprised to hear that I propose that we should reject his amendments. As he has said, amendments 19 and 20 go to the heart of the bill. They are designed to unpick the vital protection that it offers to Scottish Water's domestic customers. We believe that that protection is essential if we are to deliver social inclusion. It is inevitable that retail competition for domestic customers would undermine the link between what customers pay for water and sewerage services and the value of the property in which they live. It would threaten the principle that people who live in properties in the same council tax band are liable for the same water and sewerage charges, wherever in Scotland they live and whatever their needs as consumers. It would also threaten the role of local authorities in billing domestic customers and, in doing so, would undermine ministers' ability to set discounts from charges for certain classes of customer. At present, we set such discounts for single adult households. Councils collect water and sewerage charges on the basis of information that they already hold. That information allows them to deliver discounts; only councils can administer those discounts directly. To protect that ability to provide discounts, we have specifically designed the bill to exclude competition for domestic households. Of course the benefits of discounts and of property-related charges are not felt equally by every customer, but without the participation of all customers, competitor companies could cherry pick those customers who were not receiving a discount and those who were in higher tax bands, thus leaving everyone else to pay more. That is directly contrary to the bill's purpose. We believe that water and sewerage services are essential to the health of every person in Scotland. A key purpose of the bill as endorsed by the Parliament at stage 1 is to ensure that those services should remain as affordable as possible for all customers. Amendments 19 and 20 are directly contrary to that aim and I urge members to reject them.

A key aim of the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill is to establish a licensing regime to regulate retail competition for business customers that will be managed by the water industry commission. Our policy is that the costs to the commission of administering the licensing regime should be recovered from licence holders. That will be achieved by, for example, charging application fees to cover the work of assessing licence applications. Section 9(5) provides that ministers will specify such fees in an order. Amendments 2 and 21 seek to remove the provision and a reference to it in section 27 and instead, through amendment 1, we seek to provide that the commission should produce the fees scheme to be approved by ministers. That will mean greater flexibility to ensure that a greater range of different fees can be levied; to allow for variable fees where appropriate; and, subject to consultation and ministerial approval, to ensure that fees can be tailored to meet the costs of the commission's licensing function and do not fall on all water and sewerage customers or the taxpayer. Section 10 requires the commission to secure the participation of water and sewerage providers in licensing in an orderly manner and in a way that  is not detrimental to the exercise of Scottish Water's core functions. Amendment 3 seeks to add to the direction-making powers in that regard to put beyond doubt that the commission may use its powers to require licensed providers to meet the costs of developing a mechanism or switch engine for handling customer information between licensed providers. I move amendment 1.  Amendment 1 agreed to.

Very substantial resources are in place. Last year's spending review increased the grant that is available for flood prevention and coast protection schemes to £89 million over the period 2005-08. Local councils can apply to that fund to meet 80 per cent of the eligible costs of approved schemes.

I am aware of the flooding incidents in the Borders and elsewhere in Scotland in recent weeks. Because of that flooding, the funding that is available to local authorities is particularly welcome in the Borders and other areas. The message that I hope local authorities will receive in respect of the increased funds and the increased rate of payment is that we very much want to encourage all councils to address the areas that have flooding risk and to bring forward schemes. Such schemes must go through the statutory process to be approved for technical  competence, but if the criteria are met, schemes will be supported by the Executive.

In the current investment period, some £200 million will secure positive benefits in addressing current constraints and an additional £41 million will address development constraints and first-time connections in rural areas. We consulted recently on what Scottish Water's future investment priorities should be and we will announce next week the objectives that we wish Scottish Water to address in the next regulatory period.

I am aware of the issues that Paul Martin raises, although they are not confined to the areas that he mentioned—similar issues have arisen elsewhere. It is worth saying that at the outset of the current investment programme, none of the parties in the discussions highlighted the issue of development constraints. One consequence of that is that, in preparing the directions that we will issue for the next investment period, we ensured that business, housing developers and local government were fully involved in the discussions to help us identify the priorities that need to be applied if we are to ensure that similar constraints do not arise in the future.

Local authorities have a duty under the Environment Act 1995 regularly to review and assess air quality in their areas against the objectives that are contained in the air quality strategy. When an objective is unlikely to be met by the required date, the authority concerned must declare an air quality management area and draw up an action plan outlining how it intends to work towards achieving that objective.

Glasgow City Council has prepared an air quality management area for part of the city centre. The Scottish Executive and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency have engaged closely with the council on that plan and we are confident that what the council proposes will allow it to take action and make progress towards reducing nitrogen dioxide and other pollutants during the next few years.

As Robert Brown said, I have enjoyed what has been a good quality debate. Ross Finnie opened by referring to climate change as one of the most serious threats facing our planet. It has been encouraging that, although one or two contributions wandered from the central theme, not a single one has taken issue with that point of view. There are issues to discuss and it is right that they should be the subject of vigorous debate. Rob Gibson's speech reflected the views that were expressed by his party during the debate. The powers of the Parliament are not central to what we are discussing, which is what we need to do to tackle harmful emissions.

If there is a consensus in this chamber it is that what matters is that emissions from Scotland are cut. It matters much less which Government is responsible for cutting them. As members of different parties have acknowledged, Britain is leading the way in global efforts to tackle climate change and show what action can be taken. Scotland is playing its part within that wider context. This will be an important year for tackling climate change in Scotland, as well as across the UK and beyond. The Parliament is debating the subject and the Environment and Rural Development Committee is conducting an inquiry. Following our current consultation, the Scottish Executive and the UK Government will publish revised climate change programmes later this year. In the summer, as Mark Ruskell said, the G8 summit will come to Scotland and we are working hard with our partners on a programme of events to show why the decision to come here was a good one, and why it is an opportunity that Scotland should not miss to influence policy positively in the world community.

I certainly do have something to say about that and I will come to it in a few moments. To look at the wider picture, we recognise the importance of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and of monitoring how that is done, and we acknowledge our responsibility to ensure that those commitments are fulfilled. That is why we have issued our consultation and are seeking views from all parties as to how those targets will best be met. The subject of powers was raised in the debate and it is important to say that in the context of working with the UK Government and the EU, we already have more ambitious targets and are leading the way in some of the initiatives to promote action on climate change. One of those  initiatives is renewables. We have a more ambitious renewables target thanks to our existing platform of hydroelectricity and superb natural resources. We also have better standards in building regulation. The thermal insulation standards put in place since devolution have put us among the leaders in Europe. I welcome the clear and unambiguous support that we have heard from many in the chamber, including John Home Robertson and Alasdair Morgan, for progressing with wind as a key part of our renewable energy future, and for diversifying the renewable energy that is offered. Of course, we considered very carefully the views of the Enterprise and Culture Committee. We have a strategy for promoting renewable energy. It is set out very clearly in planning policy and guidelines. Whether they relate to wind or hydro or anything else, it is clear that renewable energy developments should be accommodated where the technology can operate efficiently and the impacts can be properly addressed.

No. Decisions about the location of wind farms, and any other type of renewable development, are best taken at a local level, if possible, because local authorities and local communities are impacted on most and understand their areas best. Certainly, the last thing that we want to do, which would be incompatible with what we actually do, is to close down whole areas of the country to particular types of renewable development, while saying that we recognise that we need to expand the sector—as we clearly do. There are other important points to be made when it comes to the question whether Scottish targets should simply reflect those set for the UK as a whole. It is important to recognise the differences between the emissions patterns in Scotland and those elsewhere. For example, the figures that were produced, I understand, by the Scottish Parliament Information Centre for Richard Lochhead are very different from those published by the European Environment Agency, which compare levels of carbon emissions per person across the European Union. Such differences in the figures highlight the difficulty of trying to compare like with like.

No, I do not accept that. It is completely wrong to try to extrapolate levels of  saving that have been achieved over the past 12 years to the coming 46 years. The point is that we and the UK Government are consulting in order to identify what needs to be done to increase the effectiveness of the measures to tackle emissions. When we do that, we will see that the targets are achievable, that we must commit to them and find the best way to carry them forward. A number of other issues were raised during the debate that challenged particular aspects of policy and asked how they related to the wider picture. Richard Lochhead questioned emissions from electricity generation. It is true that they are up by 10 per cent, but it is also true—and relevant—that something of the order of 17 per cent of Scotland's electricity generation is exported furth of Scotland. Because it is generated here it counts against our emissions targets. It is important, in comparing the figures and in deciding what targets we should set, to recognise such features and differences. We are also promoting a range of renewable sources besides wind and hydro, which are the two current and significant contributing renewable resources. It is worth reminding members of the work that is being done by the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland and of the investments that are being made by the DTI, as well as by us, in order to support the development of, for example, marine energy and biomass. On the suggestions that seeking 40 per cent of our energy supply from renewable sources is either too modest or unrealistic, I draw it to the attention of the parties who made those suggestions that the 40 per cent figure was reached on the basis of a wide-ranging consultation. The industry, and others who understand the opportunities and the limits, were very clear that although 40 per cent was ambitious, it was within the range of what could be achieved. It is on that basis that we have taken that figure forward. It is also important to distinguish between motor vehicles and the roads on which they travel. I do not accept the view that because motor vehicles are an important contributor to carbon emissions we should simply freeze the road network and the transport infrastructure that we have today and that that would answer the problems. In fact, more efficient use of our roads, as well as of our other transport systems, is a critical part of tackling climate change. As for aviation, its impact on the environment cannot be dealt with by Scotland alone, but only on an international basis. We therefore support the UK Government's efforts to carry forward that issue during its presidency of the EU. We think that that is the right way to go. Like Sarah Boyack, we believe that energy efficiency is also critical to the efforts that we shall make.  I am grateful to members for the views that we have heard. I believe that they will contribute to the debate, and they will certainly be noted in our consultation.

Does Mr Scott accept that it is for the industry to develop such proposals and that a number of hydro-power proposals are being prepared?

I was intrigued when I saw Richard Lochhead's amendment to the motion. I wondered on what basis he had drawn that conclusion because, when I checked the latest figures from the  European Environment Agency, I established that the number of tonnes of carbon dioxide emitted in Scotland per person was round about the European average. The figure was on the same level as that for Germany and was better than that for many countries, including Denmark, the Netherlands, Finland and Ireland.

I thank Jamie Stone for the opportunity to have a wide-ranging debate. If we wanted an example of diversity in relation to agriculture, this evening's debate has probably provided it. The Executive recognises that agriculture remains central to the prosperity of rural areas. As "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture" makes clear, we want prosperous and sustainable agriculture that produces good food for the consumer and which meets high standards of environmental stewardship. The key challenge is to establish conditions that allow farmers and crofters as business people to take decisions that achieve those objectives. Agricultural production needs to be smart about the marketplace and it needs to be sustainable. That approach must guide decisions as we move forward under the new common agricultural policy reform scheme and it must drive our objectives for land management contracts. A major component of those will be to provide incentives to allow producers to respond and to develop their businesses in ways that deliver public policy objectives and meet their own economic interests.  Several speakers pertinently mentioned CAP reform, which provides an excellent opportunity to advance our strategic objectives and gives us in Scotland more opportunities to make decisions than we have had for a generation. We have decided fully to decouple subsidy from production at the earliest possible date. We have also based future payments on a straightforward historical reference period. Those decisions were taken after extensive consultation and have been widely welcomed. They provide some certainty for farmers and crofters and give them the opportunity to improve market returns by producing food that meets market requirements. Several members highlighted the relevance of food production in Scotland to improving diet, which is a key aspect of health improvement policy. As Stewart Stevenson said, that relates to cancer as well as to some of the more obvious obesity-related ailments that arise from bad diet. We recognise the enormous potential for local food producers to ensure food access and to overcome health inequalities, which is why local nutrition plans form part of joint local authority and national health service health improvements plans. Increasingly, community planning for health improvement is building in sustainable access to fresh food. Several members referred to local initiatives: local community food initiatives are adopting a range of innovative approaches, which include community-assisted agriculture that involves local growing projects, such as the type on which Jamie Stone is keen. Scotland has about 500 community food initiatives, many of which have support from local authorities, local NHS services or both. We recognise that the Government has a direct role in such matters, especially in relation to procurement. School meals have been mentioned. Several councils—including Aberdeenshire Council, which Nora Radcliffe mentioned, Highland Council and East Ayrshire Council—are engaging effectively with their local food producers to supply that important market. The question of uptake of school dinners has puzzled those who are responsible for young people's nutrition for a long time. Jamie Stone was right to highlight that issue, which is not new. I agree with him that making school dinners cool is likely to be much more effective than making them compulsory. I also agree with him that celebrity chefs have a role to play. In fact, celebrity chefs regularly appear at the Royal Highland Show, which is Scottish agriculture's foremost flagship event each year. Ross Finnie has occasionally been happy to help with demonstrating good preparation and consumption of food. I am sure that Jamie Stone will be pleased to hear that colleagues are taking  such matters seriously and that they support the kind of initiative he outlined. We want to encourage local food producers to bid for more of the public sector contracts to which members have referred, and we have published new guidance on public sector procurement as part of our sustainable development agenda. If the motion is about any one thing, it is about sustainable development and how we relate production to consumption, sustainability and the best interests of individual citizens. In that public sector procurement agenda, we must of course acknowledge legislation that is designed to ensure fair competition, but we have also made it clear that it is possible to set procurement criteria that can help local businesses to compete in delivery frequency, freshness, seasonal availability, organic production—which has been mentioned—or simply in considerations of taste. There are a number of ways in which that matter can be taken forward. As John Scott said, farmers markets are an increasingly important outlet for local produce. He said that we have supported that development through the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society, of which he is a leading member. I am delighted to say that the policy has broad support that will continue, because we recognise the important contribution that such markets can make to increasing access for consumers to local produce and in increasing opportunities for local producers to understand what the market requires.

Good work is being done to educate children about the food that they eat, which is a key aspect of our health improvement project. The work that is being done by us and the Royal Highland Education Trust, for example, to train farmers and give access to children to such information is valuable. In closing, I want briefly to mention two other matters. Allotments have been mentioned; I am happy to say that the power already exists under the Land Settlement (Scotland) Act 1919 for local authorities to acquire land for creation of  allotments. Members might want to take that into account. I should also mention that many initiatives that we are progressing to bring benefits to farmers and crofters and in healthy eating depend on the quality of scientific research. I am therefore pleased to mention that my department will publish a new research strategy tomorrow for the environment, biology and agriculture, which will cover the next five years. That research will underpin much that will be done in the areas that we have discussed.  We are committed to working with the industry to create economically viable and environmentally sustainable businesses, and we will continue our work to improve the nation's diet and health. We will continue to work towards a more sustainable and healthier Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

Part 2 of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, which came into force on 29 November 2004, provides stronger protection for wildlife habitats. It is now a criminal offence for any person to damage a site of special scientific interest. The act places public bodies and regulators for the first time under a formal duty to further the conservation and enhancement of protected areas.

We are aware of the importance of red squirrels in the south-west of Scotland. Of course, they are offered protection under the terms of the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004, to which I referred. Scottish Natural Heritage and the Forestry Commission Scotland have been talking to the red squirrels in south of Scotland project about future funding. I encourage the group to discuss further the potential for future funding with SNH and the Forestry Commission, which will provide further assistance on the matter.

I do not want public bodies to breach the law and I am concerned about the matter that Mr Maxwell raises. However, the purpose of giving SSSIs legal protection was to allow prosecution to be carried out as it is under the law in general. Therefore, the matter is firstly the responsibility of the police; it is then for the procurator fiscal to decide on prosecution.

There are no current plans for any such review.

I do not accept that the wrong decision was taken, but I accept that there are always strong local views on such matters. As the First Minister has said, in the course of the life of any public body, there are quinquennial reviews that examine issues that arise. However, I do not want to encourage Murdo Fraser to spend the next three and a half years lobbying on that matter for the good reason that the Cairngorms national park, as it currently stands, has a job to do in the area that it covers. It is important that the national park authority is able to get on with that job and to proceed with the plans that it has for the national park.

Wherever there are infrastructure constraints, we expect Scottish Water to work with local councils and other agencies to identify practical solutions in order to allow development to proceed wherever possible. We consulted recently on what Scottish Water's future investment priorities should be, and we will announce soon the objectives that we wish Scottish Water to address in the next regulatory period.

I would certainly not want to give Mr Ewing the impression that I wanted in any way to avoid the questions that he asks—in fact, I am keen to address the issues. The matter concerns me. In the past few minutes I responded to a question from one of Mr Ewing's colleagues about the need to enforce high environmental standards. We do not want to start undermining those standards; rather, we want to ensure that the water and waste water industry is able to support economic development, which is why we are encouraging Scottish Water to work with local partners and why a £7 million investment was announced recently in the new waste water treatment works at Aviemore. That is a good example of the kind of investment that we are encouraging Scottish Water to make.

Fergus Ewing says £8 million. I am prepared to raise the figure if he so wishes. I look to Scottish Water to make the most of the investment opportunities that it has and to build on them during the forthcoming investment period.

I certainly agree with the principle that underlies Mary Scanlon's question. I am keen that Scottish Water collaborate with local authorities on the community planning process so that there is communication and co-operation in the years ahead.

Again, I agree with the general principle that there are always opportunities for Scottish Water and local partners to find ways to address development constraints. We are cognisant of those constraints, as is Scottish Water. It sometimes takes a bit of innovation and imagination to find ways to address them, but I believe that that can be done successfully in many cases.

New noise nuisance provisions are included in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Subject to parliamentary approval of the necessary regulations, we expect those provisions to come into force in the course of the next few weeks.

I am always happy to progress issues with local authorities, which will have responsibility for, and discretion in, implementing the noise nuisance provisions of the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Act 2004. Funding has been provided for the measures that local authorities are setting in train at the moment and we will consider other funding requirements in the future. The powers that authorities have will allow them to take effective action in this area in a way that will address Nora Radcliffe's concerns.

We are addressing a range of issues relating to the conservation, management and exploitation of wild Atlantic salmon, including the development of area management agreements between wild fish and farmed fish interests, and the work of the International Atlantic Salmon Research Board of the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organisation.

The issue of lice treatments was indeed raised in the recent debate on aquaculture. Earlier this month, my officials met the Veterinary Medicines Directorate, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and representatives of the pharmaceutical industry and the fish farming industry to address the issue. All the parties involved in the talks have taken away action points on which they will work in order to up the range of available treatments. Of course, we recognise that pharmaceutical intervention is important, but we also recognise that the area management agreements, to which I referred, are critical in addressing the issues.

If the Environment and Rural Development Committee called me to give evidence to that inquiry, I would be happy to do so. However, the focus of our work is on wild salmon and sea trout, which are the species that are most directly affected by the issues that we are discussing. Of course, where there are implications for other species, we would want to do something about those as well.

Do seals eat fish? Yes. Does that have implications for our management of the aquaculture industry? It does not, so long as cages are properly designed in accordance with regulations. Does John Farquhar Munro have a supplementary question? I suspect that he does, but that it may be for another day.

Research is on-going, including research into, for example, patterns of sea lice dispersion along the west coast of Scotland. All the research should be viewed in the context of the management of species around the coast and the fact that we seek to address issues, wherever they arise, in the most coherent way. If Robin Harper would like further information on the research that is under way, I would be happy to provide it.

We want to consider a range of issues relating to freshwater fisheries and we shall do that carefully. To give a general response to the specific point that Jamie McGrigor raises, we recognise that all fish stocks present in our fresh waters are sustainable so long as they are properly managed. That is the area in which we will want to address our efforts.

Following initial discussions with a range of stakeholders, we expect to develop proposals that will be issued for formal consultation next year.

Our intention is to devise a co-existence regime. As I said in response to Mr Gibson's initial question, we intend next year to put out to consultation the proposals that we develop. As the member indicated, those proposals are being developed on the basis of consultation with stakeholders, through workshops and other mechanisms, in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK. I do not want to prejudge any  conclusions that that process will reach, but the member will see the outcomes next year.

We face common issues in the UK and across the European Union, therefore we want to work in partnership with DEFRA as far as we can to develop the proposals that we will put out for consultation. There will be a separate Scottish consultation, because it is within our competence to develop a different regime if we so choose. However, we and DEFRA will have to conform with European requirements in any proposals that come forward. That will apply as much to compensation issues as it will to other issues of concern in this area.

Eleanor Scott is to be congratulated on raising this important issue for debate. Rural communities like to have key services on their doorsteps, as has been said before, but it is important to recognise—as has also been said before—that there needs to be enough business for abattoirs to do. We must recognise that abattoirs provide a business service; we have to view the issue in that light. The setting up or closing down of an abattoir is a commercial decision for a commercial operator. It is clearly not for ministers to get into the business of directing such commercial decisions, not least because of the issue of EU state aid, which a number of members have mentioned. It is important to set the debate in its commercial context. A new abattoir means a large investment. The view of many potential investors is that the density of stocking in many parts of Scotland simply does not justify the considerable capital  expenditure that is required for even the most modest of plants. In many areas, there is not the necessary throughput of animals for slaughter to allow processing to be done profitably in the longer term. For those reasons, a new abattoir of any size is simply not an economic option in many areas. History has shown that the pressures on abattoirs are significant. A number of those pressures have been mentioned this evening, including competition for the supply of animals and the need for investment to meet required hygiene standards without wiping out producer returns. Clearly, for smaller abattoirs, those pressures tend to be proportionately greater. It is worth noting that the decline in numbers has slowed considerably in recent years. I was struck by Jamie McGrigor's party-political approach to the issue. I thought it worth drawing to his attention the fact that the number of slaughterhouses fell by 31 between 1984 and 1997 and has fallen by only a further six since then—the rate of loss of slaughterhouses in the Tory years was two and a half times more. On the bigger picture throughout Scotland, the challenge for operators does not seem to be a need to increase slaughter capacity; it seems to be a problem of overcapacity, particularly with beef. The larger plants in Scotland are operating at roughly 70 per cent capacity and they account for more than three quarters of all cattle slaughtered. Therefore, any proposition to increase slaughter facilities has to be considered carefully in the context of that commercial reality. There is clearly an issue about support for rural abattoirs, which ministers recognise.

I accept that and I accept that the issues for small and remote communities are different from those for Scotland as a whole. However, the motion is drafted in terms of Scotland as a whole and it is important for anyone who would advocate a return to farm-based slaughtering to recognise the commercial realities within which the slaughtering industry operates today. We recognise the value of increasing the availability of locally produced and processed food and the benefits that that has for producers, consumers, health, the environment and local employment. For that reason, we have processing and marketing grants, through which operators  can seek support with both capital and non-capital projects for construction, upgrading and the purchase of plant and equipment. That applies to large and small projects alike. Since 2001, we have committed more than £20 million in grant assistance through those schemes, of which £6 million is for meat processing and animal slaughtering facilities, including the development of the Orkney abattoir and the extension and upgrade of processing facilities at the abattoir on Barra. On some of the specifics that were mentioned this evening, we have also supported the Islay Fine Food Company through a number of projects involving the local processing and packing of beef, and we have had approaches from the abattoir on Mull, seeking assistance. Those will be considered on the same basis as other such applications. Significant public funds have already been committed and will continue to be so. Clearly, applicants must be able to demonstrate a number of things. First, as with any public grant scheme, they must be able to demonstrate that the project requires the funding in order to proceed. They must also show that the project is economically viable, that there is an identified market outlet for the product and that the project will also deliver an adequate and lasting share of the benefits to the primary producer. I think members of all parties would support those objectives. We acknowledge the difference that those types of project make. We have plans to invest a further £18 million in the food-processing sector over the next four years, but it is for individual operators to make decisions about the investments that they would require to make for such projects to go ahead.

Fergus Ewing raises an issue that is on the table. The continuing general agreement on tariffs and trade talks concern such issues. No decisions have been made and no firm proposals have been agreed. It is important not to disadvantage the Scottish industry, but we are also clear that we will compete with Argentina not on quantity, but on quality. That is why the emphasis on Scotch beef is important, because the quality of Scottish produce is our strongest asset in the marketplace. Animal welfare reasons have been given as justification for a different concentration or spread of slaughter facilities throughout Scotland. It is  important to recognise that although issues arose during the foot-and-mouth outbreak with the transportation of animals, they typically related to animals that were being transported for further fattening and finishing; they did not particularly concern animals that were going to slaughterhouses, which did not spread the disease. We must recognise that some of the greatest stress that animals face on their way to slaughter is from loading and unloading, rather than from the distance or time that is involved in a journey. Strict rules govern journey times and that is appropriate. Those rules should be maintained and respected. As long as those time limitations are adhered to, the quality of the route and the type of journey that the animals must make matter more than the distance, as Maureen Macmillan said. I will respond to the suggestions that smaller abattoirs somehow invariably deliver a better service and that dispersing the slaughter of animals among a larger number of small units has no potential risks. Consumers want and expect safe food. That is why hygiene standards exist. The record of units in Scotland—including large units—is very good and we want to maintain that. Given the food hygiene regulations that will come into force on 1 January 2006, it will be important to maintain those standards. It was said that the distinction that exists between full-throughput and low-throughput abattoirs will cease at that time, but it is also worth noting the other change that will happen at that time. The regulations that apply to slaughterhouses of all sizes will be risk based and risk related and will no longer be as inflexible as some regulatory requirements have been. That means that no slaughterhouse will be required to adhere to standards that do not relate to the hygiene risks in that unit. The standards as implemented and enforced will relate to the position in that unit. The legislation will apply directly in all member states, so gold plating will not be an issue, as has been suggested. All plants—large and small—will require to meet the same standards throughout the European Union. That is the right direction in which to move. The slaughter of horses was mentioned. The requirements to which Elaine Murray referred relate to the slaughter of horses for human consumption and do not apply to the slaughter of horses when the meat is not to be used for human food. Through our grant schemes, which comply with European requirements, the Executive wants to maintain support for economically viable projects that have due regard to food hygiene standards, animal welfare, working conditions for staff—they  were not mentioned, but they are important—and the commercial realities in which all sorts of businesses must work. We recognise the importance of such services to communities and to Scotland as a whole.   Meeting closed at 18:14.

That is an operational matter for Scottish Water, but it advises me that the current figure for the number of households with a water meter is 610.

I do not agree with Margaret Mitchell that the number of households with a water meter, which I indicated in my reply, is disappointing. It is entirely appropriate that we should link the water charges that individuals pay with their council tax liability, because that reflects the value of the property that they occupy. In that sense, the charges are appropriate, manageable and predictable. However, I agree that a case for metering can be made for non-domestic users, because their water usage, unlike that of private households, can be very varied. Indeed, meters have already been installed in many thousands of business premises and allow them to pay for their water as they use it. The critical issue is that household charges should be affordable.

Around £200 million in Scottish Water's current investment programme will provide benefits in addressing current development constraints. An additional £41 million has been allocated specifically to relieve such constraints in rural areas and for first-time connections and water quality improvements.

I certainly agree with the principle of seeking to promote economic growth and affordable housing. I should put the comments in my letter of 22 November to John Swinney into context, because I was acknowledging that no one—by which I mean Scottish Water as well as local authorities—had predicted the degree to which development constraints would become an active consideration in that programming period. Because of that recognition, we will address concerns about development constraints in preparing the investment programme for Q and S III. We are encouraging Scottish Water to work with local authorities and other local partners to address some short-term constraints that they will want to be tackled before Q and S III is implemented in two years' time.

The problems to which David Davidson refers are not dissimilar to those that John Swinney mentioned. We recognise that such problems exist throughout Scotland and we recognise that action needs to be taken to tackle those problems. That is why we will seek to address issues of development constraint, which occur not only in one particular locality but throughout Scotland, when we make an announcement early in the new year on the priorities for the investment programme going forward.

Good progress has been made and we expect the access provisions of the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 to come into force early next year. It will then be for local councils and national park authorities to draw up core path plans for their respective areas within the following three years.

Thus far, local authorities have been fully engaged in the work on the guidance on the preparation of the core path network and the implementation of the outdoor access code. We expect that work to continue. A total of £22 million over three years has been allocated to local authorities to support their work on access. We will continue to consult authorities on guidance and other matters that relate to the implementation of the core path network throughout Scotland.

I will attempt to be brief. I welcome the great majority of what has been said by the great majority of contributors. The debate has reflected the widespread recognition in the Parliament of the importance of aquaculture for many communities around our coast and for the Scottish economy as a whole. Sadly, there is an exception to every rule. The only positive thing that I can say about the speeches of Robin Harper and Eleanor Scott is that they succeeded admirably in uniting all the other parties in the chamber in opposition to the Green's approach to this important industry. I talked at the outset of the debate about the importance of investor confidence for the future sustainability of the aquaculture industry. Investor confidence is affected by what is said in the Scottish Parliament and members should be aware of that when making their speeches. We should all seek to send out a positive message endorsing the aquaculture industry and its produce, and send that signal around Scotland and beyond. The point was also made that we should not only act to support the industry, but seek to ensure that investors are aware of the actions that we are taking and of the difference that they will make. I assure members that we are doing that. My predecessor, Allan Wilson, met with the banks not so long ago and we continue to talk with investors. Moreover, the banking community is represented on the ministerial working group for the strategic framework for Scottish aquaculture, which I chair. We will talk to the banking community and to others about what we need to do to secure the industry's future. We believe that the case for definitive safeguards has been well made. We also recognise that we must continue to make that case with all EU member states to ensure that the measures are put in place. Members will be aware that the industry has lodged an anti-dumping complaint, which could provide an alternative route if the safeguards route proves unfruitful. However, the signals are positive, as I said at the outset, and we believe that we should go ahead on that basis. What we want is an agreed process that produces a minimum price that can underpin a sustainable industry for the future. Beyond the safeguards that we seek, we are aiming to achieve a level playing field on which the Scottish industry can compete successfully. Several members commented on the support that we have had from Douglas Alexander  and UK ministers. Having spoken to Douglas in recent days, I can confirm that we have not only that support, but valuable support from within the European Commission and from other member states. It is important to recognise that, even after we have done the things that we want to do and have resolved the issues of production costs in Norway and loss-making prices being set for Norwegian produce, it will remain the case that Norway will be an important producer in the sector and that Norwegian companies will be important players within the Scottish industry. Therefore, we will continue to pursue dialogue with the Norwegian Government and seek to improve our competitiveness in order to attract investment for what is an international market. We will also continue to tackle future impediments to competitiveness and will press ahead with the streamlining of regulation, providing a basis for best management practices and supporting the production and marketing of quality food products. The point has been made from a number of directions that that process is important and that it ought to go faster. I assure members that we are working closely with the industry, stakeholders and regulatory bodies to ensure that the process goes ahead as quickly as it can. I emphasise that we have identified a one-stop shop as a priority for action under the strategic framework.

If the action that we are taking in Europe does not indicate to members the urgency with which we are tackling the issue, I can say only that their measure of what constitutes urgency must be somewhat different from mine. We are, indeed, addressing the issues with urgency and we are doing so with the industry, which is the critical point. It is not good enough just to say here in the Parliament that Government ought to do more; nor is it good enough to overlook the fact that the industry's buy-in to what we want to do is critical. We must persuade and bring with us all those within the industry, whether they are big producers, small Norwegian-owned companies or Scottish-owned companies. We must work with them and find ways in which they can support the changes that we seek to make. We are exploring a more efficient approach to the question of relocation and there are a number of good examples of what we are doing in that regard.  The Crown Estate issue was raised, which was perhaps predictable. It is worth saying that part of the process of examining regulation that we are undertaking is the examining of comparative costs within the industry. The kind of figures that have been bandied around in the debate will be replaced by firm, clear figures that will allow us to make sensible judgments. It is worth recalling that the Crown Estate does indeed provide funding for community projects and, among other things, provides funding for the Scottish aquaculture research forum to the tune of £100,000. Therefore, the Crown Estate recognises its relationship with the industry. The Scottish aquaculture research forum is moving forward. The question was raised whether it attracts sufficient funding. Its projected budget is some £900,000 over three years, which is a more significant figure than has been recognised by one or two members. The forum includes within it the industry, environmental non-governmental organisations, wild-fish interests, public bodies and the Executive. The forum is clearly and decisively setting an agenda and calling for research tenders to address those issues that must be considered. It is worth emphasising that we are consulting on the extension of planning controls. Those who feel that they can contribute to the consultation should do so. The closing date is 14 January next year, so there is still time for those who want to, to respond. The principle of transferring the responsibility for planning consents from the Crown Estate to local authorities is clear and established, and is on course for next year. Overall, the actions that we are taking are designed to ensure that the industry has a sustainable and competitive future. We believe that Scottish salmon and Scottish aquaculture products can compete with the best in the world, but they need the support of all stakeholders in the industry to do that. The industry particularly needs an end to the kind of scare stories that we have had in the past and an end to the kind of ambiguity that we heard again in the debate from the Green party about the bogus science that has been brought forward to discredit the industry. There must be consensus around promoting a quality, profitable industry for the future. The industry's profitability depends on the trade defence measures that the UK Government is promoting in Europe. The efforts of the UK Government and the Scottish Executive deserve the whole-hearted support of all in the Parliament. We will continue to work with the industry for the benefit of Scottish-owned companies and the whole industry within Scotland in order to achieve a sustainable future and support jobs in many of our most remote communities.

I want to be clear about what Robin Harper is saying. In response to Fergus Ewing, he seemed to say that he did not know what the position was. The member has lodged an amendment that says that we need to do more towards having a sustainable aquaculture industry. Clearly, we will have no sustainable industry if no one buys the fish.

Does Mr Brocklebank accept that the correct way to address regulation, the promotion of the product and the other issues that he has mentioned is to do so in collaboration with the industry? That is precisely what the Executive has been doing.

I return to the point that I made earlier. Does Mr Brocklebank accept that those targets have been set in collaboration with the industry and that many of the on-going targets are ones for which the lead body is not the Executive, but the industry, the trade association or other partners? Together, we will get the industry to change in effective and sustainable ways precisely by taking such an approach rather than by being driven by a target timetable.

Will Mr Gibson confirm that he understands the point that, in order for an effective and definitive safeguard to be put in place, there needs to be a process that identifies the real costs to the Norwegian industry of producing fish that the Norwegians are selling at what appear to be loss-making prices? That is why the Commission has to take a number of weeks to establish the evidence base before taking further action.

It is something over a year since the previous debate in this chamber on Scottish aquaculture. Since then, much has happened, and this is a good moment at which to pause, reflect and look ahead. Everyone in the chamber recognises the importance of shellfish farming and cultivation to Scotland, which are worth about £500 million a year to the Scottish economy and employ up to 10,000 people in part-time and full-time jobs on the farms and in processing and other support services such as transport and feed supply. The industry is particularly vital to some of our more remote rural areas, especially in the Western Isles and the northern isles and on the western and northern coasts, where communities are sustained by the income generated by aquaculture. Aquaculture is, therefore, not only a fisheries matter but one that lies at the heart of our rural development aspirations. Despite the difficult conditions under which the industry has been labouring over the past 15 months, progress is being made on a number of fronts. In three areas in particular, the Executive, the industry and other key stakeholders have been working together to make that progress: the pursuit of trade defence measures; the efforts to improve future competitiveness; and the implementation of the strategic framework for Scottish aquaculture. Any observer of the aquaculture industry, particularly the salmon sector, will be aware of the pressure that the industry has been under in recent times. One of those pressures has come from the difficulty in attracting investment from banks. One of the reasons why banks are reluctant to invest in the industry is because of the continuing low prices, which means that there is a lack of potential to make a profit. That, in turn, is due in large part to the increasing over-supply to  the European market. The European Commission directorate-general trade is convinced of the case that we have made of there being unfair trade and is committed to aiding our industry to counter that threat. We have gone down the trade defence route to seek safeguards precisely because of that and have worked closely with our colleagues in the United Kingdom Government and with the industry in pursuing that case. Following representations last year from many of the small and medium-sized enterprises operating in Scotland, those efforts have carried us forward. As I said, we were persuaded to act because of the dire market conditions that resulted in sustained losses for many companies over a period of months. We recognise the fact that the European market is out of balance for reasons relating to importation and significant and continuing over-supply from Norway and other salmon-producing countries. We have therefore had no option other than to raise our concerns with the UK Government and, in turn—in partnership with the UK Government—with the Commission. It has taken time to produce results in that regard and many obstacles have had to be overcome. We were delighted in August this year when provisional safeguard measures were secured. However, as those measures near the end of their terms—they will fall in a few days time—it has become clear that they have not done enough to lift market prices and give the industry the boost that it needs. There has also been some resistance to long-term safeguard measures from a number of member states In spite of that, negotiations for a lasting safeguard solution continue. I am pleased to be able to report that there is a good prospect of our being able to achieve a workable solution, based on definitive proposals, which the Commission is drawing up, to safeguard and protect the Scottish industry from cheap imports. That will include a Commission investigation of Norwegian production costs, in which some of my department's officials will be involved. The measures will lead to a European agreement to put in place a minimum import price that will be sufficient to sustain the Scottish industry and will last for four years. It is right that we have taken those measures and that we recognise the significance of the industry to the Scottish economy. I am delighted with the support that we have received from UK ministers, who also recognise the significance of the industry to the Scottish economy. Clearly, Norway and other producers, such as Ireland, also regard farmed salmon as being important to their economies. It is right that we do the same and take serious measures to find solutions to the problems that the industry faces.  We have taken those steps in response to the economic pressure that the industry has been under but also because of a recognition that, given a level playing field and the opportunity to compete fairly, Scottish farmed salmon can compete with salmon that is farmed anywhere else in the world. By putting in place the measures that I have discussed, we will achieve a sustainable aquaculture industry in Scotland.

That is a reasonable question. The temporary, provisional, safeguard provisions are likely to fall on 5 December. We anticipate that proposals resulting from the investigation into costs in Norway will come back to the Commission by 20 January. Therefore, we expect measures to be in place by around February 2005. That will be early enough to make a significant difference to many producers in Scotland. Of course, our energies have not been devoted only to trade defence and safeguard measures, important though we recognise those to be. We have also begun taking steps to improve the competitiveness of all parts of the aquaculture industry, working with large and small businesses. On streamlining regulation, we have made a clear commitment to review the burden of regulation on aquaculture. We have done that in partnership with the industry, which regards that as a priority. We need transparent procedures and we need consents to be processed speedily and at minimal cost. We also need to be smart about how new regulatory requirements are implemented and enforced. Let me emphasise that none of that need reduce the effectiveness of regulation. Many of the regulations are in place for good reasons, such as the protection of the environment, and we will continue to maintain that regulatory framework. In the past few days, however, we have appointed new officials to work with the industry specifically on ways in which the regulatory regime can be reduced and streamlined.

We need to put the matter into perspective. The industry will confirm that Crown Estate rentals account for about 1 per cent of its costs. Therefore, there is a requirement for a degree of proportionality. The most important matter in relation to changing the regulatory framework with regard to the Crown Estate is the improvement of the planning process and the need to bring aquaculture within the local authority planning process. That work is on-going. The required documents concerning the strategic planning policy and the planning guidelines are out to consultation and we expect them to come into force around this time next year. When that happens, we believe that it will greatly improve the regulatory framework within which the aquaculture industry operates. We are also looking at the scope for improving the siting of fish farms. There are a lot of very small farms scattered around the coast and although that is not a bad thing in itself, we can make the industry operate more efficiently by bringing sites together and by relocating them where that is appropriate, thereby improving the position with regard to treatment of sea lice, for example. A number of initiatives are seeking to achieve that efficiency. There are also a number of examples of partnership working in the industry where fish farmers have rationalised their procedures and come together to reduce the burden on them all. Quite a lot is happening already and we intend that more should be done. We believe that the strategic framework for Scottish aquaculture is the right framework within which that work can proceed. In order to continue with that work, we have put in place a working group that brings together many of the key stakeholders in the industry and which is working to put in place some of the things that we have identified as important for achieving our objectives. Among the achievements of the working group in carrying forward the strategic framework are the creation of the new Scottish aquaculture research forum; the advancement of local authority planning controls; the development of exports action plans; and the preparation of work in the fields of training and skills. The development of the first ever farmed fish welfare code will be welcomed by many and will shortly be put out to consultation. It is clear that some of those action points are moving forward faster than others. We make no apology for that because we are working to bring the industry with us and are seeking to achieve a consensus in the sector so that people agree on where they want to go. We can work together to achieve that. I believe that the story so far is very positive.  We have always to be alert to threats and challenges to the industry. Members will be aware that a fortnight ago, there was a suspicion that there might be infectious salmon anaemia on a farm in the Western Isles. I hope that members are also aware of the measures that we have taken to ensure that that situation was dealt with quickly and efficiently in a way that prevented the spread of the problem. Controls have been placed on the farm in question to restrict the movement of stock. The company has acted very quickly to address the problem and we are well prepared for any further developments. I hope that the measures taken and the controls applied will succeed in containing any infection should an outbreak of the disease be confirmed. We will maintain the utmost vigilance through the next few weeks. That is a good example of how the industry has responded to the challenge and recognised the need to be seen to act—and to act effectively—in partnership with the Executive.

I agree with the principle that any decision on such matters should be based on sound science. Of course, we look to the Food Standards Agency as our authority and adviser on that matter. We have a clear commitment to preserving the health of Scottish aquaculture products and to getting the message across to the marketplace that this is a safe, healthy and high-quality form of food. We are working with the industry and succeeding in projecting that message into markets both in continental Europe and in these islands. We will continue to work on that in the period ahead. It is critical to the future success and sustainability of the industry that there is an end to the kind of scare stories that we heard some time ago. Frankly, those scare stories appeared to be designed to undermine the sustainability of the Scottish aquaculture sector; we want no more of that. We want to work with the industry to project the message that it produces healthy and nutritious food and we want to work with the communities that depend on the jobs within that industry.  We continue to view the sustainable development of Scottish aquaculture as an achievable and desirable end.

I deliberately began my remarks on trade defence with a reference to the banks and investment. Jim Mather's point is pertinent; it is critical that the banks understand the position of the industry and the measures that Government is taking to improve that position. I hope that the message goes out from the chamber today that Parliament fully supports the measures that we are taking to secure a sustainable future for Scottish aquaculture. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Executive commitment, as set out in A Partnership for a Better Scotland , to support a sustainable aquaculture industry, through the implementation of the Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture and other measures, including trade defence and a review of the regulatory procedures and associated costs and of the scope for improved access to veterinary medicines, all of which are designed to protect and improve employment and investment opportunities in many parts of the Highlands and Islands, including many of our most remote rural and island communities.

While we are still considering the full implications of that case, our initial assessment is that it is unlikely to lead to major changes in waste management practice in Scotland.

If Mr Harvie had listened more closely to my initial answer, he would have heard that we are still considering the full implications, but that our initial assessment is that the judgment is unlikely to lead to major changes in waste management in Scotland. We have come to that conclusion because, in the main, the causes of pollution and land that is contaminated  by pollution are treated together anyway—an oil spill cannot be separated from the ground on to which the oil has spilled. Therefore, although we are still considering the Van de Walle judgment, the principle that it appears to reinforce is one by which we already abide.

Janis Hughes makes a valid point. I hope that Patrick Harvie and the Green Party will support effective action to deal with contaminated land, rather than hope that we cannot afford to take such action.

The Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Act 2003 requires ministers and others to promote sustainable flood management, both to reduce flooding risk and to protect the environment. We are preparing guidance on flooding issues with the assistance of a national technical advisory group, and that guidance will be issued next year.

Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's concern in those areas is well known, as is that of the RSPB. I assure him that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency will be funded and resourced in such a way as to allow it to meet its requirements. It will, of course, have to set priorities for how it does that, identify the areas in which there is the greatest risk and deal with those areas first with a view to full implementation of the water framework directive in due time.

Sarah Boyack will be aware that the funding that has been made available to local authorities for that purpose has been significantly increased and now runs at the rate of £89 million over the funding review period to 2008, and that the grant rate has been increased to 80 per cent. At this juncture, it would not be appropriate for me to give a guarantee on any specific scheme, because each scheme that is proposed is the responsibility of the relevant local authority and must meet the criteria that have been set. However, we expect that the available funding will allow local authorities to do a significant amount of work on flood prevention.

I do not think that that is particularly a matter for me, although it is clearly a matter for the Executive to consider generally. The Bellwin scheme is designed for a purpose. The rules exist to ensure that those schemes that meet the criteria for support under the scheme are the ones that are supported. That is the proper way to go forward.

I am pleased to be able to welcome much of what has been said in the course of the debate. As members have said, the debate is about how we secure a high-quality public sector service provider and how we enable Scottish Water to address, in the investment programme ahead, issues such as development constraints and odour nuisance. I was pleased to hear Alex Johnstone say that the bill reminds him of why he got involved in politics. He is not the only one; many people who are involved in Scottish politics campaigned for a Scottish Parliament precisely because of the Tories' obsession with privatising everything. The bill represents a bulwark against that Tory obsession. We are committed to keeping Scottish Water in the public sector and to ensuring that it delivers first-rate water services for Scottish customers. The bill provides robust statutory measures in response to the Competition Act 1998 to secure those objectives, which would otherwise be at risk. We are committed to providing stability for the industry and we believe that the bill will allow us to achieve that aim. Those who raise the spectre of privatisation need to understand that under the bill no private company will sell or supply water or sewerage services. New entrant companies will be able to compete only for billing and retailing to business customers. The idea that Frances Curran promoted, that competing for billing services somehow amounts to water-service privatisation by neglect, is bizarre in the extreme.

I am glad to receive that clarification of Green party policy and I welcome its support for our approach. By contrast, the Scottish Socialist Party boasted today that it looks forward to voting side by side with the Tories against the bill and asked Scottish ministers why we did not "go the whole hog" and sell off Scottish Water. We reject that invitation from the Tories and the SSP precisely because we believe that a public sector Scottish Water is the best way of delivering core water services.

If Frances Curran had read the evidence that was given in committee, she would know that we have taken the best advice on what we need to do to meet the requirements of the Competition Act 1998. When the Office of Fair Trading makes a submission to the committee that confirms our view, I am pretty comfortable to rest on such assurances. We seek to introduce two prohibitions and a detailed licensing regime that will secure public health, protect the environment and allow us to maintain a charging system that protects the interests of low-income customers. Clean drinking water is fundamental to health and we are not prepared to compromise on that or to blur accountability for water supply. The same applies to sewerage services. The prohibition on retail competition for domestic households secures our continuing ability to ensure that water charges are linked to other means of raising funds and that they reflect ability to pay. Concerns that GATS might require us to privatise water services are without foundation. As my colleagues have pointed out on a number of occasions, we have ensured that the UK Government's representations to the European Union on those negotiations reflect its commitment to retain Scotland's water service in the public sector. The UK Government has confirmed to us that no requests have been received for the UK to include water services in future GATS commitments and the UK, of course, has no intention of moving in that direction. It is precisely because of our certainty on that matter that we seek to introduce explicit prohibitions in the bill against any third-party involvement in the physical provision of water and sewerage services. Under the bill, the industry will also remain accountable to Parliament. Although the proposed water industry commission will acquire powers of determination over charges in order to bring its technical expertise to bear, responsibility for deciding on public policy objectives will rest entirely with ministers: we will state the level of investment that Scottish Water must achieve during a regulatory period; we will determine the drinking water quality and environmental standards that Scottish Water must meet and the timescale in which they must be achieved; and we will decide on the principles of charging, including how costs are borne by different customer groups. As far as the water industry is concerned, ministers who are accountable to Parliament will  own Scottish Water and set the public policy that it must achieve. Sarah Boyack and other members raised the important public policy issue of sustainable development. We are committed to ensuring that sustainable development is fully embedded in decision making in the water industry and will seek the best way of delivering that. We will consider carefully the Environment and Rural Development Committee's recommendations on that, particularly on the question whether additional sustainable development duties, such as licensing of retail providers by the water industry commission, are appropriate. However, it is worth noting that the bill reinforces the requirement on Scottish Water to have regard to sustainable development issues, because the water industry commission must fully fund all Scottish Water's core functions, which include that sustainable development duty. Many members rightly highlighted the issue of development constraints, and we are fully committed to addressing that complex problem. Some have pointed out that it was not fully recognised at the time of quality and standards II; however, £200 million has been made available in the current programme to provide positive benefits with regard to existing constraints and a further £41 million has been allocated specifically to address some of the rural issues that members mentioned. We recognise that constraint is a real issue. The current situation will be specifically addressed and we are determined to ensure that it will not arise in the next investment programme period. Indeed, the issue was addressed in the consultation on Q and S III—a whole chapter was devoted to discussion of extending the public networks. We are keen to ensure that a workable and affordable mechanism is put in place. That work will be done in liaison with local authorities. The convener of the Environment and Rural Development Committee referred to the fact that the investment programme will be informed by the priorities for economic development and area regeneration that are set out in the "National Planning Framework for Scotland". That is precisely the commitment to investing in water services that was given in the consultation document. We are working with a number of parties—including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Communities Scotland, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations and Homes for Scotland—on considering what that will mean in detail and in tactical terms. Again, we will return to that in January when we announce the results of the Q and S III process. The conclusions that we come to then on environmental issues that affect industries such as aquaculture will be  significant indeed. A number of members sought clarification on Ross Finnie's announcement at the commencement of the debate on the problem of odour, which is one of the key environmental issues that members have raised. As members will know, we are consulting on a voluntary code of practice; that consultation will run until January. The draft voluntary code will then be finalised and published in the spring. It will form the basis of our proposed statutory code of practice on odour control, which will be brought in by an amendment to the bill at stage 2. The intention is, of course, to consult on that and to issue a regulatory impact assessment. Our expectation is that the statutory code's introduction will be dovetailed with the beginning of the next investment programme period, which is due to commence in April 2006. I hope that the Environment and Rural Development Committee and, in due course, Parliament will support that amendment when it is moved. We will lodge another amendment on the convener of the water customer consultation panels taking over responsibility for handling individual complaints. We are grateful to the Environment and Rural Development Committee for its consideration of the proposed amendments and for the evidence that it will take next week. We look forward to lodging the amendments in good time for stage 2 and to working with the committee on them. We believe that what the consultation panels amendment will propose will be a step in the right direction and that it need not, and will not, take away from the wider responsibility of the panels for dealing with wider issues that affect all customers. I thank the members of the Environment and Rural Development Committee for their detailed consideration of the bill's general principles. The committee's report on the evidence that it took has allowed a thorough assessment of the Scottish water industry and the bill's aims. We look forward to working with the committee at stage 2. Today's debate has been useful. It has marked out clear dividing lines, but it has also marked out clear common ground that I think will attract wide support in Parliament. I believe that it will allow us to deliver the kind of public sector Scottish water services that we want in the future. I commend the general principles of the Water Services etc (Scotland) Bill to the Parliament.

I ask Maureen Macmillan to accept my assurance that in introducing competition to the retail function it will be confined to precisely that, in other words, to the billing process, and not in any sense to the sale or supply of water.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It has been a good debate, which has covered a range of issues. There is agreement on some issues and disagreement on others. However, the debate has reflected the significance that all parties in the chamber give to our forestry sector. Members have recognised that growers and processors face a continuing climate of challenge and change. It is clear that we need the public and private sectors to continue to work together to make the most of Scotland's forests. As has been said, forestry is a long-term business, which is precisely why we have embarked on developing a future forest resource that is rich in diversity. I was interested in the different views of a number of members—sometimes from the same side of the chamber—on the correct balance in that regard. However, we are clear that we want an increasingly diverse national forest and forest cover, whether in the public or in the private sector, that develops the natural resource to increase not only the supply of paper, wood and other forest products, but the environmental and social benefits that were touched on in the debate. That is why, as well as investing in the public sector, we have invested, through the Scottish forestry grant scheme, in work in the private sector. I hope that members will agree that it is right to seek to deliver even more against those wider objectives. That is the purpose of the review and recommendations that were published today. The developments in the woods in and around towns initiative, for example, should be widely welcomed because organisations and individuals are working together to make a real difference in areas around our towns that have been neglected for too long. In time, the new woods that are planted under that initiative today will make a significant difference to the health and well-being of the next generation in our towns and cities. Woods can provide the links by which people reach the wider countryside, providing opportunities for enjoying outdoor recreation. As I said at the outset, they also provide significant assistance to our tourism industry. Whether it is through forest recreation and tourism, walking, watching wildlife, cycling or horse-riding, or whether it is through small businesses hiring out mountain bikes or providing other related services, those activities are not peripheral to our priorities, as some have said. Those activities are a critical part of what forestry policy is all about.  The economic issues are of great importance, and I am pleased about the broad welcome that there has been today for the timber transport fund. That is a key challenge for the industry in delivering its product to market. Freight facilities grants are raised, and members should be aware that a number of such grants have been used in the past to improve marine infrastructure such as the piers at Portavadie and Lochaline. The timber transport fund that we have now established will seek to connect forests to both marine and rail facilities, and we are keen to work with partners in the timber transport forum on how to promote more rail and sea transport of timber to market.

That is a significant point. To answer the point that George Lyon raised, and the question that Alex Fergusson asked in his own speech, the fund will be administered by Forestry Commission Scotland, which will work with local authorities and other stakeholders through the timber transport forum to address not only the rail and sea issues that have been mentioned today, but how to remove the pressures on local roads in the way that George Lyon highlighted. That will be done in part by making better use of forest roads and by investing in and building on that network, but the Forestry Commission will also seek to develop an alternative transport network, such as was approved in Argyll last year, to take those vehicles off the public roads. There have been a number of areas of consensus on which members have welcomed the things that we have done.

We shall quickly bring about a resolution of the issue relating to the reform of the common agricultural policy and the single farm payment, which has been raised by members of several parties and which we believe is key in many respects to restoring the level of private sector planting. I shall say a little more about that in a moment. Alex Fergusson kept what I thought was the most interesting part of his position on the issue to the end of his speech. He made a new proposal for putting Forestry Commission management in the private sector, which is novel but perhaps not unsurprising. It is also interesting that he asserted, in his speech and in the Conservative amendment, that Forestry Commission Scotland was somehow soaking up public subsidy while the private sector  suffered from neglect, and he used the figure of the £80 million budget line for the Forestry Commission. It is important to make it clear that the funding that goes in cash terms from this Parliament to the Forestry Commission is in the order of £46.6 million and that the majority of that money—£28 million of it—goes to support private sector growers and industry generally. That happens, for example, through the woodland grant scheme, which is public money devoted to the private sector and to what it is able to contribute. Alex Fergusson mentioned an additional sum of around £7 million, which is provided through the farm woodland premium scheme for farmers to plant woodland. The private sector, which has an important role to play, receives significant support from the Scottish Executive and will continue to do so. However, the debate has made it clear that there are good reasons why we continue to look to Forestry Commission Scotland as the public agency that should lead on forest policy and should drive forward forest policy, in the economic sphere and in social and environmental terms. That is the direction in which we wish to travel and that is the key message of the review report that was published today. Indeed, that is the underlying theme of our strategy and of the policy that we have followed until now. I welcome the broad support that the chamber has given for biomass and for the wide application of that form of energy. Unfortunately, I cannot accept the proposal that is contained in Richard Lochhead's amendment that we should set "a specific target to promote the use of forestry for biomass", not because targets are unimportant or because they might not have a role to play, but because, as was mentioned in the debate, we recently asked an expert group under the umbrella of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland to report to FREDS and ministers on how best to grow the biomass sector in Scotland. At this stage, we do not want to instruct the group on the conclusions that its members should reach or the recommendations that they should make.

I absolutely accept the role of Government in this area, which is why Scottish ministers have taken a lead through FREDS to seek to develop the biomass strategy. I am certain  that my colleague Allan Wilson, who now has responsibility for this area, will want to return to the subject. I am sure that he will do so when the expert group makes its report available to him. Other renewables issues were raised, including short-rotation coppicing, which Alex Johnstone mentioned. I confirm that short-rotation coppicing is grant aided under the Scottish forestry grant scheme. I am aware of the issues involved and assure the chamber that the Executive is happy to address those issues if required to do so. There was a wide expression of support for the greater use of Scottish timber in housing, particularly for external cladding. Forestry Commission Scotland, which is working closely with the industry on that subject, is supporting a research project to explore the use of Scottish timber in cladding and the opportunities that that presents. That is the right direction in which to go. Alasdair Morgan raised the important issue of the contribution that the Executive makes to industry training. Having until recently had responsibility for lifelong learning, I am conscious of the relevance of the issue. Indeed, Forestry Commission Scotland is working with the Forestry Contracting Association to support a number of projects that the association has under way. [ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Forestry Commission Scotland is working with universities and colleges to ensure that this important industry has a skilled and trained work force.

I intended to address that point and I am happy to do so now. I know that Mr Ewing described the source as being "pretty reliable". My sources tell me that it is not very reliable and that there is no truth in the statement that Mr Ewing reported. However, it is important to keep an eye on such matters. Forestry Commission Scotland tells me that it is doing all that it can to maintain thinning populations where it is reasonable to do so. The commission recognises the long-term benefits that that practice provides.  Clearly, forestry is an important employer in rural areas. It brings economic benefits. As members described, it also contributes to the rural economy in a number of other ways. I am thinking of imaginative projects such as treefest, the musical trees tour, the woodland bus tour and the tree trunk online. Various efforts are being made to increase awareness of our forests and woodlands and to promote the contribution that they make. We do not want to lose sight of the cultural aspects of our woodlands. As several members said, forestry plays a central role in sustainable development and in the contributions that it makes to global and natural systems. The more that we hear of and understand climate change, the more we recognise the importance of forestry in that respect. Our strategy for Scotland's forestry was put in place some four years ago. We are keen to ensure that that strategy is fully up to date, so next month, through the forestry forum, we will begin to examine the current strategy and look at putting in place the groundwork for the next strategy. The five regional forestry forums that we have established, which have been critical to ensuring that stakeholders have a say in the way that we develop our forest policy, will inform that process. We will continue to take such an approach. We look forward to working with all parties in the chamber on those areas on which we agree in the future months and years.

What cutback in funding for public roads is the member referring to?

It gives me great pleasure to open this debate about Scotland's forests. Scotland's forestry and primary wood-processing sector contributes more than £800 million to the economy, provides more than 10,000 jobs and attracts a further £160 million in forest-related expenditure by tourists. Forestry can also play an important part in meeting social and environmental objectives. Forestry policy is delivered through the regulation of and support for the private forestry sector and through the national forest estate, which is run by Forestry Commission Scotland and represents 8.5 per cent of Scotland's land area. The private and public sectors of the industry combined account for 17 per cent of Scotland. Forestry is a significant industry and both sectors should play a role in it. Prior to devolution, the Forestry Commission was unique in that although it was a Westminster department that operated across Britain, the Secretary of State for Scotland was the lead minister. With the passage of the Scotland Act 1998, forestry was devolved and became the responsibility of the Scottish ministers, to whom the Forestry Commission became accountable in relation to its work in Scotland. We recognised that the structure of the commission had to change to reflect the devolved arrangement. In April 2003, following a review of the operation of the Forestry Commission, we established Forestry Commission Scotland to strengthen the commission's accountability to the Scottish Parliament. We have also made the management of the national forest estate more accountable, by setting up Forest Enterprise Scotland, which is an agency of Forestry Commission Scotland and manages the estate in accordance with performance measures that were agreed with ministers. These changes have ensured that the development and delivery of forestry policy are integrated effectively with our wider rural development objectives. The public forest estate should be an exemplar of sustainable forest management. In August last year, we arranged a review of the long-term role of the national forest estate. We received more than  400 written responses to a public consultation and are grateful to those who contributed. I am delighted to have been able to announce earlier today that we have accepted all the recommendations of the review group. In doing so, we endorse the vision that "Scotland's national forests will benefit everyone in Scotland, promoting vibrant and healthy communities; enriching natural environments and our cultural heritage; and creating wide-ranging opportunities for economic development."

I am glad to see that members in the chamber have copies of the report. It is, of course, available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I would be pleased to return to the matter on any future occasion when members want to pursue issues that have been raised in the review. The review group recommends increased opportunities for communities to take a greater stake; closer working ties between the forestry and tourism sectors, to make the most from the nation's forests and to take a more strategic approach to economic development; more large-scale landscape and native woodland restoration; and increased opportunities to enhance wildlife habitats near towns and villages.

I will be happy to take an interest in the matter. Mr Swinney will know that biomass and renewable energy generally were formerly my responsibility. In our previous roles, Mr Wilson and I worked together closely on the matter Mr Swinney has raised, and we will continue to do so.

I understand that Mr Wilson has replied to Mr Ruskell's letter today. When Mr Ruskell receives Mr Wilson's response he will no doubt be able to take forward with him the issues that he has raised. We are looking to take forward the national forests estate. We want to ensure that the public funds that we invest in the national forests estate continue to deliver a wide range of public benefits. We will adopt a more flexible approach to the size and distribution of the estate by giving Forestry Commission Scotland more latitude to buy and sell land at the margins. We can use money that is raised from sales of land and forests that do not contribute significantly to our objectives to develop other parts of the estate where greater public benefits can be generated, with at least some of the proceeds being invested in worthwhile projects locally.

One of the things that we want to take forward is to find ways to make it easier for communities—crofting communities as well as other communities—to take ownership of forests on their land. That is one of the matters on which there is room for further development. We will also continue to support the forestry sector as a whole. Private woodland owners, growers, those involved in harvesting, the hauliers and the wood processors are all working in a very competitive climate. We want to give them appropriate support. We designed the new Scottish forestry grants scheme, which was opened last year, to deliver more closely the objectives and priorities of our forestry and agriculture strategies on land outwith the national forests estate. Although so much that is positive has been going on, we have also been aware of the economic pressures on the industry. We have made the grants as attractive as we can and we recognise that the reform of the common agricultural policy has caused some people to delay in making choices about whether to plant trees. Forestry Commission Scotland and the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department have been working hard within the strictures of the scheme to ensure that the conditions are as favourable as possible for  farmers who are considering planting. We look to that process to be completed quickly. Everyone with an interest in the agriculture side of the policy will recognise that some of the uncertainties around single farm payments will be resolved in the relatively near future. I think that we will then witness an increase in planting by those in the agriculture sector. Timber production is forecast to double over 15 years and we have been working with the Scottish forest industries cluster and Scottish Enterprise to identify the best way of taking advantage of that opportunity.

The greening government strategy that is in place involves improving the use of sustainable products of one kind or another. In general terms, we are working hard with the construction sector to develop opportunities to make use of timber and wood fuel. The Building (Scotland) Act 2003, which will come into force in May 2005, is supportive in that regard. We certainly expect such matters to be developed in relation to our estate and more generally. Under the able chairmanship of Mr Wilson, the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland will in the near future carry forward work on many issues to do with the use of wood fuel and biomass.

I am conscious of time and must make progress. We listened to the case that a number of parties made about how to address some of the economic challenges that the industry faces and we agreed to establish the timber transport fund, with support of £13 million over a three-year period. Given the forecast doubling of timber production over 15 years, transport infrastructure was recognised as a priority in the forestry strategy. By working with all the relevant parties, we have developed innovative solutions in many parts of Scotland to allow matters to go forward.

I think that Eleanor Scott intervened first.

Yes. As I mentioned in my reply to Mr McGrigor, we seek to facilitate croft forestry. We also seek to support and carry forward the woods in and around towns initiative. We have announced additional funding—£2 million in 2005-06 and £4 million in 2006-07—to enable more people to enjoy woods close to their homes and to play a part in contributing to human health and well-being. Last December we announced a proposal that Communities Scotland and Forestry Commission Scotland should consider the potential for releasing land to increase the supply of affordable housing in the Forestry Commission Scotland estate. Forestry Commission Scotland has encouraged the identification of appropriate sites and 40 sites on which social housing can go forward have already been identified. We are working with partners on a range of social issues such as access to forests and the use of forest land for housing; economic issues, which I have described; and environmental issues such as encouragement of the growth of native woodlands through the Scottish forestry grant scheme and other measures. The report, which was published today and which we have accepted in full, recognises the social, economic and environmental aspects and potential of Scottish forestry. We will carry work forward to allow forestry to play an even greater role in Scotland's society, economy and environment in the years ahead. I move, That the Parliament recognises the significant contribution which Scotland's forestry and primary wood processing sector makes to the economy, tourism and jobs; recognises the environmental benefits of the creation and restoration of more than 8,600 hectares of native woodland in the last two years; believes that Scotland's forests can contribute to the achievement of the Scottish Executive's renewable energy targets; welcomes the contribution made to delivering greater benefits to communities through 70 partnership agreements between Forestry Commission Scotland and communities and through the setting up of the regional forestry forums and the Strategic Timber Transport Fund, and believes that all stakeholders from the public, private and voluntary sectors should continue to work  together to maximise the value of forestry to the economy, the environment and the people of Scotland.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency will register activities involving the spreading of sewage sludge on land only if it is satisfied that doing so will not harm either the environment or human health.

Anyone who makes proposals has a responsibility to do that themselves. SEPA's responsibility is to grant an exemption only if it is satisfied that there is no implication of harm. In the cases of which I am aware, I believe that that has been done. It is a pleasure to begin my stint as a minister responsible for the environment by answering a question on a subject that addresses recycling as well as other matters.

I am not familiar with all the details of the Beoch case, but I am familiar with the current testing of land, which involves taking core samples to test for metals in the soil. Before it grants an exemption from the application of regulations, SEPA will satisfy itself that there is no threat either to human health or the environment. I have no doubt that SEPA will follow that procedure in the case to which the member refers.

The consultation on future charges and discounts for Scottish Water's customers closed on 12 October. We expect to announce our conclusions early in the new year.

Mr Maxwell has clear views on the matter and I am sure that he will have made his response to the consultation process in good time. It would be a shame if he has not done so, but if that is the case, I am sure that we will take his comments into account when we consider the wider responses to the consultation process. On Mr Maxwell's question on single-person households, we should examine not a stand-alone proposition within the context of the consultation paper, but the need to consider whether a discount system for low-income households should be introduced. Looking at single-person households as if they stand in isolation, or as if they relate to big industrial users, is perhaps missing the point, because they relate to low-income households. The way in which domestic and non-domestic customers are charged will be considered when we examine the principles for future charging. I am sure that we will address the issues equitably and on a level playing field.

During the current investment period, £200 million will secure positive benefits in addressing current constraints and an additional £41 million will address development constraints and first-time connections in rural areas. We recently consulted on what Scottish Water's future investment priorities should be. We will issue our response to that consultation early in the new year, when we will outline the objectives that we wish Scottish Water to address in the next regulatory period.

I am happy to give that assurance. We are conscious of the development constraints that have arisen during the current investment period and we are keen to do what we can to ensure that similar constraints do not continue into the next investment period, particularly with reference to the challenges that face small rural communities.

It may be stating the obvious, but it is particularly important to start by addressing the big question—which Murdo Fraser addressed at the beginning of the debate—of which aspects of this matter are reserved and which are devolved. Not only are decisions on the future of the British Army decisions for the Ministry of Defence, but it is hard to imagine a rational argument that said that those decisions should be for this Parliament, or for anyone else apart from defence ministers who are  answerable to the House of Commons. Even those who wish to disband the United Kingdom would, I suspect, accept that as long as there is a British Army the decisions about how it is structured and run should be taken by a British Government. However, important aspects of such decisions impact on Scotland, as members have said. Because of that, I congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. Not only is the defence of the United Kingdom essential for our safety and security, but it has significant impacts on the Scottish economy. In the past four years, the Ministry of Defence has placed almost 2,500 contracts in Scotland at a total value of approximately £2 billion. Many of those contracts sustain vital jobs in manufacturing, and many of those jobs involve high-value research and technology. There are more than 14,000 service personnel and 7,000 civilian personnel in Scotland. With some 50 core defence sites, and many minor units, Scotland has one of the largest defence footprints of any part of the United Kingdom. Nearly 50,000 are employed in defence and related jobs. It is, in part, because of that context that Scottish ministers take an active interest in the Ministry of Defence proposals. Other UK Government departments also take an active interest in the economic aspects of defence policy; only a couple of weeks ago, I accompanied Jacqui Smith, a minister from the Department of Trade and Industry, on a visit to the BAE Systems naval shipyards on the Clyde. Like me, she was interested to ensure the best possible economic benefits for British companies from meeting our defence requirements.

The member raises an important point, but the issue that I think will be of concern to members is that although many Scottish infantry regiments are based outside Scotland—Dreghorn in Edinburgh is the only place in Scotland where a Scottish regiment is based in a training role—they should not, and cannot, be seen separately from the rest of the British Army. They are part of the British Army and the policies that we are debating tonight are UK-wide policies. That is the basis on which we should have the debate.

We will come back to that, because we need to understand that the issue of families is part of what lies behind the Ministry of Defence proposals. I want to move quickly to the main issue. John Home Robertson made the point that the issue of Britain's regimental structures has been raised before.

I ask the member to have patience, because I will come to that very point. As a result of the issue having been raised before, half our infantry regiments in the UK are already regiments of two or more battalions. A number of members have made the point that it is only 10 years ago that the Gordon Highlanders and the Queen's Own Highlanders were merged as a result of a similar set of proposals. Infantry structure is just one of the issues that are raised in the MOD's proposals this year. There is an important debate to be had about how the British Army should be structured in the future, but it is important to be clear about what is proposed and why. I respond in particular to the suggestion that it is wrong to address such issues at a time when British soldiers are putting their lives at risk, not just in Iraq, but in Afghanistan and elsewhere. Those who know the history of the British Army will know that British soldiers have been in dangerous positions and conflict situations almost continuously for the past 60 years. It is precisely because of the risks that our soldiers take and the need to support them that the Government would fail in its duty if it did not constantly keep in sight the need for reform and modernisation. However, any such proposals for change must be well considered and fully debated. They must take into account the strength of Scotland's infantry regiments, each of which has a strong base in its local area, has a reputation in the field that is second to none, commands local loyalties, confers identity on local areas and has a record down the centuries that is second to none. It is important to recognise that a key part of what the MOD proposes is to end the arms plot. It proposes to do that partly on the basis of an argument that keeping regiments in a single  location, rather than re-roleing them and redeploying them as has been done under the arms plot, will be better for Army families and the full utilisation of Army strength. There is a good argument to be had there, but again, it is important to stress the nature of the MOD proposals. The MOD is proposing not to divert resources from the infantry into heavy armour or high technology, but to divert those resources into logistics, engineers, signallers and intelligence in order to support the infantry. There is a valid and important argument to be had between trickle movement of troops and the arms plot, and between additional infantry battalions and additional support for the support units. We recognise that we have a role in that debate and we want to play it. That role is to exercise our stewardship of the economy and of Scotland's culture and to ensure that ministers at Westminster are fully aware of the role and importance of Scotland's regiments.

I can see the strength of that argument. However, Nicholas Soames and Peter Duncan at Westminster have said that they support the ending of the arms plot, so Murdo Fraser might want to talk to his colleagues at Westminster about which view his party wishes to take. The basis of the proposals is to end the arms plot and replace it with trickle posting, and the consequences of that would be as Murdo Fraser has indicated. We want to ensure that the MOD ministers are aware of our views and those that are held in Scotland. That is why the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister have, as John Swinney asked, made representations to the Ministry of Defence stressing the importance of the identities of all six of Scotland's regiments. We recognise that the MOD ministers will have decisions to take on those matters and we are keen that they should understand how significant those regiments are considered to be in Scotland. I was interested to see the recent reports of the appearance of the Secretary of State for Defence before the Select Committee on Defence; I have also read his comments from the Westminster debate that was held a week or two ago. I was  encouraged to see his view that the existing regiments might retain their identity even under a slightly different regimental structure, but the key question of how that identity should be maintained remains on the table and requires to be settled. We recognise that modernisation and reform of the army are issues for Westminster and that it would be negligent of the British Government ever to cease to consider how best the British Army should be organised, but we believe that the Army has gained great strength over the years from the regimental system as it is currently constituted and from the local and family loyalties that many members have mentioned. Therefore, we will continue to maintain the dialogue with the Ministry of Defence to ensure that the views that have been expressed clearly in the Parliament are fully considered when final decisions are made.  Meeting closed at 18:13.

We have been in close contact with the DTI before, during and since its consultation on the future of regional aid. We worked with it on drafting the UK consultation document, we have encouraged Scottish stakeholders to respond and we fully support the UK view that the Commission's current proposals would not deliver better targeting of aid for the least favoured regions.

I am very conscious of the implications for Fife and other areas and will be happy to consider invitations to meet in the usual way. Indeed, I will be in Mrs Eadie's constituency next week and will be happy to discuss those matters with her then. It is worth saying that the implications are similar for the whole of Scotland. The potential for reducing coverage from 48 per cent of the Scottish population to 8 per cent is clearly something that we take very seriously and we will continue to make representations on that.

I cannot predict what Alex Neil's third point would have  been, but I will seek to respond to those that he made and other points that were made in the debate. I am delighted that we have had such a wide-ranging debate on the Scottish economy this morning. As was pointed out at the outset, we had a similar debate 12 months ago, but it is also worth noting that we have had numerous debates on the economy at the Executive's initiative over those past 12 months. To name just a number of them, we have had debates on enterprise in education, the economy of the Highlands and Islands, renewable energy development and learning and skills. Those are all critical aspects for achieving growth in the Scottish economy. In our previous parliamentary chamber, we also held the business in the Parliament conference, which was a unique collaboration between the Executive and the Parliament to engage with representatives of Scotland's business community. Jim Wallace announced the publication of the Executive's response to the main issues that were raised at the event. I affirm that business in the Parliament was extremely productive in focusing the debate on enabling business to talk directly to ministers and MSPs and I look forward to the next such event to be held here in our new Parliament building in the course of the next year. One of the things that I heard from business people was that Scottish business recognised Scotland's strengths and wanted politicians to recognise that there was little point in business talking Scotland up if Scottish politicians were determined to talk Scotland down. Therefore, it was disappointing, although not surprising, to hear Tory front-bench and SNP members highlight one report from the Swiss International Institute for Management Development to try to find evidence to let them talk Scotland down. I have looked at that report and, like Murdo Fraser, I am happy to quote a selection of its findings. As an antidote to his pessimism, I will mention some of the positives: Scotland is number 6 in the world on exports of commercial services, number 5 in the world on country credit rating, number 4 in the world in value traded on stock markets and, according to the report of which Mr Fraser is so fond, second to none in stock-market capitalisation. However, like other members, I admit that the points that I have quoted from that report are selective—it is always possible to be selective. Jim Mather suggested that we should look instead to the Royal Bank of Scotland for an indication of our real economic strength. I am happy to do that. The Royal Bank's "Purchasing Managers' Index Scotland Report" for August 2004 says that "growth of private sector output was maintained for a fourteenth successive month";  service sector activity remained "robust"; "For the fourteenth successive month" growth in the manufacturing sector was "sustained", with output growth still "solid" over the period; and "private sector employment expanded for a ninth successive month". Therefore, there are grounds for optimism.

There is a range of economic analyses, many of which have been examining Scotland for a great deal longer than the IMD in Switzerland has been doing, and they all point towards continuing growth over this year and next year and to continuing competitiveness in the years ahead. Scotland is indeed growing under devolution. Wherever we look at the Scottish economy, devolution is making a difference. The signs of progress are to be found in the economic stability that we enjoy, the increased number of doctors, nurses and hospitals and the increased attainment in our schools. Devolution gives us the advantage of macroeconomic stability that is provided by the United Kingdom economy and Government, which the SNP could never match. That advantage provides us with a sound macroeconomic position on which we can build, a strong labour market, a strong service sector and encouraging signs of growth in manufacturing. We have fewer unemployed people and more jobs in Scotland than we have had for a generation. However, there are no grounds for complacency. We realise that our economy and the global economic climate are constantly evolving, which is why we have sought to bring up to date our framework for economic development in Scotland. That is why we are determined that the smart, successful Scotland strategy, with which we direct the efforts of the enterprise networks, will reflect the principles that are laid out in the framework. Our approach is, of course, about more than having the right strategies and plans in place. It is also about taking action to help to deliver economic growth, such as strengthening the transport infrastructure to a degree that has never happened before, extending broadband coverage, promoting enterprise in education in all our schools, providing more than 30,000 modern  apprenticeships throughout Scotland, promoting excellence in further and higher education and supporting business start-ups by young people. John Scott seems to have missed the announcement on business start-up support that was made during the summer, so I will remind him of it. We will provide £6.6 million for grants to young entrepreneurs aged 18 to 30 and additional support for business start-ups through Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust. In those and a range of other areas, we are taking action to deliver on our ambitions to grow the Scottish economy.

I know that the Executive works well and works fast, but as the announcement was made only on 28 July, even I would not expect a tremendous difference in the rate of business start-up success over the past six weeks. If Mr Scott looks ahead, I am sure that he will see the benefits coming through not only in his area but throughout Scotland. Christine May put the case for coal in the context of our targets for reducing CO 2 . We recognise the potential of new technologies in power generation and the potential of co-firing and other methods. I met the new UK minister of state with responsibility for energy, Mike O'Brien, earlier this week, and I am happy to undertake to continue our dialogue with the Department of Trade and Industry on the whole range of energy issues. I would welcome a positive approach to the British electricity trading and transmission arrangements from all members and recognition that giving Scottish power generators access to English markets is an enormous benefit, no matter the outcome of the current consultation on transmission charges. Looking ahead, we anticipate taking action on a range of other areas in the next period. We look forward to confirming the competitive position and advantage of Scottish higher and further education and to producing our detailed green jobs strategy to help to position Scotland as a world leader in that field and exploit the enormous economic opportunities that exist. We also look forward to our intermediary technology institutes, which are funded through Scottish Enterprise, beginning to produce the benefits that we expect of them. We believe that Scotland's people need opportunities for good jobs, for entrepreneurship, for lifelong learning and to achieve their ambitions. We believe that economic growth is fundamental to achieving those ambitions by enriching life for everyone and working to the benefit of the many,  not the few. That is why economic growth is and will remain our top priority, to ensure that we generate that prosperity and that it is shared by more people throughout Scotland. Those are the right ambitions and I commend them to Parliament.

Will the member give way?

Frances Curran made the point that capital investment is critical to competitiveness and productivity. In what is clearly a global market for capital investment, what are her proposals for attracting private capital to Scotland?

Jim Wallace has said that we will achieve broadband access for every community in Scotland by the end of next year.

Will Shiona Baird accept that the vast majority of our marine energy potential lies off the north and west coasts of Scotland, and that it is connecting the Highlands and Islands to the rest of the UK that will provide the biggest possible support for the development of marine energy?

Will Murdo Fraser accept that, in the section of the report to which he refers, out of the 10 criteria on which that assessment is made, eight are based on subjective survey material, with only two being based on objective criteria?

Mr Mather says that he is innocent of the charge of talking Scotland down. In that case, in commenting on the Deputy First Minister's speech, will he say whether he welcomes the rate of 70 per cent broadband coverage, the £3 billion of investment in transport and the highest employment rate in Scotland's history?

I, too, congratulate Bill Butler on securing the debate. The Scottish ministers are aware of the excellent work of citizens advice bureaux throughout Scotland and of Citizens Advice Scotland. Only last week, Margaret Curran met Kaliani Lyle, the chief executive of Citizens Advice Scotland. I understand that the meeting was constructive.  As other members have declared an interest in the debate, I confess that I was for some time a member of the management committee of Aberdeen citizens advice bureau. Therefore, like other members, I have seen at first hand the work that CABx do and the particular challenges that they face in the delivery of services. There are many examples of fruitful relationships between Government and CABx. Several Scottish Executive departments work with CABx to support the delivery of services where, how and when people need them. Citizens Advice Scotland receives core funding from the UK Department of Trade and Industry, which reflects the role of bureaux in addressing issues such as consumer credit, welfare benefits and employment issues. I assure members that we keep in close touch with colleagues in the UK Government on consumer credit and other issues. I agree with the points that a number of members made about the growing importance of debt in the work of CABx and in the priorities that Government sets. Members have described the growing burden of debt, the growing borrowing commitments that many people, particularly those with low incomes, face and the critical importance of free and high-quality money advice to allow people to take control of and do something about their situation.

The important thing is that the money is there for a purpose. The purpose of the funding is to address debt issues where they arise, and the money has been distributed on that basis. It is right that decisions about how the funding is provided should often be made at a local level. It is because of the Executive's recognition of the growing burden of debt and its pressure on communities throughout Scotland that significant funds have been put in place. There is £3 million of on-going funding, which provides for 120 money advisers across Scotland, half of whom are based in the voluntary sector, including in CABx. Earlier this year, Mary Mulligan announced a funding package of an additional £4 million to support money advice in Scotland further. Such funding is often directed towards specific advice projects for vulnerable groups such as lone parents, people with learning disabilities, young people and minority ethnic groups.  We want to ensure that resources are available to meet increasing demands. Therefore, £2 million of the additional funding will be distributed through the money advice sector to help meet demand arising from the introduction of the debt arrangement scheme, which will provide a positive opportunity for managed repayment of multiple debt while protecting the debtor from enforcement action. As Jackie Baillie mentioned, that will be backed up with research to identify precisely where issues are arising. We want to help improve the quality of advice that CABx and others are able to provide, recognising the critical importance of training for those who work in the sector. We are therefore providing support for money advice training, resources, information and consultancy services—MATRICS. The matter of varying levels of support from local councils to local CABx has been raised. It is right that local authorities should provide the core funding for CABx, because councils are best placed to decide on the allocation of resources according to the needs of local areas. In general, councils recognise the quality of service that their communities receive from CABx. We believe that both councils and bureaux should build on that and that they should work together to resolve any issues that have arisen, whether they be around funding or around other factors. The Executive does not take a line and intervene on such discussions, which are clearly best conducted at local level. We are keen to support advice services that are delivered where and when they are most needed. I think that it was Bill Butler who referred to the in-court advice service, which is an excellent example of a service that has been developed from a focus on the needs of the client being met where that is most required. That makes high-quality advice available to people who might approach a court of law feeling unprepared for the experience and unaware of the advice that they can receive. I was delighted to join in the launch of the Aberdeen court advice project, in my constituency, earlier this year. Such projects are funded in every sheriffdom in Scotland through the Justice Department. They are an indication of our commitment to access to justice, and they represent a recognition that CABx, which run the majority of projects, are well placed to assist with that. Hospitals, like courts, are places where people end up in distress, often unprepared and often with issues on which they need advice. That advice can make a tremendous difference to the outcome of their visit. I am delighted that the health ministers have agreed to fund Citizens  Advice Scotland to develop a model for an independent advice and support service for those wishing to raise concerns in the national health service; that will give valuable support to many people who are going through difficult periods in their lives. We recognise that the services that are provided by CABx would not exist without volunteers. We recognise the crucial role that volunteers play in CABx and across the sector. At the same time, CABx are rightly proud of the professionalism of the service that they provide to people throughout the country.  I acknowledge the hard work and commitment of the citizens advice bureaux and their staff, which has been highlighted by members today and celebrated through advice week. The dedication and motivation of those who work in the bureaux make the most difference to the lives of their clients and of many people who are facing issues in Scotland today.  Meeting closed at 17:54.

The Scottish energy efficiency office offers energy and waste audits to small firms, including retail businesses, and can provide interest-free loans to businesses to improve their energy efficiency. Small firms also benefit from rates relief of between 5 and 50 per cent and have access to many of the business support services that the Scottish Enterprise network provides.

The planning policy that applies to the retail sector supports development in city centres. It is clearly in the interests of smaller businesses and established businesses that that should continue to be the basis on which local authorities make judgments about applications of the kind that Mr Ballard describes. As far as other costs are concerned, in many cities—including my own—small businesses have banded together in city centre associations to provide mutual support for members in addressing some of their common concerns.

We are promoting the development of renewables in a number of ways, including the renewables obligation on electricity suppliers to source more electricity from renewable sources, the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative and the work of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, which seeks to accelerate the development of emerging technologies such as marine energy, biomass and hydrogen.

Maureen Macmillan is absolutely right to say that, if Scotland is to realise its potential in renewable energy, particularly in the north and west of the country, the upgrading of the national grid will be an absolutely essential requirement. That is subject to a statutory process—specifically, consents have to be sought under section 37 of the Electricity Act 1989. Any consent would be given only after careful consideration, taking into account environmental impacts and the interests of communities, as well as the requirements of national energy policy.

We have set a target for 40 per cent of all electricity that is generated in Scotland to be from renewable sources by 2020. How that relates to the retiral of existing power stations will depend on the number and nature of renewable projects that are brought forward, as well as on other changes to energy markets and technologies over the intervening period.

We will continue to seek to make energy efficiency savings at the consumer end because it is clear that that is where energy is used—it is not used at the point of generation, but at the point of consumption. Therefore, our focus is rightly on households and businesses. Last year alone, the Scottish energy efficiency office saved Scottish businesses £12 million off the bottom line, which represents savings of more than 200,000 tonnes of carbon emissions that would otherwise have been produced. That is rightly our focus in promoting energy efficiency.

I am afraid that I cannot give the member a quick answer to his first question. However, as I had a suspicion that some such  question might be asked, I worked out that the wind power applications that the Executive has approved in the past 18 months alone are equivalent to roughly half the generation capacity of Torness power station. That gives the member an idea of what we need to do and the progress that we have made. The equivalent to Torness would be something in the order of 500 turbines of the most modern variety. Clearly, we face a big task, but the number of successful applications that are going through the system is encouraging and gives us great confidence that we will reach our renewables target by the end of the decade.

It has been good to have an opportunity to focus on the successes of the Highlands and Islands economy and on some of the challenges that lie ahead. As has been said, there is much to be positive about in the Highlands and Islands. There are attractive places to live and work; technology that enables enterprise to locate in the area; an increasing population; and in many regards a broadening business base. There is diversity; there are companies, jobs and prosperity. Our challenge is to build on that. It was fascinating to hear Jim Mather and Fergus Ewing explaining their rejection of "A Smart, Successful Scotland"—a strategy that Andrew Wilson supported and warmly endorsed many times in the Parliament when he was the SNP's economic spokesman.

That makes not one but two U-turns by Jim Mather in the debate. He has gone from saying that he no longer supports the smart, successful strategy to taking the opposite position. Jim Mather told us that his party plans to introduce a compulsion for young people to return to the Highlands and Islands after they have left. Although he used the word "compulsion", he did not say what form it would take. He also  suggested that there was no way of measuring the success of "A Smart, Successful Scotland", but there are many such measures. Just one example is the proportion of businesses that trade online—which is very important for the Highlands and Islands—as reported year on year. Jim Mather will be interested to learn that the latest figures show that, according that measure, Scotland was ahead not only of the rest of Britain, but of many of our international competitors, such as the USA. That strategy is delivering. To build on that strength, this week we announced our new targets for the roll-out of broadband. Rob Gibson complained that yet another broadband announcement was being made. We made yet another announcement because earlier this year we met yet another target ahead of schedule. That means that we can now seek to provide broadband access to every Scottish community by the end of next year. That should be welcomed by all parties.

If Rob Gibson had been listening, he would know that the commitment was that broadband would be available to every community by the end of this year. Only this week, my colleague the Deputy First Minister had a meeting with British Telecommunications and learned that it is considering Stromness as a priority in that roll-out process. [ Interruption. ]

As for the Tory speeches, it was a bit rich for Murdo Fraser to boast about his party's contribution to the success of Highlands and Islands Enterprise, given that the Conservative's enterprise strategy nowadays is based so firmly on hostility to the enterprise networks. Once again, we heard the bizarre proposition that it is possible to promote renewable energy in theory while, in practice, opposing the roll-out of wind power and the many jobs that it brings. Eleanor Scott said much that I could agree with about community enterprise and the importance of the Highlands and Islands buildings and their strengths, but she appeared to say that Inverness Medical was not the kind of business that we should seek to attract. If she believes that those jobs are important to the Highlands, she should acknowledge that it is important that politicians of all parties welcome such enterprises and investments when they speak about them in public places.

The important thing is not just to welcome such developments at the time, but to continue to welcome them and to make the businesses concerned feel welcome in the Highlands and elsewhere. I was pleased that Ted Brocklebank and Mary Scanlon both appeared to recognise the merits of land reform and the positive influence on policy debate in the Highlands and Islands of "The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil". That is a good thing. The Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 is designed precisely to help rural communities throughout Scotland to overcome barriers to economic development by encouraging diversity of ownership. The community and crofting community rights to buy in parts 2 and 3 of that act will be implemented later this month, which will allow communities to make those decisions to strengthen their economic position. To sustain the progress that is being made through having the right land ownership and the right economic strategy, we need to take further action to provide good-quality, affordable housing, as Sylvia Jackson and several other members have said. That is why, through Communities Scotland's rural development programme, we are providing £65 million this year to support regeneration and to provide new and improved housing throughout rural Scotland. We are also examining the operation of the Scottish housing market—

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. We are also examining the operation of the housing market, reviewing affordable housing supply and identifying ways to address the imbalance between supply and demand. We are committed to taking new action to ensure that affordable housing of the right size, type, tenure and quality is provided in the right places in future. We have already announced an additional £20 million of funding to act this year on any requirements that emerge from that review.

There is wide awareness in the Executive and in Scottish Water of the  importance of addressing those issues, and my ministerial colleagues will continue to take those matters forward. A number of members have highlighted the importance of transport infrastructure. That is why ministers have commissioned a route action plan on the A82 and why we are committed to improvements on the A9 at the Ord of Caithness and elsewhere. In recognition of the range of priorities in the Highlands and Islands, we work with local partners in the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership on identifying and meeting those priorities—for example, work is progressing on the air network study. Another example is that of improvements to the instrument landing system at Inverness airport, which Kenny MacAskill mentioned. The last delay to those improvements was an unresolved stopping-up order on a minor road close to the runway, but I confirm that ministers resolved that matter earlier this week and that the project will now go ahead. Along with Highlands and Islands Enterprise and many other stakeholders, we believe that renewable energy will be hugely beneficial for the economy of Scotland, including the economy of the Highlands and Islands. We recognise that the ambitious targets that we have set for renewable energy will be achieved only if we are able to develop new renewable energy technologies in Scotland. Wave and tidal stream technologies are critical to the exploitation of our renewable energy potential, and the Highlands and Islands are particularly critical to that. We also agree with the point that was made about the importance of upgrading the national grid to ensure that the additional power from renewable energy is delivered to the market. We also need further development of the existing renewable energy technologies: onshore wind and hydro power. Those technologies are already available in the Highlands and Islands, as they are elsewhere, and the opportunities that arise from them are already being exploited. When I addressed the "All-Energy Opportunities" conference in Aberdeen last week, I was struck by the number of Highland companies and individuals who are already immersed in the renewables industry—the jobs that already exist in Kintyre and the potential for jobs in Nigg, Stornoway and other places have also been mentioned. In Aberdeen last week, I announced that we will shortly consult on proposals to provide additional income for councils that deal with the largest wind farm proposals to ensure that all such proposals can be dealt with efficiently and effectively. Land and housing, and energy and jobs remain critical issues for the Highlands and Islands, and particular issues remain for the more remote communities, which is why we have built on the  successes for many such areas of the initiative at the edge. We will continue to work with our partners in Highlands and Islands Enterprise, local enterprise companies, local government, large and small businesses and communities to ensure that the Highlands and Islands continue to build on such successes and go from strength to strength.

I welcome and share Ted Brocklebank's recognition of the seminal importance of "The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil". Does he recall that the central message of that play was the importance of land reform and community land ownership?

Will the member join me in welcoming the investments that have been made in the new airport terminals at Stornoway and Kirkwall, in the new causeways at Eriskay and Berneray and in the new ferry infrastructure at Stornoway, Hatston and Scrabster?

Is Mr Mather telling us that the SNP's U-turn on "A Smart, Successful Scotland" is entirely down to Andrew Neil?

Although petrochemicals industry support is a reserved matter, both the Scottish Executive and Scottish Enterprise Forth Valley are working to achieve a sustainable future for petrochemicals at Grangemouth in view of the industry's importance to the local and national economy.

At Cathy Peattie's invitation yesterday, I was happy to meet trade union representatives from the plant. They carefully explained their concerns to me. On the basis of that discussion, I undertake that ministers will write to Lord Browne—the chief executive of BP—to explore with him how the efficiencies that have been gained through the integration of the three existing business streams at Grangemouth will be protected under the company's current proposals.

Inevitably, Jim Mather's closing speech took us from the issue of skills and training to the issue of the devolution settlement. Of course, the issue before us is not what alterations Jim Mather would like to make to that settlement but how best to use the tools that we have. He asked what is different about Scotland. If he had listened carefully to what business said at the recent business in Parliament event that took place in the chamber a few weeks ago, he would have heard that what is different about Scotland is that we have a world-beating reputation for education and skills. Many people have said that that is why companies choose to do business here. The question for the Parliament and the Executive is how we maintain that world-beating reputation and adapt it to meet the needs of the 21 st century. The vital contribution that skills and learning make to economic growth and to social justice was widely acknowledged in the debate. Much agreement has been expressed about many of the measures that we have taken and proposed to promote skills and learning. However, some members have offered false choices. For example, a choice does not have to be made between improving soft skills and responding to industries' specific needs. We must do both. That is why Futureskills Scotland plays such an important role. Not only has it talked to employers to identify and address skills gaps and shortages, but it is conducting research on core skills and soft skills, which I have no doubt will be extremely useful and will be available to us soon. A choice does not have to be made between a skills strategy and a lifelong learning strategy. I  repeat that "Life through Learning; Learning through Life" offers a coherent and comprehensive response to the report on lifelong learning that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee produced in the previous session. When we published our lifelong learning strategy, that marked an important step in meeting the committee's aspiration to make the learning nation a reality. The strategy takes a learner-centred approach and places a strong focus on skills, knowledge and inclusion. Many of its key commitments are aimed at bringing more people into learning and helping them to stay there.

The figures that we published today have several features. I am sure that Fiona Hyslop will agree that the clear overall trend remains upwards. The fluctuations in the number of part-time students who undertake higher education courses at further education colleges are nothing new and are not in themselves surprising. We want to ensure the maximum uptake of such opportunities and the maximum articulation from further education to higher education. That is why we have paid close attention to such issues recently. The learner-centred approach in our lifelong learning strategy will tackle literacy and numeracy issues. We will introduce education maintenance allowances, which Bill Butler mentioned, and we will widen access to further and higher education. We believe that all that will help to redress the balance between those who achieve their potential and those who do not. We have established the lifelong learning forum to ensure that we have the best advice on implementing our strategy. I am sorry that Fiona Hyslop reported difficulty in accessing information about that forum. There is no secret; it is a body that brings together people from many sectors of business and from learning and training providers. The forum will shortly establish its own website, which will remove any remaining uncertainty on Ms Hyslop's part. It will publish its first report next month and it will meet again very soon. If she wants to know more, she has only to ask. It is important not to be pushed into a false choice between developing learner aptitude—soft skills, some might say—in the early years and  investing in supporting adults and in continued learning. We need to do both. We have sharp demographic challenges, which have been mentioned. They cannot be met by investment only in the very young or, equally, without improving our young people's skills and investing in pre-school education. That is why our range of policies and pipeline of support for learning are important. Members have discussed the schools and colleges review and Brian Monteith asked about the GTCS's involvement in that. Great care has been taken to involve the GTCS in the consultation. It was given, and took, the opportunity to publish unedited its response to the consultation. We will continue to work closely with the GTCS and trade unions on how we implement the review of the relationship between schools and colleges. The governance of FE colleges has been mentioned. It is true that FE boards are required to include members with professional and business experience, as Frances Curran said, but it is not true to say that that experience is confined to the private sector. It is found in the public and voluntary sectors and we encourage colleges to draw on whatever expertise will help them to make the choices that they must make to deliver proper and relevant courses to their students. It was no doubt informative to debate the roles of FE colleges and the enterprise networks in ensuring that training provision meets the needs of business, but the key is to ensure that all stakeholders have a say and work together. The sector skills network is critical to achieving that. Sector skills councils draw on the expertise of employers and unions to work with trainers and learning providers and to ensure that the training that we provide is fit for purpose. Modern apprenticeships are a key part of that training and a vital source of skills development for industry. We have placed great importance on the provision of apprenticeships to supply the skills that Scottish industry needs. Murdo Fraser was right to say that a previous Government introduced modern apprenticeships—it had to do so, because it had allowed traditional apprenticeships to wither away. When we passed our target of 30,000 modern apprenticeships earlier this month, that meant that we had increased by six times the number of apprentices in training since 1997. Most of those apprentices are young people, but it is worth remembering that apprenticeships provide an opportunity for older people to upgrade their skills. Modern apprenticeships have shown that learning and sustainable development go hand in hand. I am delighted to report that the first modern apprenticeship scheme in the United Kingdom for  nuclear decommissioning is based at Dounreay. That is another example of the benefit that our modern apprenticeship schemes can bring to working people in Scotland. Christine May and others asked about the relationship between further and higher education in relation to the consultation on the bill to complete the merger of the funding councils. The new funding council will not have a central planning role; that will continue to be the role of individual institutions. Like its predecessors, the new council will take a strategic lead on issues such as quality, coherence and new institutional models. The merger is not intended to impinge on academic freedom. The higher education framework that we produced last year made clear our continuing commitment to that academic freedom. In fact, the proposed bill will extend to FE colleges some of the academic freedoms that universities enjoy. We do not intend to change the status of universities or FE colleges. Of course, learning is not just about further and higher education, important though that is. The debate has—correctly—focused on other sectors of learning and skills provision. We want to create a culture of lifelong learning. We use learndirect Scotland as our one-stop shop for encouraging people into learning and as a broker, through its network of 450 learning centres, to make access easier for all people of all generations. Tomorrow is silver surfers day and will mark the increasing uptake of access to information technology skills that learndirect Scotland has provided to the older generation. I listened carefully to Adam Ingram's comments on learners with additional needs. He made important points that I am happy to consider and I will respond to him in due course. Christine Grahame asked about BALSA in the Scottish Borders and ALFiE. Having checked since we had our exchange earlier, I can tell her that they are not listed on the learndirect Scotland database because they are learner forums rather than learning providers. However, the learning providers that are listed in the database will refer inquirers to appropriate sources of guidance, information and support. One of my senior officials will chair an information, advice and guidance delivery group that will meet next week and will consider ways of improving the delivery of learndirect Scotland services to such forums. The lives of many individuals, even those of quite an advanced age, have been changed by the opportunity to re-enter learning and to learn new skills. Such learning contributes to sustainable development and I have no doubt that our green jobs strategy will identify sectors in which Scotland can prosper industrially and economically and, therefore, sectors in which additional skills will be  required. Skills and learning are important for industry and contribute to growth in the economy. In winding up, I can only repeat my invitation to those members who want to take advantage of some learning opportunities themselves to do so. A tutorial on basic sign language—courtesy of Deaf Action—will be held in the chamber at 12.45 pm, and I hope that colleagues from all parties will take advantage of that opportunity to learn a new skill. I hope that colleagues will also take advantage of learndirect Scotland's mobile learning station, which is at the Parliament this week. It is clear that the importance of learning and skills is recognised on all sides of the chamber. I welcome the constructive nature of the debate that we have had on the subject today.

I am surprised that Mr Mundell does not recognise the work of the committee within the body of the lifelong learning strategy, which was produced in response to the report to which David Mundell and Fiona Hyslop referred.

I know that Christine Grahame was not here for the initial speeches, but  she should be aware that there is a national learning opportunities database, which learndirect Scotland provides, and which should provide—

I can check that.

Jack McConnell was, of course, right to say that such matters are worthy of debate. Will Murdo Fraser tell us, as his contribution to the debate, what he would do instead of using the enterprise networks to ensure that training providers are responsive to the business community's needs?

Does Fiona Hyslop accept that "Life through Learning; Learning through Life" places a great deal of emphasis on the skills agenda and constitutes a strategy that links skills to the wider economic strategy that the Executive has set out?

Could Ms Hyslop outline the respects in which she believes universities stand to lose academic independence and choice under the proposals that are being consulted on?

I am delighted that we are able to mark adult learners week and national learning at work day by debating in the Scottish Parliament the vital issues of skills and continued learning. At the end of this morning's parliamentary business, there will be a tutorial on basic sign language here in our temporary debating chamber. Later today, members may spot learndirect Scotland's mobile learning centre outside the Hub. This afternoon, I shall visit the first fire station in Scotland to take part in national learning at work day and, this evening, I shall present the John Smith award as part of the adult learners week awards in Dundee. That programme of events is designed to highlight the opportunities for adults to continue to learn or to return to learning, which in turn is an important part of our overall strategy to promote skills and lifelong learning. The amendment in the name of Fiona Hyslop complains that our lifelong learning strategy is somehow separate from our strategy for a smart, successful Scotland. I want to show today that, in fact, the opposite is the case. Growing the economy is our top priority. We have set out clearly what we believe Scotland needs if we are to achieve that. The chief methods of growing the economy, as identified in "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks", include improving our global connections, supporting businesses to grow and improving our knowledge and skills. Whatever we do to refresh our enterprise strategy, we will not move away from those fundamental objectives. We will improve our knowledge and skills in a strategic way, as set out in "Life through Learning; Learning through Life". That strategy, which is precisely what Fiona Hyslop's amendment suggests that we lack, is for delivering knowledge and skills in order to support economic growth.  Our lifelong learning strategy affirms that it is essential to continue to invest in developing the knowledge and skills of every individual, to enhance employability and to equip people for the challenges of the future, thereby allowing them to contribute to Scotland's economic prosperity. The way in which individuals take up those opportunities and make those contributions will be different in each and every case. For some, it will mean taking the traditional academic route—our world-class universities are ideally placed to support those people. For many others, vocational education and training will offer the best way forward. That is why we are continuing to develop and implement policies that are designed to support vocational skills and learning. The question is not either having world-class universities or being at the cutting edge for training and skills globally. Scotland can have both and that is our aim. For each individual, there is a pathway through the qualifications system that will deliver the greatest value to him or her and ultimately to the economy. Vocational skills are in no sense a second-class way in which to make that contribution. A skilled work force is a productive one that will enable Scotland to gain and retain a vital competitive edge. If we are to continue to build and retain a skilled work force, we must recognise that adults and young people need the opportunities and encouragement to learn and develop throughout their lives.

I would not want to comment in Parliament on an individual case. Elaine Smith should take up the case that has been raised with her by writing to the appropriate minister. However, I echo what she says: I, too, have met people who have overcome sometimes significant disabilities in order to make progress, either in the academic sphere, like the young man whom Elaine Smith describes, or in obtaining apprenticeships. It is striking just how many young people have made the effort to do that and have succeeded. We want all our young people to be work smart from an early age, to enable them to be enterprising and active citizens who can grasp the  opportunities that exist for them and come to an early understanding of the demands of the world of work. That is why we put in place the strategy "Determined to Succeed: Enterprise in Education", to which we are committing more than £40 million over three years. Through that strategy, young people at schools across Scotland will have the opportunity to participate in a range of enterprising and entrepreneurial education and work-based vocational learning throughout their school lives, to embed key messages, skills and positive attitudes about the world of work. That will require a real commitment from the education and business communities to work together, sharing good practice and expertise and ensuring that teachers and business people understand each other's needs and share the opportunities. I pay tribute to the many business people who have already made that commitment, from the Hunter Foundation's £2 million investment in the programme outlined in "Determined to Succeed", to individual decisions to adopt a school and to create relationships such as that between Kerr-McGee and Portlethen Academy, which I witnessed for myself in Aberdeen a couple of weeks ago.

Fiona Hyslop makes an important point, which illustrates exactly why we want to engage with the business community. The CBI's interest in matter reflects the willingness of many in the business community to address the issue. That is certainly an area in which we wish to make further progress. We also wish to make progress in enabling 14 to 16-year-olds to develop vocational skills and to improve their employment prospects, by allowing them to undertake courses in further education colleges as part of the school-based curriculum. For that reason, I am happy to accept the amendment in the name of Murdo Fraser, which emphasises that point, although I should point out that the policy is already contained in the partnership agreement. We are convinced that vocational learning will increase pupil choice by offering school curriculum flexibility. Vocational learning has proved popular with pupils and employers in preparing young people for the transition to the world of work. Since the election, we have launched our schools and colleges review, putting pupils at the heart of the review and considering with school pupils and others how to improve school-college collaboration further by managing supply and  demand and by ensuring that pupil welfare and support are fully taken into account.

As Sylvia Jackson says, it is important that we have that balance and that we recognise that vocational skills development is part of a continuing school education curriculum. We must assist children and young people in making the best prepared and informed choices when they come to leave school. Careers Scotland clearly has an important role to play. We continue to support the pioneering development and implementation of the Scottish credit and qualifications framework to provide all learners with a transparent and accessible guide to the landscape of qualifications in Scotland. Co-operation between Careers Scotland, learndirect Scotland and Futureskills Scotland is directed towards providing a seamless service to learners that allows them to make informed learning choices and learndirect Scotland has put in place a national database of learning opportunities, which we think will be valuable. We are also working with the enterprise networks to re-engineer work-based training for young people. We have made good progress with the modern apprenticeship programme—we announced earlier this month that we had passed our target of having 30,000 apprentices in training, two years ahead of schedule.

It is worth considering who is going through apprenticeships. The largest category of apprentices is in the construction sector, which no one would dispute is a critical area of need for the Scottish economy. It is important that the apprenticeship training that is provided is responsive to changes in the wider economy and in the demands of employers. The work of the further education sector in responding to the changing demands of employers and in ensuring that needs in the wider economy are met is also important in that respect. It is worth noting  the progress that has been made with modern apprenticeships. The best of those programmes have achieved high levels of completion and positive outcomes, but we now want to focus on improvements throughout the range of apprenticeship programmes.

I agree with Jamie Stone about the importance of being able to meet that demand. The Executive is working with the enterprise networks and the FE sector to ensure that modern apprenticeships continue to respond to needs and that they improve their response where needs have not yet been met. The Executive is also working to improve education in the workplace through the Scottish union learning fund. I was delighted last month to launch a round 4 project, led by ASLEF and the rail unions, and, later this week, I will visit a learning day, organised by Unison, towards the end of one of its union learning programmes. That method of supporting learning has allowed us to use trade unions' membership, connections and credibility in the workplace. In many cases, trade unions have recruited employers to the learning process. That is an important contribution. The unions are particularly interested in the introduction in Scotland of individual learning accounts, which will be available from this summer. ILAs are designed to help new learners into learning and to help people to return to learning. Training and development are also crucial for small businesses. The Executive has begun to pilot business learning accounts to encourage more small businesses to train and develop their staff and we have made funding available for training access points for small companies. We are working jointly with UK colleagues to develop the skills for business network. That will allow all our employers the opportunity to feed into the sector skills councils, which determine the content of apprenticeship programmes. I spoke to the Sector Skills Development Agency before its board meeting in Glasgow on Tuesday and it was clear that it has a strong commitment to the particular needs of the Scottish economy. With a national learning at work day, in adult learners week, at which people throughout the  country can celebrate learning and try out new skills, there is much that we can continue to develop and that will continue to bring real benefits for individuals and for the wider economy.

I was not at the lecture, but a number of colleagues were. As with all the lectures in the Allander series, I understand that that one was thought provoking and useful. There is clearly a debate to be had. The Executive recognises the importance of early-years skills and early-years training, but we also recognise the urgent necessity for Scotland to address skills issues with its existing adult population, as with the existing school-leaving population. The issue is not about concentrating on one generation, but about providing support for skills across the board. Futureskills Scotland is doing good work in identifying the skills gaps in the labour market and in working with the sector skills councils and other training providers to ensure that those skills gaps are filled. The Executive wants to be ambitious for Scotland and to ensure that our policies work hard to maximise the contributions that individuals can make. However, we also want to ensure that we get the most out of our people in order to grow our economy, strengthen social justice and create a sustainable future for Scotland in the 21 st century. I believe—and my colleagues are clear—that the wide agenda of knowledge and skills is critical to achieving that. I move, That the Parliament supports Scottish Executive initiatives, such as the Scottish Union Learning Fund, the Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework and the Determined to Succeed programme, to ensure the provision of effective skills and learning opportunities that will allow more people to play a full and productive role in the workplace and in the community; recognises the vital contribution that skills and learning make in helping to stimulate sustainable economic growth and to close the opportunity gap, and congratulates all those involved in the Modern Apprenticeship programme, which has exceeded its target of having 30,000 apprentices in training two years ahead of schedule.

We will continue to engage with the Treasury and the Scotch whisky industry on the proposed introduction of tax stamps in two years' time.

I am sure that Brian Monteith does not expect the Scottish Executive to take the place of the UK Government in making its estimates of the fraud. No one disputes that significant levels of fraud exist in the spirits industry, hence the case for the introduction of tax stamps. The National Audit Office has taken a clear view of the estimates from the whisky industry and HM Customs and Excise. It has said that, although those estimates require further work, they are within the possible range of accuracy. In other words, although the NAO has not dismissed either set of figures, it has said that both are only a snapshot of a wide range and that much more work needs to be done. I recognise the validity of that view. Given that it is not proposed to introduce the stamps until April 2006, there is an opportunity for the NAO and the Treasury to look closely at the figures.

We are talking to our colleagues in the Treasury about the economic implications of their proposals. As we have described in the chamber in the past, we are making the case that we want the Treasury to talk to the industry about how fraud can be tackled in a way that does not impose undue compliance costs on the industry. There is broad agreement about what the compliance costs might be, although there is a difference at the margins between the two estimates. We are talking to the Treasury about that. We recognise, of course, that it is for the Treasury to make a decision on the stamps, but we believe that, if it proceeds with them, it should use a mechanism that will minimise the impact on the industry. The Treasury should reach agreement with the industry about the most effective way of implementing tax stamps.

It was striking that the Scottish Affairs Committee's summary of the position identified 17 different options suggested by the industry and by people such as John McFall who are advocates for the industry. I am sure that all those suggestions will be on the table at some point in the discussions that are going forward. We  will continue to work closely with the industry on those matters. It is worth acknowledging John McFall's efforts to get those arguments across at the highest level in the United Kingdom Government.

We support the Scotch whisky industry in a number of ways within the context of the framework document "A Toast to the Future", which we issued in November 2000. When I met the Scotch Whisky Association in March, we agreed that we should revisit that document in the near future.

Both the Government and members of the Parliament can do a good many things. Indeed, Jamie Stone's raising of that question is an effective way of drawing to people's attention the significance of the whisky industry, which makes a substantial contribution to gross domestic product and to our export earnings. The industry also gives rise to a significant amount of employment, particularly in constituencies such as Jamie Stone's—I know that he is familiar with the Glenmorangie spirit, for example, which comes from his part of the country, and I am sure that he will continue to promote that product in the way that he has done in the past.

I, too, congratulate Dennis Canavan on lodging the motion. I acknowledge the efforts that elected representatives in the Falkirk area have made to work with the Government to secure the future of manufacturing jobs at the TransBus plant and elsewhere. The motion talks about the important contribution that TransBus workers make to the local economy and to the wider Scottish economy, which several members mentioned. That is true in three respects, the first of which concerns manufacture and export. Dennis Canavan said that TransBus is the leading provider of buses in the United Kingdom. That is correct. It is also one of the leading providers in Europe, so it is a significant contributor to the Scottish manufacturing sector, which remains of core importance to our economy. The orders that the company places are important. Alex Neil and Cathy Peattie talked about the company's expenditure locally and more widely. The income in the pockets of the work force and the local spend that that produces is also important. We echo the points that have been made about that. Because we recognise the significance of those three matters, immediately after the announcement of administration was made on 31 March, we sought clarification of the implications for TransBus operations in Scotland. That was to help us to find ways to sustain activity and jobs. My colleague Jim Wallace, the Deputy First Minister, engaged in some of the meetings. Officials from Scottish Development International—which is the body that is responsible for dealing with the company in its international aspect—and Scottish Enterprise Forth Valley have regularly been in touch with the company, the work force through its trade unions, and other interested parties. We have stressed our commitment to work with any potential buyer and to explore whatever avenues might be available for support and assistance to a potential buyer. There has also been close contact with Deloitte & Touche, which is the administrator. Jim Wallace met Deloitte & Touche representatives on 8 April to discuss prospects for the way ahead. Naturally, those discussions focused on potential support for any prospective buyer who comes forward with sustainable plans for the operations. Dennis Canavan referred to the long-standing commitment to support TransBus plans to create a new, modern manufacturing facility at Glenbervie. We believe that that is the right way for the company to go and to continue to make a contribution to the economy. In dealing with the  administrator, we have therefore made it clear that we will continue to support those plans and to offer support to any prospective new purchaser who comes forward. From the discussions that we have had with the administrators, there appear to be good prospects that operations will continue under new ownership—one or two members have reflected that. There has been significant interest in the company and in the facility at Falkirk in particular, and the administrators said to us on 22 April that they hope to dispose of the company as a going concern in a matter of weeks. This week, they confirmed that they remain hopeful that the process will be completed in May.

I share the focus on seeking to reduce redundancies wherever possible. Carolyn Leckie will appreciate that our focus, and that of Scottish agencies, is on Falkirk and Larbert and that core of manufacturing jobs in Scotland, which nobody disputes is a profitable and productive part of the company. From our perspective and that of the work force, the key priority is to ensure that that unit remains in being and retains as much employment as possible. Whatever links it might have with other parts of the existing company is an issue of secondary importance compared with that larger issue. The subject of how we have reached where we are was raised. A number of members have referred to the possibility of an inquiry. I can confirm that responsibility for that lies with the DTI and that the DTI has powers under the Companies Act 1985 to consider whether companies legislation has been properly followed in this case. I understand that the DTI is currently considering that matter. It is clear that the first concern is to maintain economic activity, employment and the company and to allow the company's growth. It is clear that the second concern is for people who have already lost their jobs, of whom there are more than 130, as has been mentioned. That has been an enormous blow for those people, as has been reflected in a number of comments. Our top priority in that regard has been to do everything possible to help those who have been affected to find other jobs as quickly as possible. As Cathy Peattie said, support services have been put in place through the PACE initiative. A future fair was held in Falkirk on 14 April, which was attended by around 80 people who were affected. Careers  Scotland, Jobcentre Plus, the local authority, the local college and others were involved to support those individuals. As a direct result of the event, PACE partners are supporting a number of people with respect to retraining opportunities and they will continue to do so. Concern was raised about a prospective buyer taking the assets and leaving the jobs in the lurch. Although it is certainly the case that under existing legislation responsibility for the matter lies with the administrators, the Enterprise Act 2003 makes it clear that the purpose of promoting company rescue should be given priority. Therefore, although safeguarding the legitimate interests of creditors is important, the 2003 act will encourage the administrators to make a viable sale to buyers who will maintain the firm in being. The question of creditors is important. The question of local suppliers has been raised and the provisions of the law are clear as far as creditors of all kinds are concerned. I suggest, however, that any firm that is adversely affected, such as those to which Cathy Peattie referred, should seek advice and guidance from the local enterprise company, which I will alert to the fact that there might be one or two firms that are looking for support. I return to the point about redundancies. The question was raised about the process that was followed. It is for the trade union to make a judgment on whether it feels that the administrators have acted properly in calling out those redundancies. Should the trade union feel that the administrators have not done so, it might wish to take the matter to an employment tribunal on behalf of its members. The employment tribunal will base its judgment on the question of whether any steps taken were necessary for the survival of the company. It is not a straightforward judgment to make, but it is principally a judgment for the trade union.  TransBus matters because it is a manufacturing centre of excellence. We want to support that. I have described how we are doing that and we will continue to work with all concerned to try to secure the best possible outcome. I do not believe that it is the endgame for bus building in Falkirk—quite the contrary. We can build on existing excellence and we will continue to work towards that end and to support the work force. The next few weeks will be critical and I hope, as a number of members have said, that we can be of one mind in seeking to support the best possible outcome for the work force and the local economy.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

The debate has highlighted the opportunities and challenges of renewable energy. It has also made it clear that our absolute commitment to maximise  renewable electricity generation in Scotland, and the opportunities for the economy that come from it, has wide support. I welcome the support that we have received from various members. However, it is clear that there are different views about how the increase in renewable electricity generation should be achieved. That is why the debate is important. The areas of agreement are significant. All parties agree that we must support the development of a range of renewables technologies if we are to meet the ambitious targets that we have set. Everyone agrees that small-scale domestic and community projects can make a significant contribution. Such projects are the focus of our highly successful Scottish community and householder renewables initiative.

Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Energy Saving Trust are working hard to promote the availability of the grants, which are significant. The issue of PPP contracts was raised earlier. There is the potential to build into those contracts standards that relate to energy efficiency or the use of renewable sources. Clearly, applications must be considered on a case-by-case basis, but we would welcome developments that give local authorities that opportunity. Some of the areas of disagreement must be addressed. It is entirely false to suggest that we are ignoring the contribution that technologies other than wind power can make. It is equally absurd to suggest that the main fault in our renewable energy strategy is that we permit too many applications to develop new wind power resources—and therefore to argue to limit the potential for development—while at the same time arguing that we should set higher targets for renewables.

We favour the use of as wide a range of renewable and associated technologies as possible.  Some of the questions that have been asked are about the use of biomass and coal. It was extraordinary to hear a Tory representative say that we needed to strengthen the British coal industry. Anyone who remembers the history of the Tories and the British coal industry will recognise the hypocrisy that that involved.

I would be astonished if Jamie Stone did not take the opportunity to mention hydrogen. He is right on that point. Hydrogen is one of the technologies that FREDS—the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland—will consider later this year, to see how we can make progress.

I want to make progress. We want to position Scotland as a renewables-friendly country. We must show that we are better placed than our competitors to attract developers and jobs in all the renewables technologies. We will fail to attract those who wish to develop the new technologies if we do not demonstrate that we are serious about renewable energy by supporting the existing commercial technologies of onshore and offshore wind power and hydro power.

It is certainly important to make the point that whether wind power, hydro power or any other energy-producing technology is involved, planning guidelines are in place to protect the environment and communities' interests, which will result in inappropriate and inadequate applications being thrown out. That is a completely different proposition from the Conservatives' proposition that wind power onshore is bad per se yet some of the other renewable technologies that have not been developed to the commercial stage are per se without fault, defect or concern. Roseanna Cunningham suggested that the planning guidelines that apply to wind power developments that local councils consider do not apply to larger developments that the Executive considers under the Electricity Act 1989. That is  not the case. Every authority that considers a planning or consent application, including ministers, must take those planning guidelines into account. The guidelines cover not only the environmental matters that Rhona Brankin mentioned, but the cumulative impact of a series of developments in the same location.

We want to encourage the development of renewable energy. We will not do that by drawing a red line around great sections of the country and saying that renewable energy shall not happen in those areas. That would send completely the wrong signal to developers and to communities and would fail to deliver on the targets that we have set. If a planning issue exists, it concerns ensuring that planning guidelines are up to date, that they reflect our objectives and that they achieve the balanced judgments that have been described. I am delighted to report that the United Kingdom Government is reviewing planning guidance on renewable energy south of the border, with a view to bringing it more into line with what we have had in the past two or three years in Scotland. We have a planning policy that supports our energy policy—that is the way it should be. Significant community benefit issues under planning policy have been raised. We look forward to seeing Highlands and Islands Enterprise's conclusions on its proposals and we have undertaken to consider how to apply the same principles in lowland Scotland once the Highlands and Islands proposals have been made. In his opening remarks, Murdo Fraser suggested that our energy strategy relies on wind power alone and that we are reluctant to talk about wind power. He was wrong in both respects. We are happy at any time to make the case for wind power as a key part of our energy strategy. It is key not only in its own right, but because it opens the door to new technologies. Alex Johnstone suggested that the timescale means that we can use only wind and hydro power to reach our targets. The targets for 2010 will rely on existing technologies—wind and hydro—but by setting for 2020 a target that is more than twice as high, we are stimulating the development of the other technologies that we need. That is why FREDS is doing such valuable work. It will report in May on what needs to be done to stimulate wave and tide power. I reassure Shiona Baird and others that Richard Yemm of Ocean  Power Delivery is chairing the FREDS marine energy group. That is the level of his commitment to Scotland and to remaining in Scotland, which we very much welcome. The sub-group on biomass energy is examining what needs to be done to encourage the use of wood fuel for electricity and heat.

I cannot take another intervention. The point that I made reflects some of the concerns and questions that have been raised. We recognise that issues beyond electricity generation exist. Biomass has the potential to address some matters such as space heating. Christine May and others asked about the fossil fuel base-load. It is worth remembering that we have approved not only more than 400MW of renewable energy in the past 18 months, but a 400MW gas-firing station, part of which will run on coal firing with renewable sources. A good deal is being done to address the security-of-supply issues that have been mentioned. Social justice has of course been mentioned. Scotland now has the highest thermal insulation standards in the UK. We have cut the number of homes with the lowest energy efficiency rating and we are working hard with the Department of Trade and Industry in considering, for example, two-way metering to enable the connection of renewables production to the grid. In response to the threat of climate change, which has rightly been highlighted as underlying the debate, we are taking a range of actions that will bring environmental benefits. Those actions will also bring Scotland economic opportunities for business and for jobs. We have a real world lead in many new technologies in the renewable energy sector and we should continue to support them. In order to do so, we should continue to make the most of the existing renewable technologies to which we have access in Scotland.

Does Ms Baird accept that the success of a Scottish renewables company in exporting its product to Portugal, which is one of our potential competitors, is a good sign of how far ahead we are in the area of technology concerned?

I hear what Roseanna Cunningham is saying. In her view, is the best way of releasing that renewables potential to make it easier to develop wind energy production or to make it more difficult?

The forum for renewable energy development in Scotland has established a sub-group, which is preparing an action plan for the development of the marine energy industry. The sub-group will report to FREDS when it meets in Aberdeen next month.

I have said many times that Scotland's economic potential in renewable energy should not be taken for granted. I agree with Shiona Baird that we need to be aware of the competition for innovation, business and jobs—that is the reality. However, we must put that competition in context. The renewables obligation certificates that are provided will support renewable energy across a range of methods of generation and will support the creation of additional capacity without a limit to that level of capacity. The tariff support that the Portuguese are providing is for the first 20MW of wave-generated power. We will consider closely the recommendations of the marine energy group next month and I have no doubt that that is one area that the group will cover. I agree with Shiona Baird that we need to keep ahead of the competition and to be aware of other players in the field.

I am sorry that Mr Fraser did not follow my evidence to the Enterprise and Culture Committee a couple of days ago, when I made it clear that wind power and hydroelectricity, for which the Executive is providing support, are part of a chain of new technologies that the Executive wants to encourage. The support that the Executive gives to the existing renewables technologies will help us to make Scotland an attractive location for the developers of new renewables technologies in future.

Does Jamie McGrigor accept that the National Audit Office said that the figures on fraud that the industry and HM Customs and Excise produced were reasonable in their approach; that the scale of fraud might, therefore, range up as far as £1,000 million; that the NAO said not, as he suggests, that the fraud was entirely overestimated, but that there was a lot of room for doubt; and that there is, therefore, room for discussion with the industry?

We have heard in the debate widespread agreement on the whisky industry's importance and on the potential impact of compliance costs on the industry. The challenge is to focus our efforts on achieving the most satisfactory outcome following the chancellor's budget statement. I am disappointed that Margaret Ewing did not take the opportunity to seek withdrawal of the amendment in Jim Mather's name. Mike Watson referred to the chancellor's budget statement of 2002. We should recognise, as Margaret Ewing did, that the chancellor's view that he wished to avoid tax stamps if he could was where the debate began, far from the bizarre version of policy making at Westminster that the SNP presented. I have outlined the efforts that the Treasury and the industry have made, with our support, to agree on several critical points, such as the scale of the problem. They have discussed recognising the reality of what is very serious fraud—contrary to one or two comments—and its consequences for Government revenues. Efforts have also been made to agree on the scale of the potential compliance costs if tax stamps are eventually introduced. As I said when I intervened on John Farquhar Munro, much agreement exists between the industry and the Treasury on what those compliance costs might be.

We have made it clear that we seek a satisfactory outcome that allows the chancellor to decide not to proceed with tax stamps and which tackles spirits duty fraud effectively. That is our preferred outcome. However, we must acknowledge that the Treasury and the industry have failed to agree on an adequate package of alternative measures that would deliver the solution to fraud in the industry. Despite that failure, there is no reason to give up and walk away. There is every reason for the industry to continue to engage with the  Government. The chancellor has decided in principle to press ahead with tax stamps but, as Jackie Baillie said, the chancellor's announcement about such fiscal marks may have flexibility. There is every evidence of flexibility in how the decision may be implemented. The industry's continuing willingness to engage with the Government was made clear to me earlier this month when I met the Scotch Whisky Association and had a detailed discussion not only about tax stamps, but about other domestic and international concerns. The industry recognises that important issues must still be addressed. Treasury ministers are alert to the concern about the impact of tax stamps on smaller distillers, which is one issue that the industry will pursue. If tax stamps were introduced, a large element of compliance costs—towards 40 per cent—would relate to cash flow. If the chancellor proceeded, the industry would want to talk about what could be done to deal with that. The Treasury has made commitments that point in the direction of addressing that aspect.

That does not take us forward on how we address the issue, which is to pursue further discussions and engage the industry. That is where I want to keep my focus. It is clear that we want to find a solution that will allow the UK Government to reverse its decision because it has negotiated with the industry an effective means of addressing the fundamental problem of tax fraud without the need for tax stamps. If that is not possible, it is essential that the dialogue continues on the technical details of the implementing regulations and on the package of measures that would be needed to mitigate the very real concerns that have been raised today. Yesterday, I spoke to the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, John Healey, as part of an on-going dialogue. I understood clearly from him that the Treasury's intention is, indeed, to monitor measures that are developed by the industry over the next two years and, if tax stamps come in, to monitor their impact.

I am seeking to describe the representations that we have made and that we will continue to make to ensure that Treasury  ministers are aware of our views on the matter. Members will understand that decisions on such matters lie with the Treasury and not with us. The representations that we are making should be seen in that context.

As I mentioned a few moments ago, I understand that the industry and the Treasury agree on the scale of the upfront capital costs as being around £23 million to £25 million. As the member knows, there is already a provision in the budget statement for capital assistance to the value of £3 million. Clearly, there is a significant difference between those figures, and it is precisely in respect of that that we will continue to talk with the industry and the Government. We and the Treasury recognise that the implications of tax stamps for the smaller companies that operate in the industry are significantly different from the implications for the larger producers, and I have no doubt that that will be one aspect of the discussions. I assure members that the Executive will continue to work with the industry and the UK Government in efforts to reach a satisfactory conclusion. I have already moved an amendment to the motion and I hope that the amended motion will attract the support of all parties.

Does John Farquhar Munro accept that there is broad agreement between the Treasury and the whisky industry about the potential compliance costs, specifically on the up-front capital costs of about £23 million to £25 million and on annual running costs in the region of £50 million or £60 million?

This debate should start from our shared recognition of the importance of Scotch whisky, and indeed of the whole spirits industry, to the Scottish economy. As Murdo Fraser said, we have debated the subject twice in the Scottish Parliament. Both times, we made clear the commitment of ministers to work with the industry to support its efforts to grow new markets and to sustain jobs, revenues and business in many parts of Scotland. The debate should also start from the position that the revenues that are raised from the industry are important to us all. Whatever the Government's policy priorities are, they cannot be delivered without the revenue being raised to pay for them. In both of the previous debates on the issue, there was wide consensus about the need to tackle fraud in duty on spirits. That need is explicit in the Executive amendment today, because to fail to acknowledge the reasons for the Treasury's decision is simply not a credible position for any of us to take. I am glad that Murdo Fraser accepts our amendment and recognises that our balanced approach is the appropriate way forward. Like him, I hope that the amended motion will attract the support of all parties. Since the issue was first raised, I have ensured that Treasury ministers are in no doubt about the  views that are held here and about the predicted impact on the producers of spirits. Of course, the matter is entirely reserved and it is for UK ministers to make the decisions, but they are fully aware of the views of Scottish ministers and the debates on the issue in the Scottish Parliament. From the chancellor's comments in the budget two years ago, we know that he was reluctant to adopt tax stamps in view of the recognised compliance costs. The Scotch Whisky Association and the Gin and Vodka Association have put considerable energy into discussions with the UK Government about various courses of action that they see as likely to be effective in tackling fraud, and some of those measures can be put in place quickly. As Jack McConnell said at the time—his words were mentioned a moment ago—it is therefore disappointing that the chancellor announced in this year's budget that the Treasury has failed to agree with the industry a suitable alternative to tax stamps and that he therefore intends to introduce tax stamps in two years' time. The industry and the UK Government recognise the importance of each other's concerns and they have tried to close the distance between them.

I share Murdo Fraser's disappointment in the way in which the SNP has chosen to approach this debate. That intervention reinforces my concern that the SNP has not taken the opportunity to support the views that have been expressed around the chamber in the past. Instead, it seeks to make party political points. The thorny issue of the level of fraud, which lies behind this debate, has been examined by the National Audit Office with the support of both the Treasury and the industry. The NAO takes the view that there is much to be said for the approaches that have been taken by both sides. There is, therefore, every reason for the industry to maintain close engagement with the Treasury and with HM Customs and Excise on the question. There is also a high level of agreement on compliance costs—again, that is thanks to work that has been done by both the UK Government and the industry. That level of agreement provides a sensible baseline for discussions about what might be done to reduce compliance costs if tax stamps go ahead. Our view is that the door is not closed on the issue. The chancellor has announced his decision, but a lot of work around implementation remains to be done. It is important to understand that if tax  stamps are to be introduced, they will not be fully introduced until 2006, when the necessary secondary legislation has been put in place. I can report that Treasury ministers intend to consult fully with the industry in advance of publication on both the enabling legislation that they intend to bring forward this year and the statutory instruments that will follow. In the meantime, a number of the measures that are proposed by the industry as effective alternatives to tax stamps will begin to take effect, and I have no doubt that the UK authorities will monitor carefully the effectiveness of those measures in combating fraud. For our part, Scottish ministers will continue to work closely with both the industry and the UK Government to try to arrive at a satisfactory outcome. In our view, the best outcome would achieve the desired aim of effectively tackling tax fraud without the need for tax stamps. If that does not prove to be possible, it will be vital to seek agreement between the industry and the UK Government on a comprehensive package of mitigating measures and a method of implementation that will cause the minimum of additional costs to the industry. We in the Scottish Executive are ready to help to facilitate those discussions and take them forward. I move amendment S2M-1116.2, to leave out from ", thereby adversely" to end and insert: "; and therefore calls on HM Treasury to engage in further discussion with the industry on the impact of these measures with a view to reaching a satisfactory outcome which deals with tax fraud and would lead to the decision being reversed, failing which to ensure that a comprehensive package of compensation measures is put in place to minimise the impact on the industry."

Does the member accept that our contacts with the United Kingdom Government on this matter have not been confined to the occasional piece of correspondence and that, in fact, I have also had conversations with the relevant Treasury minister on a number of occasions, even over the past few weeks?

Highlands and Islands Enterprise and its local enterprise companies support the development of skilled craft industries and other manufacturing in the Highlands and Islands. A range of assistance is available including advice, training and support for capital investment to improve productivity and efficiency.

I am aware of the situation of Caithness Glass and of the meeting that Jamie Stone will attend. I have spoken to the GMB, which represents staff in the Wick and Perth outlets of Caithness Glass, and I am aware of the discussions that the member alluded to regarding possible outcomes that will maintain at least part of the company in being. We are keen to ensure that the high skill levels that a number of members of staff in Caithness possess are maintained in the local economy. Next week, Jim Wallace will meet Caithness and  Sutherland Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise Tayside to discuss the various options that are available. I can confirm today that Caithness and Sutherland Enterprise has undertaken to carry out a feasibility study on plans to maintain a glass-making presence in Wick, regardless of the outcome of the discussions at Caithness Glass.

The Harris tweed industry has worked closely with Western Isles Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise on skills, among other issues. Highlands and Islands Enterprise is focused on the importance of that industry and I expect that to continue.

We will increase the number of modern apprentices in training to 30,000 a year by 2006, as outlined in the partnership agreement. We published research on modern apprenticeship completion rates yesterday and outlined how, with our delivery partners, we will further strengthen the programme by focusing on the quality of outputs as well as on the numbers in training.

We do not have a completion rate target at present, but we are talking to the enterprise networks about putting one in place. The research that was published yesterday highlighted several areas in which we can address the issue. It is important to say that although Alex Neil is quite right about the figure of 52 per cent for modern apprenticeship completions, many of those who leave their apprenticeships before they have completed them do so in order to go into further or higher education or into full-time employment of another kind. The modern apprenticeship is designed to provide transferable skills. Of course we want the highest possible completion rates, but there are other issues to be considered. We want to set a target and we are discussing that with the enterprise networks. We want to shift  the focus so that it is on the quality of the outputs as well as on the number of completions, important though that is.

Marilyn Livingstone raises two issues. First, many of those who withdraw from modern apprenticeship programmes do so to pursue other forms of learning. We want to find out why others drop out and do not complete programmes, so we have asked the enterprise networks and the modern apprenticeship implementation group to consider that and to do more work—on the back of the research that was published yesterday—to get to the bottom of the matter so that we can address it. The second issue is about people who want to enter apprenticeships and need necessary pre-apprenticeship vocational skills. We are working with the sector skills councils and the enterprise networks to re-engineer the current skillseekers programme—the pre-apprenticeship programme—to find ways of improving delivery, content and people's access to it. We are running one or two pilots to establish how quickly that can be done.

The proportion of women in modern apprenticeships is increasing. It is beginning to increase in sectors such as construction, automotive skills and other less traditionally female occupations. Clearly, there is a long way to go. It is very encouraging that the sector skills council for the construction industry has set as one of its key objectives the attraction of more women into the craft and technical aspects of the industry. We are keen to encourage the council to do that. There is a majority of women in certain construction trades, such as painting and decorating, in one or two countries in the European Union. There is no reason why we cannot increase the proportion of women in those trades. Glasgow and all the other cities in Scotland require more skilled craftspeople in construction. Clearly, having more women join the industry would help us to achieve that end.

I am surprised to hear Murdo Fraser suggest that. We include the enterprise networks in the design and management of apprenticeships precisely because of their understanding of the industrial sectors for which we are training people. All of us who believe that business should influence the training of apprentices, and that such training should meet the needs of the real economy, want to see a continued link between the enterprise networks, the private sector and further education colleges in the delivery of apprenticeship training.

The number of modern apprenticeships in the small business sector, as elsewhere, is on the increase, which is encouraging. However, I acknowledge the points that Des McNulty makes and I encourage him to encourage businesses in his constituency to make connections with the sector skills councils for their industries. By those means, as well as through the enterprise networks, employers can influence the shape of apprenticeships and can input their views on the issues that the member highlighted. We support anything that can be done to reduce bureaucracy and enable smaller firms to take advantage of the modern apprenticeships scheme.

Does Mr Ballance accept that the target of an end to the growth in municipal waste by 2010 is a significant step in that direction, that the target will be challenging and that we will have to work hard to achieve it?

The debate has been constructive. I am particularly glad that there is much support throughout the chamber for the idea of linking our waste strategy with our enterprise strategy and that there is an acknowledgment of the potential for green jobs. When we consult later this year on a green jobs strategy, we will seek views from all interested parties on how best to gain new business and new jobs from pursuing sustainable development and putting that at the heart of our drive for economic growth. It is clear that the picture is varied. In renewable energy, Scotland has the potential to lead the world, but in recycling and dealing with waste, we have a lot of catching up to do, although we have made a start.

Yes. That is an excellent example of the initiatives that are beginning to appear. Recently, I have met representatives of Remploy and the Wise Group, which employ people in recycling, some of whom are at a distance from the labour market, and United Glass Ltd in Alloa, a commercial firm that makes money from recycling used glass.

SEPA is working within the terms of the waste strategy and its requirement to interpret European legislation in that regard. There are a number of tricky issues around the margins, but the important thing is that SEPA is working on the basis of European legislation and using it as a vehicle for addressing more difficult issues.  The targets that we have set for local authorities to improve recycling and composting rates are stimulating business in those areas. I am pleased that recycling and composting rates have increased from 7.4 per cent to 9.6 per cent in a single year, in advance of the major investments that, critically, will flow from the national waste plan in the next two or three years. I turn to John Scott's speech. The Tory position appears to be that we cannot achieve our ambitious targets, so we should abandon them.

Certainly not—quite the contrary is true. I hope that we will have support from all parties. In seeking to meet the targets, we are seeking to stimulate the kind of business investment that will make what we want to achieve possible. We acknowledge the need for infrastructure, which is driven as much by European targets as by those that are set in Scotland. We believe that our targets in that regard can best be achieved by our focusing precisely on the means of doing so. We will continue to fund the Scottish waste awareness group, which was mentioned in the debate. Richard Lochhead asked what the public sector is doing to lead by example. NHS Scotland has put in place an environmental management statement, which includes commitments on waste minimisation and green procurement. The Waste and Resources Action Programme, which we fund, is working with local authorities on procurement issues, as members who were at the recent Convention of Scottish Local Authorities conference will know. The Scottish energy efficiency office, which Robin Harper mentioned, is working directly with business; its advice, like that of envirowise, is adding millions of pounds to the bottom line of companies that take that advice. I urge all companies that have not yet sought advice from either the Scottish energy efficiency office or envirowise to do so. Bruce Crawford asked what we have done recently to learn from international examples. I am sorry that he is not in the chamber to hear the reply, but I assure members that we are participating in work on new technologies and linking with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and others elsewhere. We have also met representatives of a number of international companies that are pioneering new technologies in composting and recycling. Yes, progress has been made and yes, there is  a long way to go, but rather than shying at the fence, which the Tories would have us do, we need to concentrate our efforts on achieving the goals that we have set. It is clear that if we do so, we have the potential not only to improve the environment in Scotland, but to stimulate the economy and put ourselves where we ought to be as one of the key players in the marketplace for sustainable products and processes in the future.

Does Robin Harper accept that the initiative that we, along with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, have taken in setting up a business waste-minimisation steering group for the whole of Scotland so that we can build on the achievements in Midlothian and the north-east, is a firm step in the direction in which he advocates we should go?

We welcome the debate, recognising the extent to which it touches on enterprise as well as environmental issues. It allows us to consider the practical challenges that we face in reducing waste, in increasing the sustainable reuse or disposal of waste products and in working towards containing and ending the growth in waste. We have set out a blueprint of how to achieve the best practicable environmental options in waste management in "The National Waste Plan 2003", which was published a year ago as part of our wider national waste strategy, as I am sure that Shiona Baird is aware. The waste plan sets out how we propose to minimise and prevent waste, reduce landfill and increase recycling. We believe that it is right to focus on the targets in that plan, which include an aim to stop the growth in municipal waste by 2010.

Bruce Crawford will recognise the fact that the plan also states that we value the concept of zero waste. We welcome the debate on zero waste, as it allows the approach that we have taken to be considered and progress to be measured. However, we believe that the priority, at this stage, is to make progress on the targets that we have set. Mr Crawford will be  pleased to hear that I will say a little more about resource efficiency shortly.

Members will be aware of the targets that have been set. Our focus is on reaching those targets, as we recognise that as the way in which to move forward. On the evidence of the debate in January, there is clearly an understanding of the fact that Scotland starts from a position that is a long way back. We need to improve our recycling record, make use of resources properly and reduce the amount of municipal waste that is sent to landfill. On the back of those achievements, we will be able to reduce the amount of waste that is produced. In fact, a number of initiatives are already under way. For example, some of strategic waste fund awards that have already been given include elements of waste prevention, such as the promotion of home composting. Consultants with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency are working on a toolkit for councils and community groups that will allow them to carry out domestic waste reduction campaigns and programmes. We are also resourcing the UK waste and resources action programme's innovative design work on minimising or eliminating waste in a whole range of products. As far as enterprise is concerned, my own particular focus is on encouraging businesses to minimise waste. Businesses understand resource efficiency. They understand that by-products that go to waste are lost business opportunities and that saved resources also provide financial savings that go straight to the bottom line. Since the beginning of the year, envirowise has carried out 214 waste audits for businesses in Scotland and identified potential savings for those companies of more than £3 million a year. Furthermore, following our previous debate on this subject, a national steering group is now co-ordinating the work of local waste minimisation partnerships such as those in the north-east of Scotland and Midlothian. The Scottish industrial symbiosis programme is examining possible synergies between businesses by establishing whether the by-product of one business process could be used as the feedstock for another. As another example of Government helping businesses to help themselves in a way that helps others, we will also provide around £1 million in additional funds in each of the next two financial years to support business waste minimisation further.  In January, my colleague Allan Wilson said that we will consult widely with businesses and waste producers on a framework for dealing with non-municipal waste, which forms the majority of waste that is produced. That will include work on how to prevent waste in the first place. As a result, we have a strategy that combines action to reduce household and municipal waste and action to reduce waste produced by the private sector. We will also encourage public bodies to minimise waste in line with the partnership agreement. We are taking those actions because they are environmentally essential and because they form part of our evolving strategy for green jobs. We will consult soon on that strategy and I hope that it will attract the support of those who advocate zero waste as well as those who are already involved in the delivery of the national waste strategy. I move amendment S2M-1089.4, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the recent increase in recycling and composting; notes paragraph 7.3.3 of the National Waste Plan 2003 which states that zero waste "provides a platform for challenging our current systems and radically reducing waste beyond even the best current levels of achievement" and the aim in the National Waste Plan to stop growth in the amount of municipal waste produced by 2010; further notes the work being carried out by the Waste and Resources Action Programme, Envirowise, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and others to minimise business and household waste; recognises the Scottish Executive's commitment to increasing packaging recovery targets from 59% to 70% by 2008, and calls on the Executive to continue its work to prevent and minimise waste, to increase recycling and to divert waste from landfill."

Does Mr Adam accept that page 3 of the higher education review has sought to establish an agreed baseline, and does he agree that it is welcome that all the stakeholders in the higher education sector have joined together to reach that established baseline?

Will Alex Neil accept that the OECD ranks Scotland at number 3 in expenditure on tertiary education?

As in other industrial sectors, companies that operate in the bottled spring water sector can access a range of business support from the enterprise networks. That support includes helping suppliers to access new markets, develop new products and improve efficiency in production and distribution, as well as encouraging collaboration, the sharing of best practice and effective networking.

We want to ensure that there is no competitive disadvantage, which is why we maintain under regular review the basis on which such things are assessed. Mr Fraser will be aware that we have taken significant steps forward on business rates in Scotland over the past 12 months, and we will continue to address those issues.

Roseanna Cunningham will appreciate that the responsibility for such matters lies with the Food Standards Agency. Although there is no legislation relating specifically to the use of the term "pure"—which term is a matter of controversy in this case—there is clear guidance  from the Food Standards Agency that the term "pure" should be used only to describe a food product to which nothing has been added. In the case that she mentioned, it is clear that minerals have been added to the water. The Food Standards Agency has raised the matter with the relevant local authority in whose area the producers of Dasani are based, and it is currently investigating the matter. Any decision about whether the law has been broken will, ultimately, be for the courts to make.

The forum for renewable energy development in Scotland—FREDS—last year set up a sub-group to prepare an action plan for the development of the marine energy industry. I expect the marine energy group to report to the next meeting of FREDS in Aberdeen in May.

I look forward to Jamie Stone reporting Saudi Arabian levels of income for the people of Caithness, Sutherland and, on the other side of the firth, the Orkney Islands. I hope that that will be one of the consequences of developing this industry. To ensure that we maximise the returns from marine energy, we will continue not only to provide the current level of support but to build on that support. We recognise that tidal energy is potentially one of Scotland's greatest resources. Indeed, because, unlike some other forms of energy, one can predict tidal streams thousands of years in advance, tidal energy will increase security of supply from renewable sources. However, tidal energy has not yet reached the point at which it can be developed commercially, which is why we have invested more than £2 million in the European Marine Energy Centre in  Orkney and why we will encourage the industry to develop the new technology in this country. After all, we want to capture the jobs and business benefits as well as the environmental benefits of developing marine energy.

Sarah Boyack has raised two very important issues. Members will recall that, when we passed the Sewel motion on the Energy Bill, which is UK legislation, a couple of weeks ago, we permitted the doubling of Scottish ministers' budget for promoting renewable energy. However, the Department of Trade and Industry will continue to provide much of the capital funding for this matter. Sarah Boyack was also right to raise the issue of upgrading the grid. If we are to connect the electricity produced in the more remote parts of Scotland to the national grid, it will need to be upgraded. We will continue to work with the grid's operators and the UK Government to ensure that that happens.

We are seeking to work with our industry partners to ensure that they recognise both the need for their investment and the benefits that could come from it. We and the UK Government will work in partnership with the industry to deliver that. The key point is that we have a grid that allows the maximum output of renewable energy from around Scotland.

I, too, join members of all parties in congratulating Johann Lamont on securing the debate and echo the comments that she and Marilyn Livingstone made about our colleague Joe Hill. Members have left no doubt about their level of commitment to co-operation and mutuality. It is shared by the Scottish ministers and underpins our proposal in the partnership agreement to establish a co-operative development agency in Scotland. Although other aspects of the social economy are important, the agency will work in the productive economy and promote co-operative enterprise. I will focus on that area in my speech. I should first declare my interests in this matter. Like Johann Lamont and other members, I am a member both of the Scottish Co-op and of the Co-operative Party. I am also a patron of Aberdeen Football Supporters' Trust. Although it is not the same trust as the one Christine May mentioned, it follows the same principle and is a new type of vehicle that allows communities to take a stake in the things that matter. Moreover, with my wife and children, I am a stakeholder in a mutual building society that holds a mortgage on our home. I share those interests with many of my ministerial colleagues as well as with many members who have spoken in this debate. I am glad to have an opportunity to reaffirm our recognition of the importance of co-operative and mutual organisations in contributing to the growth of our economy, providing jobs and offering economic and social benefits to local communities. Our future economic success will depend on our ability to sustain greater entrepreneurship and creativity; to support enterprise and responsible risk taking; to tackle cultural and social barriers to entrepreneurship; and to promote innovative, imaginative ways of mobilising labour, capital and business ideas such as co-operative enterprises and mutual ownership. Our commitment to establishing the co-operative development agency can play a key role in carrying forward that agenda. We will look to the agency to help promote, create and develop dynamic and sustainable co-operatives in a number of sectors of the Scottish economy because of the benefits they bring to the economy. As members have pointed out, the co-operative vision is nothing new. It dates from the time of the industrial revolution 200 years ago and members  who have visited New Lanark will have witnessed its evocative reminder of the vision of economic efficiency and social justice that motivated Robert Owen and so many others, including Rhona Brankin's ancestor and the other Rochdale pioneers in 1844. From the beginning, co-operatism has been internationalist. I have no doubt that the Rochdale pioneers and Robert Owen would have approved of the fact that this Parliament debated free trade—[ Laughter. ] Sorry, that was a Freudian slip—I meant "fair trade". They would have approved of the debate that we had before Christmas on fair trade and promoting produce from poorer countries in British markets. Furthermore, co-operatism has been political from the beginning. The vision of co-operative production and co-operative trade went hand in hand with the vision of workers united to improve working and living conditions. Both those elements went together with the politics of Chartism and the demand for political rights and for a social justice agenda in central and local government. Such things remain true today. In that respect, I was delighted to hear Mary Scanlon this evening sign the Tory party up to the co-operative values of self-help, self responsibility, democracy, equality, equity and solidarity. Given how widely those principles and values are shared, it is essential that they provide the foundation stones on which the co-operative development agency is built.

I am delighted by that question. Those of us in other parts of the chamber welcome the Conservatives' commitment henceforth to social equality. As far as the co-operative development agency is concerned, we will issue a formal consultation document in the next few weeks to inform the development of policy, and will consult on it over a three-month period As Robert Brown mentioned, my officials and I have met key players in the sector informally to discuss the way forward and we will continue that process. We have had valuable inputs from the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Co-operation and Mutuality Scotland and others. We will set out in the consultation document ideas about the scope of the agency, its focus and priorities, the type of body it should be, its proper relationship with the enterprise networks and its relationship with the allied but distinct areas of the social economy that have been mentioned during the debate. One option that we will lay out is for the agency to provide a first-stop shop for those  seeking access to the expertise, advice, training and resources required to support the establishment of new co-operative enterprises. The agency might also offer support services to enhance the growth of existing co-operatives. There are start-up processes in any new business and we will ask for people's views on that area. We will also consult on potential sources of funding and how the CDA can provide a voice to develop innovative approaches for expanding the sector's contribution to the Scottish economy and to developing international links. Rhona Brankin asked important questions about social enterprises such as McSence. We are considering a range of ways to improve access to Government contracts and improve the levelness of the playing field for procurement. We will consider Rhona Brankin's suggestions in that context. I agree with the point, which a number of members made, that the agency must be able to work with Executive departments across all portfolios and across the range of policy. That is happening, as officials from a variety of departments are involved in the discussions.  As has been said, a good deal of work is being done to promote co-operation, with support from the Scottish ministers, in sectors such as agricultural co-operatives, housing and sport. It will be extremely important for the agency to take account of work already underway and to avoid duplication and confusion. Instead, we should learn from the good example of other types of co-operative that are already in place. The CDA will be important to the Executive and to all who recognise the importance of the co-operative dimension to the history of the wider Labour movement, the cause of social justice and progressive politics in general. Co-operation does not just have a distinguished history; it has the potential for an exciting and dynamic future, not least in economic growth. That is why the consultation on the CDA will be so important and why we will consider the responses to the consultation carefully—to ensure that our conclusions are well founded and command broad support, thereby providing the basis for the CDA's growth, once it is established, over the years to come.  Meeting closed at 17:58.

I am grateful to Brian Monteith for providing another opportunity for me to reaffirm our recognition of the importance of the Scotch whisky industry, and indeed of the whole spirits sector, to the Scottish economy. It is nearly two years since the issue of tax stamps on spirits was debated in the Scottish Parliament. I replied to that debate too, which I hope is clear evidence of my commitment to this high-quality Scottish product. At that time, I made it clear that we are committed to working with the Scotch whisky industry to support its efforts to develop new markets and to sustain jobs, revenues and businesses as it does in many parts of Scotland. That remains our approach and, as I said in a different debate this morning, we on the Labour benches believe in picking winners and in backing Scottish firms and sectors that are already competing effectively in world markets. Whisky is clearly such a sector.  At the debate nearly two years ago, I listened carefully to what members had to say before I expressed the Executive's view on the issue to the UK Government. Members understand that fiscal matters of this kind are entirely reserved, so tax stamps have been debated at Westminster, but the good health of the whisky industry is a key part of Scotland's overall economic vitality. That is why I will again reflect this evening's contributions in our continuing dialogue with our UK colleagues. The previous debate on the issue followed the consultation on tax stamps in 2001. It is, of course, essential to understand the context; duty evasion on spirits costs all of us, as UK taxpayers, many millions of pounds per year. In his budget in 2002, Gordon Brown concluded that the introduction of tax stamps would impact on the productivity of the industry and that if the compliance costs were passed on in full, they could have a significant impact on retail prices. Then, as now, that is not an absolute; the issue is about balancing the compliance costs of tax stamps with the revenues to be gained from a reduction in fraud. The decision that was taken gave the industry the opportunity to develop alternative ways to reduce fraud. Brian Monteith and others asked how and where fraud on the scale that has been reported could be taking place. I suspect that the answer is that it takes place not in Scotland's distilleries or high street supermarkets but, as Brian Monteith's tale of Ukrainian vodka suggests, in transit from one point to another, on the supply route from the producer to the consumer. Fraud takes place not just in Scotland and the UK but in imports and exports; Mr Monteith's speech made it clear that the problem is widespread in Europe. There is no dispute about the fact that fraud exists or that it costs many millions of pounds, but there is disagreement about how much fraud takes place.

Yes. Points have been well made about the risk of fraud even with a duty stamp system. That has been made clear in discussions between the industry and the Government. Unfortunately, since 2002, the industry and the Government have not agreed on an effective alternative. UK ministers believe that the fraud problem is worsening. They are—rightly—determined to take tough action to tackle duty evasion and, as members have said, they may introduce tax stamps this year to come into force in two years' time. That is clearly of great concern to Scottish whisky, gin and vodka producers. I have discussed such concerns recently with Gavin  Hewitt of the Scotch Whisky Association. He confirmed that the industry does not accept Treasury estimates of the scale of fraud and that it believed that, as Jamie Stone said, tax stamps would have a disproportionate impact on smaller distillers, smaller brands and smaller bottling runs. He also confirmed that the association is concerned about the up-front and continuing costs of compliance, which it did not believe were proportionate. In the light of those concerns, I have also discussed the position with the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, John Healey MP. I understand that he has encouraged the National Audit Office to examine the disputed fraud figures. Sir John Bourn, the Comptroller and Auditor-General, has expressed his willingness to do that. I know that the industry will welcome that. John Healey recognises the position of smaller distilleries—that is significant. He remains more than willing to consider further development of proposals from the industry to tackle fraud. If the Treasury concludes that no effective alternative to tax stamps exists, he has pledged to work with the industry on means to mitigate costs, including possible further freezes on spirits duty and measures to prevent counterfeiting of stamps, to which Brian Monteith referred. That is all encouraging. I am pleased to report that Mr Healey will visit Scotland later this month at the invitation of the Westminster all-party Scotch whisky group's chairman, John McFall MP, to see for himself how any new scheme that is centred on the point of production would work.

Mr Healey's visit to Scotland to see a large distillery and a small distillery and to meet industry representatives will give him the opportunity to see for himself how such measures may work in practice. Members may recall that his predecessor, Paul Boateng, did the same thing two years ago, as ministers reached a view on the efficacy of tax stamps. I am sure that John Healey will enjoy his visit and I have no doubt that some of the industry's practical concerns will be brought very firmly to his attention again. I know that the industry associations will continue to work flat out  to come up with an effective alternative that will satisfy the need to tackle fraud. The motion refers to the Scotch whisky framework document "A Toast to the Future: working together for Scotch whisky". Like the best whiskies, "A Toast to the Future" does not have a limited shelf life. It is a live working document under which the Scottish Executive will continue to work with the industry on mutual concerns. We will ensure that Treasury colleagues are fully aware of the views of the Scottish ministers and the Scottish Parliament on the need to explore all options to minimise extra burdens on the whisky industry while supporting the Treasury's proper efforts to end evasion of spirits duty. That fraud is an affront to us all.   Meeting closed at 17:59.

Growing the economy is not just about statistical indicators going in the right direction. It is about real people, real jobs and real businesses. We recognise that the best way out of poverty is work and that the best way to tackle disadvantage is to create jobs and give people the opportunity to take up those jobs. The idea that Government can support business growth and improve skills and enterprise while cutting our enterprise budget simply does not add up. Of course, Government can reduce the burdens on business and it can support the small firms for which business rates and water charges are proportionately more significant: that is what we have done. However, to take millions of pounds away from public support for business for a bit of short-term popularity is no answer at all. Our focus must be on the long term.

No. The usual red herrings about red tape have been trotted out—if that is the appropriate phrase—in the debate. Nobody would argue with the proposition, for example, that regulations should exist only if they serve a purpose. However, no responsible business seriously wants health and safety, consumer protection and employment rights to be thrown away in pursuit of an easy life with fewer forms to fill in. Responsible businesses want less duplication and they want processes to be speeded up. That is what local economic forums have told us since their recent establishment and that is what we are enacting through the single business gateway, which is a single entry point for businesses in the Highlands and Islands. Businesses also want the planning system to be brought up to date and we intend to do that in order to reduce the burden of bureaucracy in the planning process, while maintaining a balance that protects the interests of the environment and of communities. It is interesting that Murdo Fraser says that he wants fewer burdens on business, given that not very long ago he argued in the chamber that the hurdles in the planning system should be made higher and harder for Scottish companies that are developing wind energy projects. The Tories offer less red tape in theory,  but more red tape in practice.

We are listening carefully to business on all the issues that relate to the modernisation of planning and we will consult on all those issues. We will seek to strike precisely the right balance between the interests of business and development and those of the environment and communities. We do not intend to follow the suggestion that Murdo Fraser made to create additional hurdles in the planning system. The Tories also argue that we are wrong to pick winners in the Scottish economy. That fits with their philosophy and their track record: keep out of the way, let the market pick the winners and there will be no skin off the Tory nose if the result is that local economies collapse and millions become unemployed. That simply will no longer do. The enterprise networks have put in place ITIs in energy, life sciences and information technology. We are backing those with £450 million of public money over the next 10 years. We are picking winners: we are supporting industries in which Scotland is already strong, and we can achieve a world market advantage if we back Scottish companies that are commercialising Scottish science and research. The energy industry is one such example—I remind members that we have debated in Parliament an Executive motion on oil and gas, which recognised that the last thing that the oil industry wants or needs is one fiscal regime in Scotland and another in England. The economic and political stability of the United Kingdom is the North sea's greatest strength in attracting mobile corporate oil industry investment. We also pick winners through the small firms merit awards for research and technology—the SMART awards—which I announced earlier this week, through the pipeline of support for innovative Scottish companies and through the £43 million pounds of public money that is rolling out enterprise education in our schools, levering in private funding, giving young people the opportunity for hands-on skills and supporting a culture of problem solving, enterprise and initiative. We have the highest-ever level of investment in our transport infrastructure and we are rolling out broadband connections. We have a target of 30,000 modern apprentices in training, but the Tories left apprenticeships pared to the bone. Do not tell the Tories, but ours is the kind of investment that Scottish businesses want. We are also funding the trade union learning fund. In recent months, I have spoken at two  training days in my constituency, which were organised by Amicus and the Graphical, Paper and Media Union. Those training days were not just about trade unionists who wanted to improve their skills and learning; they were about employers, who were there to work alongside their employees and to share our agenda of training in partnership as the best way to grow their companies, their industries and the economy as a whole. No doubt that is a bit too much modernising for the Tories. They would rather stay behind the old ramparts and argue that business and the public sector should not get involved with each other. They argue that everything will be fine if we just cut the tax bill a bit. Maybe in the concluding speech we will hear what investment they would abandon to pay for their tax cuts—but maybe not. Either way, they are the same old Tories making the same old mistakes and the Scottish people will not be fooled.

Will the member give way?

Actually, I am curious to know what growth target the SNP would set if it were in a position to do so.

Does Mr Lochhead accept that the population decline to which he has—rightly—referred is a consequence of a decline in the birth rate rather than net migration?

rose—

The debate points up some important dividing lines, and provides different views of the state of the Scottish economy, of the advantages of devolution, of the way ahead to achieve long-term, sustainable economic growth and, not least, of what economic growth is for. Economic growth is the Executive's top priority, because we recognise that only by growing the economy can we close the opportunity gap, create greater wealth to be shared more widely, and give all our people the chance to do productive work and to enjoy fulfilling careers. Growing the economy, however, is not something that Government can deliver at its own hand. It depends on businesses becoming more innovative, more productive and more competitive. The task for Government is to create the right environment for that productive economy to flourish. That is why devolution is so important. Scotland's devolved Government can focus its efforts on creating competitive advantage by investing in skills, in knowledge and in innovation. We can do that precisely because the macroeconomic levers of interest rates and wider economic and fiscal powers lie elsewhere. That division of responsibilities has helped to deliver the lowest levels of inflation, the lowest levels of interest rates and the lowest levels of unemployment in a generation.

The Executive will lay out its plans to ensure that young people in Scotland can access the labour market and get the kind of jobs and careers that they want. It is by creating and increasing those opportunities that we can not only  grow the economy, but grow the population and secure our long-term future. Our job is to take advantage of the stable and strong macroeconomic circumstances by supporting those sectors of the Scottish economy that offer the best prospects of future growth and by ensuring that all our people have access to the labour market. Last year was challenging not only for Scotland, but for all the major global economies. As an open and globally connected economy, Scotland was not immune to those challenges. Despite that, the Scottish economy grew, even in the second quarter of last year, and employment remains at historically high levels.

We should focus on where we are and where we are going. This point in time, when the world economy is recovering, is our moment of opportunity. There is something peculiarly perverse about a unionist party that regards economic growth in England as proof of Scotland's failure. We benefit from economic recovery elsewhere in the United Kingdom, because the rest of the UK is our largest single trading partner. All recent surveys confirm greater business activity in Scotland in the last quarter of last year, improved prospects and expectations for this year, and renewed confidence in our manufacturing industry. The issue is how to take advantage of those improving prospects. The Tory line is to cut public investment and support for business in order to fund cuts in business taxes. We will no doubt hear the same from the SNP. The Executive would rather maintain public investment and sharpen our focus yet further, to get better value for the taxpayer's pound.

I am afraid that I am short of time. It is right to listen to business concerns and to act on them. That is why we have frozen business rates and introduced water charges below the rate of the retail price index this year, and introduced a new, low-user water tariff for 20 per cent of Scottish firms. When we listen to business, however, we do not just hear about taxation. We also hear that businesses want more investment in infrastructure and in addressing market failures. That is why the Executive will have a budget of  more than £1 billion to invest in our transport infrastructure. It is why we will continue to invest in our skills and training agenda through the enterprise networks; in streamlining business support through the business gateway; in supporting innovative new firms through the Scottish co-investment fund; and in bringing Scottish science to market for Scottish companies through the intermediary technology institutes. All of that is productive investment to strengthen the Scottish economy. Cutting those investments to reduce taxes—as the Tories would do—would send all the wrong signals to Scottish business. It would say, "There's nothing more for Government to do, you're on your own, and here's a few quid in your current account to help you get by." Instead, we should say to Scottish business, "We're on your side, we're in it for the long term, we'll invest in your success and we'll all benefit if you deliver." That way, we get the growth, we get the jobs, and we get the public services too. I move amendment S2M-855.3, to leave out from "with" to end and insert: "the evidence of an upturn in global economic activity and the opportunities for Scottish businesses and the Scottish economy to grow; rejects the proposition that increased competitiveness is best achieved by reductions in business taxation; believes instead that economic growth and wealth creation require targeted investment in skills and learning, business growth and innovation, and global connections, and supports the Scottish Executive's strategy of sustained investment in these areas to improve Scotland's competitive position in the global economy."

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Ballance accept the fundamental point that I made in my opening  remarks, which was that renewables generators' concerns relate to the potential conditions in the licences, not to the bill's provisions?

rose—

Will the member give way?

I respond by pointing out that clause 106 of the Energy Bill, as it currently stands before Westminster, gives the secretary of state powers to modify licence conditions where he feels that it is necessary or expedient to do so. That power allows the DTI to direct Ofgem if necessary on the licence conditions that apply.

Does Mr Fraser accept that the position that Governments have taken on the matter is that the issue of nuclear power cannot be properly and adequately addressed until the issue of nuclear waste has been successfully and adequately resolved, and that the Energy Bill is moving us firmly in that direction?

Members will be aware that the Enterprise and Culture Committee considered a Sewel memorandum on the UK Energy Bill last week, when Allan Wilson and I set out the many reasons why we believe that the UK Energy Bill should be widely welcomed in Scotland. We also addressed the issue of just what is devolved, or executively devolved, and therefore part of the Sewel process. I regret that the amendment in the name of Chris Ballance means that that issue must be addressed again today. Mr Ballance's amendment would have us believe that the Energy Bill as proposed will disadvantage the Scottish renewables industry and endanger our renewable energy targets. In fact, the clauses in the bill that deal with renewable energy in areas that are devolved are entirely supportive of the aspirations of the industry and the Executive. I will return to those in a moment. Another part of the bill establishes the British electricity trading and transmission arrangements—BETTA. This is the first time that there will be such arrangements for the whole of Great Britain; at the moment, the status quo involves separate markets for Scotland and for England and Wales. I suspect that that is the focus of Mr Ballance's concerns. Let me make two fundamental points. First, on the part of the bill that establishes BETTA, the matter is entirely reserved. It is not covered by the Sewel memorandum or the motion that we have lodged today. That is not a pedantic point. Because the matter is reserved, the UK Parliament does not require our consent in order to legislate to set up BETTA. If this Parliament declined to agree to the Sewel motion, we would lose the benefits to be had for renewable energy in devolved areas without making the slightest difference to the part of the bill that establishes BETTA.

I do not accept that for a moment. I will return to devolved issues in a moment but the amendment that Mr Ballance has lodged is fundamentally flawed because it claims that there will be a disadvantage to renewable energy. I know that people have concerns about BETTA, so I will stress that the part of the Energy Bill that establishes BETTA is enabling. The matters that cause concern to the energy industry do not lie in the bill—even in those parts of it that deal with reserved matters. The bill simply allows BETTA to be established. Before the part that establishes BETTA can come into force next April, the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets will have to resolve key issues such as transmission charging and connections for small generators before it issues a licence to the grid operator. Therefore, even if this Parliament had and exercised powers to delay the BETTA legislation, it would just delay the establishment of a single British market for electricity. I remind members that that single market will be hugely helpful to Scottish electricity generators and renewables exporters. What the industry needs most is the best possible implementation of BETTA; what it needs least is any delay in the bill. However, as I have said, this Parliament has no powers in relation to BETTA, which is why Mr Ballance's amendment is wide of the mark. We have the ability to influence the final content of the licence conditions and we also have very positive support for our renewable energy policy from our colleagues at the Department of Trade and Industry. It was thanks to our representations and the support of the DTI that, last June, Ofgem abandoned proposals on zonal distribution charges under BETTA that would have disadvantaged the Scottish industry. That is the combination that we believe will resolve the outstanding issues favourably before BETTA comes into force. I reassure members of all parties that we will continue to give high priority to resolving those issues in a way that ensures that Scottish renewables producers are not disadvantaged in the new British market. The Sewel motion deals with two main issues that relate to devolved matters or matters that are executively devolved to the Scottish ministers. The first is renewable energy and the second is nuclear decommissioning. The bill contains provisions to establish renewable energy zones in the parts of the United Kingdom continental shelf that are beyond territorial waters. The forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, which I chair, is considering how to maximise the opportunities for Scottish scientists and Scottish companies to lead the next stage of the renewables revolution in  marine energy from wave, tide and deepwater offshore wind energy. In establishing the zones, the Energy Bill provides the necessary legal and planning framework to allow those technologies to be rolled out. That cannot come a moment too soon. Legislative authority is reserved in the Electricity Act 1989, but the process of consenting to or refusing large generating plant onshore is executively devolved to the Scottish ministers, and the bill will extend the same executive devolution to waters further offshore. That is hugely important to us. Another important matter is the provision to have the millions of pounds that Ofgem raised from the auction of certificates under the Scottish renewables obligation paid into the Scottish consolidated fund. The Scottish ministers can make budgetary provision that that money should be used only to promote renewable energy. That is extremely helpful to achieving our targets. Perhaps £4 million or £5 million a year for several years will be devoted to such promotional work. The bill will also extend the market in renewables obligation certificates to Northern Ireland, which is also helpful. I know that Allan Wilson will say a fair bit about nuclear decommissioning when he responds to the debate. The nuclear decommissioning provisions are also to be welcomed. The bill will create a nuclear decommissioning authority, which will be accountable to UK and Scottish ministers, to oversee the decommissioning of public sector nuclear sites. The NDA will report to ministers in both Parliaments. It will have a statutory duty to have regard to the need to safeguard the environment and it will have key performance indicators on health, safety and the environment, for which it will be accountable. On the environment, the NDA will be accountable to the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which will remain the regulator for waste management and discharges in Scotland. On all those matters, reserved and devolved, and on renewables and dealing with nuclear waste, the Energy Bill will bring real benefits to Scotland. My response to Mr Ballance's intervention is that the provisions that relate to renewables create renewable energy zones offshore, allow money from auctioning certificates to be given to us to promote renewable energy and extend the market to Northern Ireland. Those are the devolved matters in the bill.

I am happy to take Mr Morgan's intervention if the Presiding Officer permits me to.

It is clear that the bill and the Sewel process address the matters for which powers have been devolved legislatively or executively. Fuel reprocessing is not executively or legislatively devolved, which is why the Sewel memorandum does not cover it. Therefore, neither the memorandum nor the bill includes such a consultation provision. We are clear that, in co-operation with Westminster, we are seeking to make the most use of the devolved powers that we have through the bill, which is going through the Westminster Parliament. The bill will give us funds, access to the market and opportunities to promote renewable energy and to improve the disposal and management of nuclear waste for many years to come. I move, That the Parliament agrees that those provisions in the Energy Bill that relate to devolved matters and those that confer executive powers and functions on the Scottish Ministers should be considered by the UK Parliament.

We are committed to strengthening Scotland's skills base. Future Skills Scotland is tasked with identifying skills gaps and skills shortages throughout the Scottish economy, and that information is used by the enterprise networks, Careers Scotland and other agencies to seek to match the future supply of skills to the identified demand.

I am aware of Susan Deacon's close interest in these matters. She is, of course, right to say that skills gaps must be addressed if we are to reach the range of social and economic targets that we have set ourselves. She will be aware that, in the context of low unemployment and increasing economic activity, particularly in sectors such as construction, employers inevitably face some difficulty in finding workers who have the necessary skills. That is why we asked Future Skills Scotland to look into the skills gap issue, particularly in the high-pressure sectors, although the employer survey that it conducted in November last year and in the previous year looked right across the Scottish economy. We are talking to Future Skills Scotland about the areas that it might address this year—for example, it might consider skills gaps in science and engineering. It is fair to say that, by definition, predicting future skills needs can never be an exact science, particularly in the context of a growing economy. However, the more accurate the picture that can be drawn by Future Skills Scotland and others, the more readily the local enterprise companies, Careers Scotland and education and training providers can gear what they offer to what is required in the real economy.

I recognise those issues, which apply not only in the Highlands and Islands but in much of lowland Scotland. That is why just a couple of weeks ago I was delighted to take part in the Scottish launch of the construction sector skills council, in which employers come together with Government, both at a United Kingdom level and at a Scottish Executive level, to address those issues. I also announced a couple of weeks ago the appointment of Graeme Millar as the chairman of the construction innovation and excellence forum, which is tasked specifically with addressing skills needs and other key issues in the construction and related sectors.

As Murdo Fraser will be aware, we have made a commitment to carry that work forward. Work is being done jointly by the lifelong learning ministers and the education ministers to draw up the proper protocols and procedures to allow school pupils access to further education. We are clear about the importance of promoting vocational education opportunities at age 14 to those who are at school. We want to give school pupils access to further education courses where that can help.

I would be delighted to accept an invitation to do that later this year.

I start by congratulating Christine May on securing the debate and on speaking to the motion constructively and positively. I will deal first with some of the negative points that have been made in the debate. Like Susan Deacon, I point out that all those who demand a moratorium, whether temporary or permanent, on wind energy development are entirely missing the point of how we achieve the economic potential of renewable energy. In our debate on wind farms late last year, I made it clear that the complaints about a lack of planning guidance were simply not founded. Murdo Fraser mentioned the planning guidance today and I should tell him that NPPG 6 allows cumulative impact to be taken into account and enables councils to take a locational approach to renewables in their development plans, as a number of councils have done. Many applications for wind energy and other renewables developments are being made. That is to be welcomed, rather than condemned. As Alex Neil, Nora Radcliffe and other members have said, the future growth of companies and jobs in renewable energy in Scotland depends on orders from developers that have made successful applications. That cannot happen unless the planning system is geared—as it is—to encouraging applications to be made and to encouraging good schemes to go ahead.

I am pressed for time, but I will come back to the member in a moment. I am sad that some members do not yet understand that we live in a very competitive world. We will not capture the economic benefits of renewable energy just by wishing to do so. We have competitors. If Scotland wants the economic benefits of renewable energy, it must support the development of the technology.

There are pressures on local authorities—that is in the nature of any planning process in which developments are proposed. However, the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament is to look to the wider national benefit. Community benefit matters at local level—I encourage local authorities and communities to work together on issues of community benefit to share their experience. However, the focus of the Scottish Executive's policy and of the Scottish Parliament must be the benefit for the national community. I look forward to visiting Campbeltown and the Vestas plant next week. I also look forward to visiting Methil—later this year, I hope—as that project progresses. It is not yet at the funding stage, but I hope that it will reach that stage. I hope that I will have the opportunity to see the project as it develops in Christine May's constituency. We must be very clear about how we proceed to capture the economic benefits of renewable energy. This debate is timely for a number of reasons. First, as has been mentioned, only last Friday the Scottish Executive, together with the Department of Trade and Industry, published the results of a study that we commissioned jointly with the enterprise networks into the current state of the renewable energy industry across the United Kingdom and the prospects for future growth. The renewable supply chain gap analysis report found that—excluding the large hydro plant that has existed for some years—the renewable energy industry already sustains approximately 8,000 jobs across the UK. Approximately a quarter of those jobs are here in Scotland. The total monetary value of the industry is of the order of £290 million. Again, between a quarter and a third of that can be attributed to Scotland. Looking to the future, the study found that, across the UK, between 17,000 and 35,000 jobs could be sustained by 2020 and that Scotland could look to attract at least a quarter of those. We are determined to do much better than that. Secondly, the debate is timely because only on Monday I chaired the second meeting of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland. FREDS represents the energy industries—electricity generators, offshore oil operators and the cutting-edge new-tech companies in the renewables sector. It also includes representatives of investors, scientists, trade unions, the DTI agency Renewables UK and the enterprise  networks. On Monday, we were joined for the first time by Tony Amor, the new chief executive of the ITI for energy. All that expertise comes together because we share the agenda that is set out in the motion—how to get the best out of renewables in business and jobs for Scotland. We see the attainment of our targets as a two-stage process. We have set targets for renewable energy to provide 18 per cent of our electricity by the end of this decade and 40 per cent by the end of the next. To meet those targets, the energy production that we need from renewable sources in this decade must come from the technologies that are already in the marketplace: hydro power and wind power. However, the technologies that are not yet in the marketplace and that a number of members have highlighted are essential if we are to achieve our targets for the next decade. That is why FREDS has focused on marine energy and the potential for wind and tidal energy, on biomass, which it will consider later this year, and on a range of other technologies that have been mentioned, such as solar power, photovoltaics and the hydrogen and fuel cell potential that exists. FREDS is therefore very clear in its focus. Vestas is a tremendous example of how we can exploit wind energy, and there are already jobs in hydro, but if we are to capture the economic potential of renewables and create the thousands of jobs that we believe it will be possible to create from them, we need not only to manufacture things and provide services, but to be at the leading edge of the technology.  The big picture is that, if we want that leading-edge technology to be here in Scotland and if we want to create the intellectual property for it, thereby bringing long-term economic benefits to Scotland, we must position ourselves as the country within the United Kingdom and the European Union that is most friendly to, supportive of and encouraging towards renewable energy in general. I hope that the Enterprise and Culture Committee recognises that, as it is certainly the agenda of the Scottish Executive and our partners in FREDS. If we want renewable energy to generate economic benefits, we must look beyond the short-term, local issues to the wider national interest and we must pull together. At the start of the debate, members talked about the need for an approach based on unity. Such an approach can work and the benefits can be delivered only if the absolute imperative of getting behind renewable energy from start to finish is recognised.  Meeting closed at 18:01.

My officials are in regular contact with the agency to ensure that the new sector skills councils meet Scotland's needs, and I will meet the chair and chief executive of the agency to discuss those matters later this month.

We now have licensed sector skills councils covering a total of 10 different sectors. They include: automotive skills; construction; science, engineering and manufacturing; information technology; electricity, water and plumbing; clothing and footwear; and sport and fitness. We will continue to work with our colleagues in the United Kingdom Government and with the Sector Skills Development Agency to put in place more SSCs in the course of the next few months.

Yes, I am satisfied, because in partnership with the Sector Skills Development Agency we consult with other interested parties in the Scottish economy—including the enterprise networks, the trade unions and others—to ensure that their views are included in our consideration before any sector skills council is licensed. That is the process that we undertake. The licence is issued by the Secretary of State for Education, but it is done in consultation with us and the other devolved Administrations; in turn, we consult relevant parties within the Scottish economy.

The Scottish Higher Education Funding Council has been working with Glasgow School of Art to develop its estates strategy and has provided financial support for the work that has been done to date.

I certainly share Pauline McNeill's views: first, on the significant contribution that Glasgow School of Art makes, in the creative and cultural spheres, to economic life in Glasgow and in Scotland as a whole; and secondly, on the importance of the Mackintosh building at Garnethill as part of the school's estate and as a building of  international significance that is widely recognised as such. It is the responsibility of the funding council, rather than the Executive, to hold such discussions, and I encourage it to have those discussions with Glasgow School of Art when the school makes its submission.

Our memorandum on the Energy Bill will lay out the consultation that has been undertaken so far on the major elements of the bill, which includes the Department of Trade and Industry's white paper in 2002, the draft bill that was published last year on nuclear waste, and the white paper proposals on renewable energy, which were published in February last year. We do not intend to duplicate those consultation processes.

Any bill that is going through the House of Commons is open to amendment in the usual way. I do not recognise Mr Ballance's characterisation of the bill as providing a blank cheque to the nuclear industry. The bill is not concerned with the generation of electricity. Among other things, it is concerned with the safe disposal of waste, the proper provision of security at nuclear installations and matters that relate to renewable energy. The bill is not at all to do with generation from nuclear sources.

I simply repeat my reply to Mr Ballance, which is that the Energy Bill is not concerned with the promotion of nuclear energy. I am happy to provide that answer, which applies equally to both sides of the debate on nuclear energy. The Scottish Executive's focus will rightly remain on achieving our targets for renewable energy by 2020. I know that we will have support from members of all parties in that.

This would not be an appropriate time to prejudge what will happen following the passage of the Energy Bill. However, in response to Mr Morgan's first point, I confirm that designations will be subject to approval by the Scottish ministers and that the present regulatory functions of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency will be unchanged following the passage of the bill.

Yes, we have, and we continue to take part in discussions on an appropriate sector skills council for the rail industry across the United Kingdom. The lead body in those discussions is the UK Sector Skills Development Agency.

I will ensure that our officials continue to engage with their UK counterparts and with the Sector Skills Development Agency in order to take that forward. We recognise the importance of engineering and other skills in the rail industry, which is why we welcome and support the continuing discussions. Those discussions involve Skills for Logistics, which is the body that will be delivering sector skills for the freight industry. A further sector skills council is involved with the passenger transport industry. In combining those interests, we are seeking to address the points that Robert Brown raises. I can tell Mr Brown that the first UK centre for the delivery of skills specifically for the rail industry is already set up at Network Rail's office in Glasgow, and is supported by Clackmannan College of Further Education. We will continue to back that initiative.

Developers must publish a description of the proposed development, details of how to access the environmental statement and details of how to make representations for or against a development. That must be done by way of a public notice in the local and national press, both  for applications for consent under section 36 of the Electricity Act 1989 and for applications for planning consent from local authorities.

We encourage local authorities to take seriously their responsibility for enabling communities to make representations. Local authorities already consult with community councils as a matter of course, whether on reaching a decision on applications that have been made or on making representations to us on matters that come to ministers for approval.

The Executive has been closely involved in the preparation of the legislation as it affects our devolved interests. We shall shortly ask the Parliament to agree, by means of a Sewel motion, that the United Kingdom Parliament should consider the devolved provisions in the Energy Bill. I have advised the conveners of the  Enterprise and Culture Committee and the Environment and Rural Development Committee that a Sewel memorandum is under preparation and will be with them shortly.

The important point is that we carry forward the measures in the bill, which will be widely welcomed by members from all parties. I am delighted to report, following a question in the chamber a week or two ago, that one of the measures that the bill includes will replace the hydro benefit subsidy, which is about to be withdrawn, with a new subsidy. That will ensure that customers in the north of Scotland are not unreasonably disadvantaged by that change. The bill contains a range of provisions. It is important that committees consider the Sewel memorandum when we issue it. The provisions that are being brought forward will be widely welcomed.

As Bruce Crawford will be aware, the intention is to establish a nuclear decommissioning authority, which will operate on a UK basis. The authority will be a cross-border public body and will be accountable as appropriate—if the Parliament approves the terms of the Sewel memorandum—to Scottish ministers as well as to UK ministers.

There is a wide range of such activity, led principally by the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, whose second meeting I will chair next month. A  couple of provisions in the Energy Bill are particularly relevant. The establishment of renewable energy zones offshore will allow the future expansion of the offshore renewable energy industry, which offers great potential for Scottish companies. There is also provision to direct funds raised by the regulator from the Scottish renewables obligation into the Scottish consolidated fund to be used for promoting renewable energy in Scotland.

Mary Mulligan has already made clear our view on that area of policy. The bill before the House of Lords, which will proceed to the House of Commons, is concerned more with the supply of electricity than with the consumer end of the business, but we have stated our view on consumer interest as well.

We will be working closely with United Kingdom ministers to ensure that consumers do not lose out as a result of the decision by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.

I can assure Margaret Ewing that on 17 November—the day that the decision was announced—I spoke directly to Sir John Mogg, the chairman of Ofgem, to Ian Marchant, the chief executive of Scottish and Southern Energy plc, and to Stephen Timms, the energy minister in the Department of Trade and Industry. They all gave me assurances that they were as keen as I was to ensure that consumers would not be affected by the changes. Stephen Timms, in particular, gave me an assurance that his officials were already working on introducing an alternative scheme, in order to avoid any significant impact on consumers in the north of Scotland. Sir John Mogg indicated that, because of the legal advice that had been received, the Ofgem consultation would be completed quickly and that in that process—in the course of this year—it would come to a view on the removal of the existing subsidy arrangement. The DTI is very keen to produce an alternative proposal as quickly as possible.

I could not agree more with the points that Maureen Macmillan makes. The north of Scotland in general has led the way in the United Kingdom in the production of hydroelectricity. That is the origin of the question that we are addressing here today. The DTI and I are keen to ensure that the north of Scotland does not suffer any disbenefit as a result of the changes.

That depends on what proposals come forward from the industry, but I have approved three new hydro schemes this year and I am considering eight more.

Alex Johnstone will understand that the consents procedure requires that I do not comment on the particulars of any specific project. The Shieldaig decision—like every other decision on a renewable energy proposal—will be made on the basis of our existing planning and consent guidance, whose provisions are clear. I remind Parliament that it is only a few weeks since a number of members—especially on the Conservative benches—suggested that the planning guidance on renewable energy for wind farms was not tough enough in taking environmental considerations into account. However, on both wind and hydro power, we will seek to strike a balance between economic development and environmental considerations, as is set out clearly in the national planning policy guidance on renewable energy.

The responsibility for upgrades to the grid lies with the grid owners. We are working jointly with the Department of Trade and Industry, the regulator—the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets—and the grid-owning companies on their plans for carrying the work forward.

We have set ambitious targets on the basis of consultation with the industry and of our determination to tackle climate change and at the same time to capture for Scotland the economic benefits of renewable energy.

If Phil Gallie was able to predict what the power requirements of the power companies would be in seven days' time, he would be a very popular man, especially with the power companies. They might even give him his old job back. We have not attempted to predict that; we have attempted to predict where we think electricity generation requirements will go and to encourage electricity companies to apply to provide the necessary share of the capacity that is set out in our targets.

We want to encourage renewable generation from a wide range of sources, and I can tell Christine May that the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, which I chair and which is concerned with achieving economic benefits, will consider biomass issues early next year.

As far as communities are concerned, we are encouraging Highlands and Islands Enterprise to work up proposals for a possible community equity scheme, which would allow communities to hold a financial stake in renewables developments in their areas. As far as industry is concerned, recently I chaired the first meeting of the forum for renewable energy development in Scotland, which will seek to maximise the Scottish stake in manufacturing and in new renewables technology.

The proposals that HIE is examining could well be applied throughout Scotland. The best way for communities to obtain benefit from renewables developments on their doorsteps is through equity schemes. If we can do that in a way that gives communities a direct stake in developments, it would clearly be better than any position that involved communities negotiating across the table with the developer as if they were on different sides. We recognise the importance of communities' obtaining benefit from developments—that is why we are at ease with the practice that has developed in the industry of putting a sum for community benefit towards funds that local communities are able to establish. A number of communities in the Highlands and the lowlands have obtained very reasonable additions to their community funding as a result of such arrangements.

The debate has been illuminating and I think that we have all enjoyed it. I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing the debate, and I congratulate the City of Edinburgh Council and others on seeking to join the ranks of those throughout Scotland who support, and have given a commitment to support, fair trade. I note that, as has been said, many of the issues around international trade and international development are reserved, but of course Scotland's devolved Government takes a close interest in fair trade and supports the principles of ethical trading and employment on which the Fairtrade mark is based. I have long taken a personal interest in the fair trade agenda. At about this time last year, I spent a Saturday morning staffing the Fairtrade stall at the farmers' market in Aberdeen. That confirmed  clearly how much interest in and support there is for the fair trade principle.

I will take Mr Stone's intervention.

I certainly agree about the importance of encouraging development in developing countries on the basis of trade rather than aid. That is precisely what fair trade can help us to do. It is worth noting that the UK Government has, through its membership of the World Trade Organisation, emphasised the point that development must be based on trade and on the economic strength of developing countries rather than on subsidy or anything else. It is important to note what support from communities in Scotland for fair trade has done and can do to support small producers in developing countries. In addition to the immediate practical and financial benefits that producers in developing countries can gain through better trading terms and price guarantees, support for fair trade can also play a major role in encouraging UK companies to support higher standards of corporate social responsibility and to manage their supply chains in ways that benefit rather than exploit primary producers.

What I am clear about is that we should seek to apply the highest principles of corporate social responsibility in our operations and that we should encourage others to do precisely the same. I do not want to enter into a bandying around of words on the issue; I want to make it clear that principles are at stake and that it is appropriate that we stand by those principles.

I agree with that entirely. As has been said, the Co-operative movement is to be congratulated on its efforts and the initiatives that it has taken. That takes us back to the point that a principle is at stake. The Co-op has drawn the link between the co-operative principles that are applied at home and the principles of fair trade that are applied internationally. Because of those efforts, as Sarah Boyack mentioned, the Executive parties have given an undertaking to introduce a co-operative development agency that will promote at home the co-operative principles that lie in line with the international principles of fair trade. We have made progress on that commitment and will consult on the structure and remit of the co-operative development agency in the next few months. The issue of producers nearer to home was raised, particularly with reference to agriculture. It is worth noting that the Fairtrade Foundation, which organises the Fairtrade mark in this country, is talking to organisations in the agriculture sector in Scotland that share its approach, such as the Scottish Agricultural Organisations Society, which promotes co-operation in agriculture, about how they can reinforce one another's messages and support one another's work. However, the Fairtrade Foundation is rightly keen to ensure that its focus on producers in developing countries is not in any way diluted or undermined, although the foundation works on some issues with people who are involved in agricultural production in Scotland. We have a responsibility for higher education provision in Scotland. Our higher education institutions are often clearly focused on matters of international trade and, in particular, fair trade.

I will quickly finish my point about agriculture and higher education, which is simply that the issue of fair trade is covered in the Scottish Agricultural College's course on agriculture.  On the important issue that Jeremy Purvis raises, the Executive's response is similar to a point that Sarah Boyack made, which is that we do not wish to, nor could we, impose a requirement that the Executive or other public bodies should provide Fairtrade produce exclusively. However, through our themes of sustainable development and environmental responsibility, we are keen to encourage all bodies in the public sector with which we have relations to take an approach that promotes the choice of fairly traded produce.  The focus of Sarah Boyack's motion is on the City of Edinburgh Council, but it has been mentioned that Strathaven, Aberfeldy and Paisley have received Fairtrade accreditation because of their efforts to promote fair trading, not only by the local authority, but by retailers and others in the local economy. My city, Aberdeen, and Dundee are working towards Fairtrade accreditation and I am delighted to report that a significant number of communities, both large and small, are seeking to go in that direction. We believe that that sends a clear signal to fellow citizens in Scotland and to the citizens of the world about the responsibility that we should take for ensuring fair terms of trade and that producers, wherever they are, should get a fair reward for the work that they do.  Meeting closed at 17:24.

I am grateful to Murdo Fraser for securing this debate. Members' business debates have rarely produced such a clear divide across the chamber or provided members with such a clear choice about the position they should take. The debate also gives me an opportunity to set out why I believe that we have put in place the right planning  policies and the right policies to support renewable energy. The starting point for our renewable energy policy is the need to tackle climate change. That is why the UK Government has set a target of generating 10 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by the end of this decade, and 20 per cent by the end of the next. Moreover, in Scotland, we have set targets for the same objective of 18 per cent by the end of this decade and 40 per cent by the end of the next one. We have set higher targets in Scotland for three reasons. First, thanks to our hydroelectricity industry and Tom Johnston's vision 60 years ago, we start from a higher base than elsewhere. Secondly, as members have pointed out, we have in Scotland a tremendous resource of renewable energy in wind, wave and tidal power. Thirdly, we want to take full advantage of the economic development potential that renewable energy has to offer. Although we cannot quantify that potential with any certainty, Scottish Renewables estimates that, if we get the policy framework and the infrastructure right, the industry could be worth more than £1 billion a year and provide over 20,000 Scottish jobs by 2020.

I am afraid that I must press on. We cannot take for granted either the potential for cleaner electricity or the potential for business and jobs. If we are to fulfil Scotland's renewables potential, we must establish policies that attract investment and innovation. Such an approach must include a planning policy that supports onshore wind energy development.

I am afraid that I am very short of time. That is the planning policy that Murdo Fraser has criticised. He argues that the current planning regime provides inadequate guidance and demands a moratorium until new planning guidance is in place. However, I believe that he is not giving our planning framework the credit that it deserves.

If the Presiding Officer will give me more than six minutes, I will be happy to give way to all members' interventions.

In that case, I will take Murdo Fraser, because he lodged the motion.

I want to answer the key point that the national planning policy framework is not adequate to its purpose. In fact, it is only three years since we reviewed our planning policy on renewable energy developments under NPPG 6, and planning advice note 45 on renewable energy technologies was reviewed only last year. That framework allows us to meet our aspirations and to maintain the high quality of the Scottish environment. NPPG 6 requires the planning system to make positive provision for energy policy "while at the same time: meeting the international and national statutory obligations to protect designated areas, species and habitats ... from inappropriate forms of development; and minimising the effects on local communities." Cumulative impacts on developments must also be taken into account. In our view, those guiding principles strike the right balance. We are very interested in developing a community stake in wind farms—indeed, Highlands and Islands Enterprise has explored that very area—and in doing what we can to provide support to local communities that wish to develop renewable energy for their own use. Indeed, that is already being carried out with a £5 million grant scheme called the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. We want to develop such initiatives. Central to many speeches that were critical of the existing planning framework was the argument that central Government should lay down a strategic framework for where wind farm development should take place. In fact, existing planning policy allows councils to do precisely that. They can use their structural and local plans either to define broad areas of search and areas where they would approve developments only in exceptional circumstances, or else to set down the criteria by which any application would be judged. Indeed, they can do both. Councils are doing that very thing. For example, in its structure plan, Dumfries and Galloway Council has established a wind energy diagram that indicates potential, intermediate and sensitive areas. Stirling Council is currently consulting on precisely the same approach, and Fife Council has  also followed that approach. On the other hand, Argyll and Bute Council, with its considerable practical experience of the industry, has chosen to take a different route by adopting an approach based on criteria alone. To pick up on a point that George Lyon made about the impact of development plans, those larger schemes that come to Scottish ministers under sections 36 and 37 of the Electricity Act 1989 are governed by the development plans of local authorities. Therefore, if a local authority chooses to give locational guidance, that will apply to those developments as well. We believe that it is right that those judgments are made at local level. This planning system is also delivering renewable energies. I simply note that fewer than 10 per cent of the applications going through the system in the past five years have failed. In other words, the system is delivering renewable energy and environmental protection. A few weeks ago, as Alasdair Morrison mentioned, I visited Arnish, which symbolises the jobs potential that renewable energy offers Scotland. I therefore restate our position that the planning position, the planning guidance and the energy policy that we have in place are the right ones to deliver for Scotland.  Meeting closed at 18:16.

I, too, congratulate Karen Gillon on lodging the motion and providing an opportunity to debate safety and health in the workplace. The Scottish Executive concurs with her entirely about the importance of the European week for safety and health, the message that it conveys about the key role of trade unions and the importance of the work of all those who are involved in promoting safe and healthy working. Overall, Scotland's safety and health at work record is broadly comparable with that of England and Wales. However, as has been said this afternoon, there are some important exceptions—in both directions. In construction, the fatality rate is higher here than it is south of the border. In August this year, I took delivery of a report from a group that was set up to advance a strategic approach to the construction industry, addressing a range of issues. Significantly, the members of the group, most of whom were drawn from the industry, identified as one of the five major constraints on progress in the Scottish construction industry the inadequacy of previous achievements in health and safety. In its report, the group made a number of detailed recommendations aimed at addressing that problem.  The construction innovation and excellence forum that we hope will be set up as a result of that process will act as a point of contact between the Executive and the industry. I hope that the forum will also serve as the starting point for addressing safety and health issues. Clearly, employment practices such as bogus self-employment and lack of training have a significant impact on safety and health in the construction industry. We look forward to the outcome of the forum's work and to its proposals for tackling such problems. The trade unions played an active role in the work of the group that produced the construction industry report, as they have in many other areas. There are anomalies in the other direction. For example, the labour force survey that was commissioned by the Health and Safety Executive indicates that the rates of self-reported, work-related injuries and ill health are significantly lower in Scotland than they are elsewhere. The reasons for those differences are not clear and it is important that we identify them. The HSE has undertaken to carry out further research to do that. Cathy Peattie suggested that the fundamental explanation for the difference is under-reporting, which would be a very serious matter. I understand that the HSE's research is intended to establish whether that is the case. As has been said, legislative responsibility for health and safety at work is a reserved area. However, the Scottish Executive is very clear about the fact that health and safety at work is critical to the achievement of our strategic objectives for health improvement in Scotland.

Both proposals are too important to be tagged on to a debate on a wider issue. I do not intend to provide a definitive Executive view on them this evening. However, I recognise the significance of the issues and I will say a word or two about them in a few moments. There is a common agenda in Government at every level on tackling health and safety issues. Employees and trade unions have an interest in that and so, of course, do employers. The point was made that a work force that is unhealthy or unsafe is, by definition, bad for recruitment, bad for morale and bad for business, as well as bad for the work force itself. There is clearly a common interest, with responsible employers, trade unions and others working together on that. I am pleased to say that we work closely with the Health and Safety Executive, the Confederation of British  Industry and the STUC in pursuing a safety-at-work agenda. The First Minister recently discussed precisely those matters with the STUC. The "Securing Health Together" document, which we signed three years ago, constituting a Great Britain-wide occupational health strategy, has laid the basis for the way in which we seek to improve Scotland's health at work. It covers a project to deliver health and safety support to small and medium-sized enterprises, which often do not have the capacity to have those professional skills in house. It provides to employers and employees in the small-business sector confidential, high-quality information, advice and support. In March 2003, in "Improving Health in Scotland—The Challenge", we confirmed our view that the workplace is one of the core target areas for health improvement. To develop our approach to a healthy-working lifestyle, we have come together with the STUC, employers and the voluntary sector. We have increased substantially the funding to the Scotland's health at work award scheme, which was mentioned in a number of speeches. SHAW is a unique, national awards scheme to address Scotland's poor health record and, by doing so, to improve our business position. The scheme rewards employers who demonstrate a commitment to improving the health of their work force and to reducing sickness absence. I am pleased to say that, just last month at the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents conference in Glasgow, the Scottish Executive was congratulated by the chairman of the scheme on achieving its SHAW bronze award this year. Donald Gorrie and Brian Adam will be interested to know that smoke-free workplaces were part of what qualified the Scottish Executive for that award. I understand that the Scottish Parliament has now registered with SHAW, in pursuit of a similar award and, no doubt, there will be some discussion of how that will best be achieved. I look forward to the outcome of that. Karen Gillon asked how many employees were now covered by SHAW initiatives. In August of this year, just over 726,000 Scottish employees were covered. The latest health white paper, "Partnership for Care", confirmed our broad view that health in the workplace is important, but it recognised that specific things needed to be done to address the matter. The issue was raised of a Scottish strategic overview—or, in Cathy Peattie's words, a Scottish commission for health and safety. Clearly the Health and Safety Executive has responsibility for that throughout Great Britain and I believe that it is open to discussion on how best its objectives can be met in Scotland. I welcome the suggestion that we take a joined-up approach to those  matters and I will ensure that the comments that have been made today are drawn to the HSE's attention. A number of members raised the issue of prosecutions. We share the view that no one should get away with criminal negligence resulting in death or serious injury at work. As Frances Curran said, there is a different prosecution system in Scotland from that in England and Wales, which explains partly the differences in some of the statistics. There are different evidential requirements in the Scottish and English systems. I give the reassurance that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service takes seriously health and safety cases and will always raise prosecutions if there is sufficient evidence and if it is in the public interest to do so. All fatal accidents at work will result in prosecution where the HSE reports the case to the procurator fiscal and there is sufficient evidence to proceed. The Parliament will have the opportunity to consider corporate homicide in the future. We acknowledge the commitment of Karen Gillon and others to ensuring that the law in that respect is adequate to meet its need. We look forward with great interest to developments in that area. We in the Scottish Executive are also employers and members will be interested to know that we have a procedure for addressing workplace stress. I do not know whether any elected members want to take advantage of that. That procedure is part of a health and safety management programme that we have implemented across our work force. It might seem surprising, but members of our work force report that their knowledge and understanding of health and safety issues have improved and that, in their experience of their workplace, it is a safer place in which to work than it was a couple of years ago. That improvement has been driven by a health and safety team in the Executive and a network of health and safety liaison officers. I commend that model to others in the public and private sectors.  We hope that our example will be followed. It is for all employers to follow the lead that is given by the best and most responsible employers and to work with their staff and trade unions, which, as a number of members have said, have made a critical contribution on the health and safety agenda for more than 100 years. We look forward to the continuation of that work, so that Scotland will be one of the safest countries in Europe in which to work.  Meeting closed at 18:01.

The renewables obligation (Scotland) obliges licensed electricity suppliers to provide an increased proportion of the electricity that they supply from renewable sources. In addition, we work with a range of partners to support commercialisation of world-class research from Scottish universities, to promote new renewable technologies, and on other relevant issues.

We are aware of the importance of that issue and I certainly welcome Linda Fabiani's support for a single integrated and competitive transmission and distribution system for the whole of Great Britain. It is absolutely important that we go in that direction. In order to do that, it is clear that we need to work with our colleagues in the UK Government, with the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets and with the electricity companies, with whom primary  responsibility for the upgrades that need to be done will lie. In our work with them, we are holding discussions about a number of areas of the grid where improvements may be required.

We very much favour energy efficiency, both in domestic consumption, where we have set a target of 20 per cent, and in business and industry, where we are working hard with partners to achieve those levels of efficiency. That is critical, because we want both to reduce unnecessary use and consumption of electricity and energy and at the same time provide more and more from renewable resources.

The Scottish Executive is committed to the continuing diversification and growth of the economy in the north-east. We work on those issues with local partners, and we discuss relevant matters with UK Government departments as and when appropriate.

It is precisely because we have responsibility for economic development that we are working in partnership with Scottish Enterprise Grampian, Communities Scotland, Aberdeenshire Council and other local partners to put together a local action plan for the Buchan economy. We recognise the requirement to do that. In the context of the wider north-east economy, we work with the Department of Trade and Industry and other UK partners on a range of issues including, for example, the continuing development and promotion of the offshore oil and gas industry. We will continue to work with the UK Government on such matters where it is appropriate to do so.

I start by congratulating Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate. As has been said by speakers all round the chamber, structural funds have made a vital contribution to regional policy and to supporting sustainable economic growth in the south of Scotland in recent years. All too often in the past, the difficulties that are associated with regional policy funding have been emphasised. Like Elaine Murray, I am pleased that colleagues round the chamber—not all of them, but the majority—have recognised what has been achieved with the structural funds. The work continues, and the current programme will continue approving new projects until 2006. Let us not forget that, as well as the £50 million in the south of Scotland objective 2 programme, the region has benefited from other structural funding that organisations in the region can access. For example, nearly €500 million is available across lowland Scotland under the objective 3 programme for 2000 to 2006. Local action groups in the Borders and in Dumfries and Galloway are promoting rural development through the LEADER + Community initiative. Partners in the south are also benefiting from the Equal and Interreg Community initiatives. Those programmes and other Community initiatives have been tackling regional disparities across Scotland. They allow us, through the programme management executives, to respond to local problems with innovative solutions. During the summer recess, I spent some time in the south of Scotland. I saw for myself the difference that structural funds have made. I enjoyed meeting representatives of the local organisations, including councils, the enterprise network, tourist boards and higher and further education institutions, all of which are using this important European funding to make a difference to the economy and to individuals and communities in the south. It is clear that, in addition to some specific challenges, the area is facing challenges that are  very similar to those facing other parts of rural Scotland. I was very pleased to see people working together to take full advantage of the natural environment and the geographical features of the region to stimulate the economy. For example, projects like the Seven Stanes project, which has developed a state-of-the-art mountain biking centre, take advantage of the upland terrain to transform geographical handicaps into economic assets. I also saw how redundant buildings have been transformed to modern use in various places, including the impressive Crichton campus in Elaine Murray's constituency, in which further and higher education have come together with the business community to make learning accessible to all. I also visited the Ettrick Riverside development in Selkirk, where I saw for myself what has been done to convert a redundant mill into a modern business centre, which is now the home of a number of dynamic local enterprises. I know that Jeremy Purvis will welcome the fact that Labour as well as Liberal Democrat ministers took the opportunity to visit the south of Scotland to see what is being done at those excellent projects. I am delighted that structural funds have been able to help such imaginative developments and I am also delighted with the way in which people and organisations are working together to deliver them. The south of Scotland objective 2 programme has been very successful in stimulating partnership working. It has encouraged partners to work together and to share ideas and good practice. We believe that, as the debate on the future of regional policy unfolds, that policy will remain a fundamental part of the promotion of economic development in the south of Scotland and across the rest of the country.

I will do so in a moment. We are committed to ensuring that regional policy continues to play that role, whether that is through the EU framework for devolved regional policy, as was proposed in the recent UK Government consultation paper, continuing structural funds support or, indeed, through the Executive's own direct support through regional selective assistance.

The approach that is being taken by the UK Government which, as the member rightly stated, is the relevant body in this  regard, is to give a guarantee that any change in the funding mechanisms that will apply for Scottish regional policy will involve no net loss of funding to Scotland's regions.

I will come to that. I ask Mr Lochhead to be patient. It is important to note that there was vigorous participation in the consultation exercise in Scotland. UK Government ministers are expected to report soon on the overall findings of the consultation. A broad range of Scottish opinion was represented and more than 50 responses out of the 300 that were received came from Scotland, including a number from the south of Scotland. I will come in a moment to some of the other issues that have been raised. Many respondents cited the contribution that the funds have made. They also identified areas in which the funding, by whatever mechanism, could be improved in its delivery in order to remove some of the bureaucratic hurdles and obstacles that exist. Such submissions point us towards some of the things that can be done to ensure that the funds are accessed more readily and that they are more fully used. The debate has a long way to run and the UK consultation has already stimulated thinking about the critical issues. Of course, the decision process lies in the European Commission's hands. We expect the third cohesion report towards the end of the year to be followed by formal proposals next spring. Through the European structural funds forum, we pulled together the views and responses of many partners and submitted a response to the consultation that laid out the range of views in Scotland. The Executive's priority is to support regional funding vigorously, whether or not the UK's repatriation proposals are sustained through the European process.

As we have made very clear to Westminster colleagues, we expect that any proposals to repatriate regional policy decisions or funds should not simply involve repatriation from the European level to Westminster. By definition,  the principle of subsidiarity that underlies the repatriation proposals would involve a devolution of responsibility from the UK to this Parliament. However, what we require in any such arrangement is an EU framework that delivers the UK Government's guarantee that there would be no loss of funding if regional policy funding were repatriated.

Jeremy Purvis makes an important point. It would be a mistake to pre-empt either the debate or the process. As most of us in the chamber would agree, the priority is to ensure that the regional policy funding stream supporting Scotland's more disadvantaged areas continues in whatever form. That is the focal point of our concerns, our discussions with our colleagues in the UK and the discussions that will take place between the UK and the European Union. It is clear that, as a result of enlargement, a reduction in structural funds will be inevitable after 2006. No tinkering about with budget lines will disguise the fundamental fact that there will be a change in the balance of regions within the European Union and that that will have consequences. We in government must manage such consequences and seek to ensure that lessons are learned from the programmes that we have introduced thus far. We must also ensure that future funding continues to be targeted effectively to obtain the maximum economic and social benefit.  We will carry the debate forward on that basis; indeed, as various members have pointed out, it is a continuing debate. The strapline that we have used for structural funds in the south of Scotland—"Europe and Scotland: Making it work together"—should continue to inform our debates on this issue in the chamber and elsewhere. I am glad to have seen in practice how that approach is being developed in the south of Scotland and to have had this opportunity to reassert our commitment to make it work together on that basis in future.

At the outset of the debate, Jim Wallace set out our medium-term approach to economic development. That approach is based on an honest analysis of the underlying strengths and weaknesses of the Scottish economy. We start from the position of acknowledging that there are weaknesses in the economy that must be addressed, but there are also strengths upon which we should seek to build. I have listened carefully to contributions from around the chamber this afternoon. I agreed with one or two of the things that John Swinney said in his opening remarks, not only when he thanked goodness that he is not a member of Scotland's devolved Government—a sentiment I am happy to  share—but when he said that he and his party continued to support our strategy for achieving a smart, successful Scotland. That is significant because our strategy is founded upon a stable macroeconomic environment that has produced not only record high levels of employment and record low levels of unemployment, but the longest sustained period of low inflation and the lowest interest rates for a generation. Those are not just healthy economic indicators; they make a real difference to the quality of people's lives, and all parties should acknowledge that.

I certainly believe that low interest rates and people's ability to spend money are good for the Scottish economy, and that putting money into consumers' pockets is a good way to stimulate jobs, business and investment. I accept that point, but I reject the suggestion that the situation is unsustainable. I acknowledge that those matters are not completely in the Government's hands, but Government can make a real contribution. Parliament should be concerning itself with how to use the powers that we have in the context of that strong macroeconomic position to achieve the ends on which we are broadly agreed. That is the proper focus of this afternoon's debate. The Executive already has significant levers at its disposal to influence the future of the economy. Scotland's devolved Government has the opportunity to use those levers to build on our strengths. For example, we have a well-educated and skilled work force. This week, tribute was paid to that work force by the leader of an American oil company that is newly arrived in the North sea. He commented on the strength of the existing skill levels in the work force that he is employing in Scotland and on the ability of our lifelong learning and further and higher education structures to continue to provide staff of the quality that he requires.

I do not criticise the English for seeking to catch up with our level of spending on higher and further education, which is only to be welcomed. However, we acknowledge the need to continue to sustain investment in higher education. That is clearly one of the bases on which we must build. We must also address the underlying weaknesses in our economy.

It is essential that we maintain our momentum in supporting higher and further education. In a moment, I will come on to some of the new things that we are doing in that regard. Our approach is clearly having an impact in various parts of the economy. I will mention only two or three at this juncture. One is business gateway, which will establish a single point of contact for all business support services and funding delivered by Scottish Enterprise. That will assist in the improvement of the business birth and growth rate, which we clearly require. A similar scheme will also be extended to the Highlands and Islands Enterprise area. We have done a good deal of work on developing the skills of the Scottish work force, with Future Skills Scotland establishing where the gaps are and Careers Scotland providing advice to people of all ages on how to sustain their careers. We will also pilot business learning accounts to add to that work.

We recognise the importance of transport to business growth and the success of regional economies. I have no doubt that we will return to that matter, which Mr Scott has raised before, but in this debate I want to focus on one or two things in the enterprise brief.

I very much welcome the growth in visitor numbers to Scotland this year. I hope to see more of that in years to come. The benefits that such growth brings to the wider economy go without saying. The intermediary technology institutes that we will establish will target other sectors of the economy that are of great significance for the future. I mentioned meetings in Aberdeen, where this week many millions of pounds of value will be added to the Scottish economy by the business that is done at Offshore Europe by the oil and gas industry, which already provides tens of thousands of jobs directly and hundreds of thousands of jobs indirectly across the UK. That industry will continue to provide those jobs for another generation, but we are clear that the energy industry's future in Scotland will build on our excellence in sectors such as oil and gas and seek to establish the same excellence in new sectors, such as renewable energy. However, we will not just leave that to happen. As has been indicated, we have set targets for the proportion of electricity that is to be supplied from renewable sources. We commissioned a study in March to identify the estimated figures for our overall requirement in 2020, which Alex Johnstone asked about. We have a good ballpark figure and a good ballpark idea that we can achieve those targets, but not simply on the basis of existing technologies, and not simply on the basis of our existing industrial expertise. In order to get there, we need to encourage the development of the technology in our universities and industries. That will allow Scotland to play the leading role in developing new, renewable energy technologies. That is why £150 million of public money, through the Scottish Enterprise network, will go into the energy ITI over the next 10 years, and why similar sums will go into ITIs for information and communications technology and life sciences. All those are sectors of the Scottish economy in which we already have a degree of success and the potential for more success to come. That is what the enterprise networks are for. The Tories want to cut their budgets in half, the SNP would rather use their budgets to fund cuts in business rates, and Tommy Sheridan would abolish them all together, but the enterprise networks exist to create business, wealth and jobs. In 2002-03 alone, more than 8,000 new businesses were supported by the enterprise networks—more than 8,000 employers creating  thousands of new jobs, many of which would not have existed otherwise. Regional selective assistance, which is provided by the Executive, also creates and safeguards jobs in the most disadvantaged regions of Scotland.

Applications that have been accepted in 2002-03 alone are designed to safeguard or create 7,700 Scottish jobs. That is good use of public money. We recognise that we must continue to make good use of public money in stimulating economic growth and economic activity, particularly in our most disadvantaged regions. However, we want to base our future economic development opportunities around creating opportunities across the range of the economy by supporting innovation, investing in skills and knowledge, fostering a culture of aspiration and ambition, and building global connections for the Scottish economy. We are working hard to deliver that. We cannot rest on our laurels. We recognise that there is—as has been said by many speakers around the chamber—much more to be done if we are to ensure long-term sustainable economic growth for Scotland. We will work closely with our partners in business, the United Kingdom Government and elsewhere to create opportunities for economic success. We look for the support of all parties for that objective.

The Executive strongly supports the full development of our renewable energy resource. Renewable energy forms an important plank in our climate change programme. It will make a considerable contribution to our ability to meet our international commitments to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. More than that, it will make a significant contribution to our policy of ensuring a competitive, diverse and sustainable electricity supply. As John Home Robertson said in his opening remarks, today's debate is about the subjects covered by the bill; it is not about the consents processes, which at least two of the members who have spoken have talked about. The proposed wind farm at Robin rigg has now received consents from the Scottish ministers under the Electricity Act 1989, the Coast Protection Act 1949 and environmental protection legislation. The project will now make a significant contribution to achieving our renewable targets.

Each and every application for a consent, whether under the Electricity Act 1989, road traffic legislation or planning legislation, must be considered on its merits. In making their decision, the Scottish ministers took into account the responses of statutory consultees, the environmental assessment and the objections that were made. We reached a decision, as it is appropriate that we should do. We recognise the potential that renewable  energy has to create employment and economic development opportunities, not least in rural parts of Scotland. There is already the example of the Vestas-Celtic Wind Technology Ltd plant at Campbeltown in Kintyre, which has created more than 150 jobs. The Cambrian Engineering (Cymru) Ltd site at Arnish on the Isle of Lewis will also create jobs where they are much needed. Although it is early days, good work is being done to attract to Dumfries and Galloway manufacturing jobs that arise as a result of the Robin rigg wind farm project.

That is why the capacity to deal with additional renewable energy generation in the south-west of Scotland, as elsewhere, is so important. However, it is worth noting that the electricity that is generated in the Solway firth in Scottish waters will contribute towards Scotland's targets for renewable energy generation, as well as towards those for the United Kingdom as a whole. There are other prizes to be won in the form of the jobs that we could secure if Scotland were to obtain a leading position in the development of industries based on marine energy technologies. That is why the Executive is funding the marine energy test centre in Orkney and the establishment of the energy intermediate technology institute in Aberdeen. Robin rigg will not be the last that we hear of renewable energy in Scottish waters. As John Home Robertson said, the bill was the Parliament's first private bill and the committee must take great credit for its work in dealing with a process that was new to the Parliament. The thoroughness with which the committee scrutinised the bill and its attention to detail in its hearings has had wider benefits. That is most obvious in two respects. One, which we have discussed at some length, relates to safety issues in the construction of a series of large structures in the Solway firth for the generation of renewable energy. The issues that the committee raised have, as we have discussed, resulted in agreement between United Kingdom ministers and Scottish ministers about the need for enforceable safety zones in and around offshore energy installations. The second matter, which was also dealt with by an amendment, relates to the decommissioning  and full restoration of the site once the wind farm has been decommissioned. In respect of the Robin rigg wind farm, that is covered by a condition to the consent issued by the Scottish ministers under the Electricity Act 1989. It is also covered by the bill in the terms that we have discussed. Scottish ministers undertake to discuss with our UK counterparts any wider implications for future wind farm construction in Scottish and UK waters. We will take those matters forward. The committee's work in those areas demonstrates the advantages not only of devolution to Scotland, but of the good governance of the UK. Those are significant achievements. The Robin rigg private bill committee and the Parliament's committee system deserve great credit for those achievements and the Scottish ministers support the passage of the bill as amended today.

If Mr Gallie will have a little patience, I will come on to answer both his points. The important point about the bill and its implications for safety zones around marine installations is the one that John Home Robertson made in his introduction. The committee has highlighted the need to clarify the position not only at Robin rigg but wherever similar installations are put in place. That will require a development of the policy on safety zones around offshore installations of various kinds. Members should bear in mind the fact that the Robin rigg wind farm will physically be a much larger installation than the offshore oil and gas rigs that are covered by the Petroleum Act 1998. By highlighting those issues, the committee has made the case for legislation that will affect Robin rigg but not only Robin rigg. That is an important point. The Robin rigg committee has considered and highlighted the issues, following which we and our colleagues in the UK Government have acknowledged the need to make progress on the issue of safety zones round renewable energy installations of every kind. The benefit of the work of the committee will not be confined to this single case—important though that case is—but will be spread out over the offshore renewable energy industry as a whole. Phil Gallie asked about existing legislation. John Home Robertson has been assured by the Department for Transport that the Maritime and Coastguard Agency will enforce the existing legislation rigorously in the meantime, until safety zones are properly introduced.

Alasdair Morgan is missing the point entirely. The point is that consideration of the bill as first introduced has developed the case. I would be surprised if anyone who served on the bill committee did not take that view. As a result of the development of the case, we and our colleagues in the UK Government have recognised the need for a more wide-ranging legislative basis for similar safety zones for offshore renewable energy installations in general. Until that necessary legislative change is made, the MCA will enforce the existing regulations rigorously. That is not to say that the existing regulations are inadequate, but it is to say that we acknowledge that they need to be clarified and built on. The specific assurance that the existing regulations will be enforced in relation to Robin rigg will be welcomed by the promoters of the bill and by all concerned. The question of enforcement, significant though it is, is one on which the developers have accepted the assurances of the Department for Transport. They regard that as an adequate basis on which to go forward.

The assurance that John Home Robertson has received is based on discussions between the UK Government and the Scottish Executive. Therefore, we will seek the matter to be brought forward as soon as possible. If Chris Ballance is concerned in any way about the timetable, he may ask such questions again when we return to the chamber after the recess.

I simply record that the Executive welcomes amendment 2. The provision is very much in line with the condition attached to the consent issued under the Electricity Act 1989 for the Robin rigg development.  Amendment 2 agreed to.

The Executive supports the amendments that have been lodged and we believe that they are appropriate. The assurances that John Home Robertson has received from the Department for Transport follow on from discussions between us and our UK Government colleagues, but I wish to respond to some of the comments that have been made in  the debate. Alex Fergusson's point about the debate being moved from one date to another is a red herring. The original date for the debate was altered because the Education (School Meals) (Scotland) Bill required full consideration. The promoters of the bill were aware of the change of date and, as I understand it, were content as long as the bill reached this stage before the summer recess.

Absolutely. I am simply giving the Executive's response to and comments on the debate. I believe that John Home Robertson will sum up on the amendments, as is appropriate. The bill is a private bill, and I am simply putting on the record various matters of fact that I think are important to the Parliament.

That is clearly a question for the promoters and for those who lodged the amendments. I am sure that Alex Fergusson will explore that point with them.

Far from that point hitting the bull's-eye, it was a million miles wide of the mark. The bill had to be discussed quickly and it has been discussed within a few days of the initial date for the debate, for reasons that have been explained. That was accomplished by the Parliamentary Bureau, which should be congratulated by those of Alex Fergusson's opinion, because the rescheduling of this debate has allowed a few more days for amendments to be lodged. Mr Fergusson did not take that opportunity, but what has happened has not in any way taken away from Parliament's ability to consider and discuss the bill properly. The idea that an amendment being introduced at this stage in some way constitutes contempt for the process is simply bizarre. In my view, it is further evidence of the robust good health of the Scottish Parliament and its committee system. I will come on to that in a moment. The committee that considered the bill has explored the key issues raised in the amendments, and it took the view that legislation was required. That is acknowledged on all sides.  Following the committee's taking that view, we held discussions with our United Kingdom colleagues and decided that legislation should be introduced as soon as possible.

Scottish and Southern Energy plc and Scottish Power have recently announced plans for considerable upgrading of the transmission network in their areas. The Scottish Executive will continue to work with the UK Government, the regulator and the industry to ensure that the grid is strengthened and that Scotland's renewable energy potential is realised.

We work with the DTI and others precisely to ensure a co-ordinated approach. Along with our partners, we take part in the DTI transmission issues working group, which is addressing how to put in place the transmission  network that will be necessary to carry the renewable energy benefits that the north of Scotland in particular can produce. Our policy clearly supports the production of that renewable energy. We are clear that we will support the measures necessary to make it possible. Along with our partners in the UK we are actively pursuing a proper system of trading in electricity throughout Great Britain, including with consumers in England, Wales and Scotland, so that we can spread the costs and ensure that the maximum benefits are achieved at realistic cost. We stand firmly by our objective of increasing and maximising the production of energy from renewable sources.

That is right. Strengthening the grid will not be done for nothing, but the companies that are responsible will do it through investment. They will invest money because they will see a return for themselves. There will be economic benefits for the areas that are served through their ability to carry larger amounts of electricity to and from the national grid.

In response to a written question at Westminster a few weeks ago, Brian Wilson made it clear that the transmission issues working group on which we serve had come to a view on the grid: over a 10-year period, it will be good value for money for the companies that are investing. Ofgem has given the companies the clearance that they need to proceed with planning the upgrade of the grid so that it can carry that additional power. Scottish and Southern Energy plc in the Highlands and Islands and Scottish Power in south-west Scotland have recently announced plans to make that happen and that is the right way forward.

No, I do not accept that, because the renewable energy planning guidelines were revised as recently as 2000. That revised guidance to local authorities on how to consider planning applications is effective, and that is why, not just on the east coast but in the Highlands and throughout Scotland, successful applications are being made that are adding to our renewable generation potential. We think that that is the right way forward, and that the strategy is in place to achieve the gains that we want to make.

We have had extensive discussions with the company through Scottish Development International and Scottish Enterprise Edinburgh and Lothian in order to pursue the options of diversification, a management buyout and the sale of the facility as a going concern. However, the company has chosen to close the facility and the focus of the agencies involved is now on supporting the workers involved in finding alternative jobs.

I certainly share the concern about the loss of jobs anywhere and our thoughts go to the 55 people involved and their families, who are affected by the closure. We have already made great efforts through the agencies that report to ministers to propose alternative solutions from the one that the company has chosen to take. That being the case, I expect the local enterprise company to work both to support the staff, as John Home Robertson requested, and to talk to the company about how the facility can be used to sustain employment in the community.

No, because no application to build a new power station at either site has been made.

I am sure that John Home Robertson will speak for himself, but I can tell Ms Byrne that, from the Executive's point of view, the partnership agreement states clearly that we will not support the further development of nuclear power stations while waste management issues remain unresolved. The resolution of those waste management issues is something on which we will work jointly with our colleagues in the UK Government.

I have no doubt that the debate on the future of energy policy will continue  both here and at Westminster. The Executive's position on nuclear power is as I stated in response to the first supplementary question.

Mr Ballance will be aware of the United Kingdom Government's proposals on a nuclear decommissioning authority and on the establishment of a committee on radioactive waste management. We in the Scottish Executive will work with colleagues on that process. I do not think that Mr Ballance's question was intended to imply that nuclear power stations should cease to operate without a proper decommissioning process, although it might be interpreted in such a way. That would be the most dangerous possible route to follow and certainly does not commend itself to us.

A tendering process for subsidy to reinstate the service has not attracted any bids so we are now  seeking to identify alternative means of reinstating the service within the tender criteria.

I share the concern that George Lyon has expressed to secure the service, to which we are committed. In that regard, because of the failure of bids coming forward, we have approached a number of shipping companies that we believe could conceivably run the service. We have inquired whether there are grounds on which we might be able to make that service happen with their support. It would not be appropriate to go into the names of those companies at this stage, but George Lyon should rest assured that every company that we believe is capable of running the service will be talked to about that matter. Clearly, if the process fails, ministers would be required to look at what other process could be adopted in order to make the service happen. We want to explore every avenue and we will leave no stone unturned in the current tendering process and criteria to get that service in place.

I confirm that we have talked to the European Commission and have won the case that mainland-to-mainland routes are acceptable for PSOs. That is something that my colleagues and I have been proud to carry forward. It has been important in allowing us to proceed with arrangements both on the Gourock to Dunoon and Tarbert to Portavadie routes. Our focus at this point has to be on the Campbeltown to Ballycastle service, as we have outlined. As I said to George Lyon, we will explore every option to deliver that service before we consider further alternative options.

In a parliamentary answer to Alasdair Morrison on 20 March, I announced that Loganair had been awarded the contract for the Barra to Glasgow air service for 2003-04 and that we would tender a new contract from April 2004 to March 2006.

I would not want to talk down the Scottish transport appraisal guidance, as it is a very useful way of assessing transport and economic impacts. I expect that the appraisal criteria that STAG contains will be among the things that are considered in the next two or three years. We want to take a wider look at the future of air services to Barra. For example, we want to consider social inclusion and access to health services. The local MSP, Alasdair Morrison, and the local council, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, raised such issues with me—as did the community on Barra—when I visited the island in January. We want to examine those larger issues, so we will consider not only transport appraisal, but other relevant forms of appraisal.

We recognise the traffic pressures on that length of road and have announced that a route action plan should be put in place as part of the £20 million investment in the rural trunk road network that we announced last week.

The people of the west Highlands require a proper and objective assessment of the correct way of dealing with precisely the kind of issues that Fergus Ewing has raised, which is why we will draw up a route action plan for the road in question. That is the right way of proceeding. Mr Ewing will know that, in light of the last round of route action plans, a number of announcements were made last week that affect roads in his constituency, such as the A96 at Delnies and the A9 at Crubenmore and between Kincraig and Dalraddy. I conclude by pointing out that, if his party's spending commitment to invest £500  million in dualling the entire length of the A9 were ever carried out, the consequences for deserving and important roads such as the A82 would be too serious to contemplate.

It is intended that work on the route action plan will start within the next few weeks and be concluded towards the end of next year, in good time for people to make submissions to the strategic roads spending review process that will begin in 2004-05. I very much look forward to discussing with Jackie Baillie proposals for improvements to the A82 in her constituency after 1 May.

As we have heard today, people's priorities and interests might change as they grow older, but that does not mean that they stop being active, interested and involved. Today's debate has provided clear examples of that. Older people are the backbone of families and communities. They give of their experience, knowledge and time as carers, volunteers, community activists, parents and grandparents. The term social capital is very relevant to what older people have to offer. Those who write off people once they reach a certain age are making a serious and significant mistake and the Scottish Executive has acknowledged the huge contribution that Scotland's older people want to make and the resource that they represent. Older people want to be valued and they want access to opportunities, jobs and services. The Scottish Parliament has rightly worked to ensure that older people have the health and care services that they need. I welcome the tribute that Alex Neil paid to Henry McLeish for his part in introducing free personal care for the elderly. However, sometimes the concentration on such matters can lead to the assumption that they are all that elderly people are interested in and that the entire age group is in need of care. That is patently not true and the key to a policy for successful aging in the decades to come is that we recognise the extent of the role of older people in our communities and society. People of all ages have talent and ability to offer. For example, older people have an excellent record in business start-ups and often outdo their younger competitors. As has been mentioned in the debate, many employers in Scotland have come to recognise the benefits of having a diverse work force and the gains that can be made through the experience and maturity that is represented by older workers. In the past four years, employment levels for older workers have risen faster than they have for the work force as a whole. From 2006, age discrimination in the workplace will be unlawful, which will build on the current code of practice on age diversity in employment. The age positive campaign aims to raise awareness among employers through a series of events that are planned throughout Scotland in May and June, and with an updated code of practice on age diversity, which Iain Gray has launched. The change in attitude that is required is a key challenge and the legal change that will ensure that the rights of older people have the same protection as the rights of other sections of society is important in that regard.  Being able to get out and about is key to making the most of everything that is available to people in their communities. As has been said by a number of members, public transport plays an important part in many older people's lives. In rural areas, especially, public transport can be a lifeline and that is why we are investing significant funds in our rural transport initiatives. I am sorry to have to disappoint Linda Fabiani, but I will not be making any new announcement today in that regard. However, it is well known—other than on the SNP benches—that Iain Gray announced some weeks ago that any future Administration in which Labour is involved will create a national concessionary fares scheme. The rural transport fund and the rural community initiative offer real benefits to older people who are unable to access the bus services to which concessionary fare schemes apply. For example, I recently visited Peebles in Ian Jenkins' constituency to launch the new community minibus that the Tweeddale Association of Voluntary Organisations is operating as part of that rural community transport initiative. The new minibus will enable many older people who would otherwise find it difficult to get out to access services and to visit friends and family.

I am delighted that Alex Neil has given me the opportunity to respond on that matter, because yesterday morning I shared a platform with Kenny MacAskill at an election hustings on transport matters. Kenny made it quite clear that the SNP's commitment to re-regulation is one that will give local authorities the power to regulate buses if they so wish. I must tell Alex Neil, as I told Kenny MacAskill yesterday, that that is precisely what the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 already created through the measures that allow quality contracts to be introduced. I am sure that the SNP will catch up with us in due course, and that it will become aware not only of what we intend to do, but what we have already done. On September 30 last year, we introduced free off-peak bus travel for all elderly and disabled people in Scotland. One million retired people throughout Scotland have experienced the benefits of that scheme, which makes a key contribution to providing access for older people to services such as health care, education, welfare and jobs. It also contributes to the greater involvement of elderly people in the general life of the community.  We are committed to further enhancement of concessionary travel. This morning, I met the chairman of the Scottish Pensioners Association to draw attention to the equalisation of age eligibility for concessionary travel. From Tuesday 1 April, 125,000 men aged between 60 and 64 will be able to benefit from the same free concessionary travel that is currently available to men of pensionable age.

I will come back to the point that Dorothy-Grace Elder raises. It is certainly a matter that I shall seek to address, but there are one or two other points that I want to respond to first. The introduction of age equalisation is only one more step. As I said, we have already made it clear that those on the Executive benches intend, in the next Parliament, to create a single national free concessionary travel scheme for pensioners and people over 60 throughout Scotland. To make that possible, we have made available significant funds, which have already amounted to nearly £100 million a year. Beyond that, we are also committed to working with the UK Government to improve access to transport for disabled people, including disabled elderly people, in Scotland. Last May, we established the mobility and access committee for Scotland to allow disabled people to feed in their views on transport issues and to suggest early practical improvements that could be made. Robert Brown mentioned the safe stations initiative in the Strathclyde area, and many other such initiatives are already under way. The mobility and access committee for Scotland will assist us in spreading that best practice. Learning and lifelong learning are also areas of great interest to older people. In February, Iain Gray launched our strategy for lifelong learning to highlight those matters. Gaining new skills and new knowledge is a lifetime opportunity; it is not an opportunity only for young adults, as was once the view. That is why our strategy emphasises the lifelong approach—we want everyone to be able to access learning that is most relevant to their needs. The internet is just one of the latest tools that people can use to gain new knowledge and access to the internet is clearly something that can be highly beneficial for older people. I was  interested in Helen Eadie's comment about the 101-year-old who was learning those skills. We are committed to ensuring that by 2005 everyone will have access to the web through public internet access points within a mile of their homes in urban areas and within five miles of their homes in rural areas. That will create an additional 1,000 new internet access points, and 450 venues are already in place. We are working with Age Concern Scotland to identify and target venues that could be of particular benefit to older people. As I said earlier, health care is not the only thing that matters to older people, although it does of course matter: many of us will need to be looked after at some time in the future, so we must ensure that when that time comes the necessary services are available to make that possible. That is why the Executive introduced free personal and nursing care, a decision that was welcomed by Help the Aged and many other organisations. There are issues to be resolved in the implementation of free personal care, which is why we are assessing its progress rigorously and have committed £250 million over two years to achieving it. Through the monitoring group, we and our partners will ensure that those implementation issues are addressed effectively. In the health service, delayed discharge is an issue that is of particular interest to older people. Last year's data clearly show that we are succeeding in reducing the figures for delayed discharge. I look forward to the latest figures being announced later this week, and to finding out whether we have continued to make an impact on them, as I suspect we have. The matter of access to information has been raised by a number of members, including Paul Martin, Ian Jenkins and Sandra White. We are committed to ensuring that older people have access to information. The "Are you over 50?" booklet has been widely distributed through job centres, libraries, general practitioner surgeries, citizens advice bureaux and older people's organisations. It is a product of the Department for Work and Pensions and is aimed at ensuring that people have access to the information that they need. The one-stop shop idea that has been mentioned is very positive, and it is something that can be built upon. Access to good and accurate information is vital and through the Executive's publications, its website and the work that we are continuing to do with elderly forums, we are addressing the best ways in which to make information available to people when and where they need it. I am pleased to confirm Frank McAveety's success this week in resolving the problem of fees in the care home sector. We have delivered an  additional £130 million of public funding to that sector since July 2001 and I am glad that the threat of blocking the access of elderly people to care homes has been withdrawn, and that care home operators will work in partnership with local authorities. Community pharmacies have been mentioned. For those who missed it, Frank McAveety's recent announcement was that we will not accept the recommendations of the Office of Fair Trading; in Scotland, we will retain community pharmacies and will give them the protection that they need, because we acknowledge their importance in providing services to older people. Dorothy-Grace Elder asked about the Scottish Executive's position as an employer. Sixty is the standard retirement age for the work force, but that position is under review and we expect a report on the subject to come out in the course of the next couple of months.

I support the view that people should have the right to choose. If people choose to continue working for Scottish ministers longer than they must, then who are we to stand in their way? The ability of older people to choose whether to work will be important for all of us. Scots of all ages want opportunities to be active and to participate. We in the Executive are determined to remove the barriers that prevent that, particularly in transport, lifelong learning, enterprise, housing, health and care. At the beginning of the Parliament, we said that things would get better for older people: they have, and there is a range of ways in which things have got very much got better, including free concessionary travel, free personal care and free central heating. They will continue to get better, but more must be done. That is why we need to work together with our partners in the voluntary and private sectors and throughout central Government and local government to ensure that we deliver services for older people. We want to make Scotland an even better place to live for people of all ages—that includes those who retire from the Parliament today.

rose—

I would have been delighted to announce that had my colleagues not made such an announcement some weeks ago. Having caught up with that fact, Christine Grahame will want to pay close attention to the matter. The  difference between our commitment to a nationwide scheme and whatever the SNP has to say is that we will deliver our scheme.

I congratulate Tavish Scott on securing the debate and will reflect on the comments that have been made. The Scottish Executive is fully committed to maintaining essential lifeline air and ferry services to Scotland's island communities. That commitment underpins the substantial and increasing financial contribution that we are making to that end. Last year, the Parliament debated the initial HITRANS report, which gave an overview of PSO practice throughout Europe. The report represented the first phase of work on the issue and it was clear at that stage that a more comprehensive assessment was needed of the implications of an extended use of PSOs. The potential scenario envisaged in that report—

It is an early intervention, Mr Ewing.

Far from being in the midst of an endless series of reviews, we are in the midst of a large-scale consultation on aviation strategy not only for Scotland and not only for now but for the entire United Kingdom and for the next 30 years. Mr Ewing will be familiar with that consultation. Given our position in the air transport networks of western Europe, it is clearly vital that we make a full contribution to that consultation. It is also vital that the case that we make for our aviation priorities be married with the case made for the priorities of the rest of the UK. However, I am not arguing against change. There has been a long-standing commitment on the part of Scottish ministers and island authorities to support a number of services that are not  commercially tenable but which are vital for the economic and social well-being of the communities served. The imposition of PSOs on air services that were previously run on a commercial basis has not happened anywhere in Britain to date. We have supported the case for such a PSO on the route from Inverness to Gatwick. As with other matters, that case has been subsumed by the wider consultation on air transport during which new services from Inverness have come on stream. We are happy that UK ministers take their time in considering a Gatwick PSO and that they should do so in the wider context of regional access to London-system airports and the future development of air transport throughout the UK as a whole.

I would look to a wide range of opportunities for aviation links from Inverness and other places in the Highlands and Islands to places furth of Scotland. We should pay attention to the results of the review—although the consultation will not be completed until June—and to the market, and recognise that the market has produced additional services in the recent past. The potential to build on that is still significant. The proposed Inverness to Gatwick PSO is not intended to deliver subsidy, whereas the proposals from HITRANS envisage a cost to the public purse of several million pounds a year. The timing of the latest HITRANS report, which fleshes out the original proposals, is useful. The current consultation process on air transport will lead, perhaps towards the end of this year, to the production of a UK white paper that will outline policy proposals. Once the consultation ends in June, we will engage in detailed dialogue with Department for Transport officials on what we want to appear in that white paper for Scotland's interests. I have no doubt that discussion of PSOs will take place in one form or another in that context. The Scottish air transport consultation document, which was issued jointly by ourselves and by the DFT, addressed specific issues with regard to Highlands and Islands air services. That document has been only one aspect of the consultation process, however. We have held a series of events in the Highlands and Islands to address issues such as infrastructure and route development. That dialogue is continuing, and my officials are scheduled to meet representatives of HITRANS at the end of the month to discuss PSOs and the latest information. Many of the  people who attend that meeting will go on to the third international forum on air transport in remoter regions, which is to be held in Cork next week, and which will address some of the issues in a wider, European context. Once we have received the supporting cost model for the HITRANS proposals, we expect to scrutinise the costs and we will take into consideration both the additional number of passengers that Tavish Scott has suggested might be generated and the extra infrastructure costs that might require to be met. The potential for extended PSOs would have to be considered by any Executive in the context of the existing commitment to Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd and to Highlands and Islands air travellers, which currently stands at about £30 per passenger, and which represents support for the airport operator to reduce the cost to passengers. My party would certainly be disinclined to move away from that approach as the centrepiece of our support for air passengers.

I would certainly not dispute the fact that there are issues around fare levels on a number of routes. Those issues require to be addressed and the market can assist us, as recently happened in the case of Stornoway routes. Clearly, however, more requires to be done. Fergus Ewing mentioned the regulatory regime. That comes under the consultation, and so is reserved to the UK Government, but we will be discussing the matter with UK Government officials. Indeed, we are already doing so. On the PFI at Inverness airport, a review is under way between HIAL and the owners of the PFI, and that has our full support. The review aims to explore whether there are ways in which that PFI can better deliver the aims that we share with the operators. Lifeline ferry services are obviously an important part of the support that we provide to our island communities.

As I was pleased to say earlier, an additional contract will be let from April next year, which will allow a full review. It will be for ministers to make clear then the basis on which that review will be conducted. We will wish to consider the future of the Barra to Glasgow air service. There are some serious issues around that, with which Mr Hamilton is familiar, and those issues require to be addressed for the long-term future in consultation with the community and its elected representatives. Given the shortage of time, I must move to some of the shipping issues that were raised in the debate. Over the past six years, we have doubled the level of subsidy to CalMac for west coast ferries. That significant investment has already enabled CalMac to introduce two new vessels, and a further two new vessels will come on stream shortly. I announced earlier that we will upgrade the CalMac winter service between Tobermory and Kilchoan from the passenger service that was announced last year to a passenger and vehicle service. That service will operate to an enhanced timetable and will be introduced in October this year. Likewise, in the northern isles we have tendered for the 2002-07 contract and have put in place a new operator that provides three new vessels at a cost of more than £100 million. That provides improved fares and journey times as well as a better timetable. We have made significant investments in the harbours that serve those routes. As Jim Wallace mentioned, I was in Scrabster earlier this week, where I visited the harbour. I confirmed our commitment to an interim solution to allow the Hamnavoe, which is one of those splendid new vessels, to dock in Scrabster from 21 April this year. Livestock transportation arrangements for the northern isles were mentioned in the debate. I can confirm that we have, indeed, reached agreement in principle with NorthLink on plans for this autumn's peak livestock season, which will involve the use of chartered vessels. The precise details have still to be settled and will be announced shortly when that happens. However, I think that that will give some reassurance to the farming and crofting communities.

I am afraid that time is against us. Clearly, future long-term solutions will require further pursuit. However, this is a time of expansion for ferries and harbour infrastructures on the west and north coasts of Scotland. Members with an interest in those areas should welcome that.  I welcome the HITRANS report on air services as a useful and constructive contribution to the air transport consultation process and the debate on transport in the Highlands and Islands generally. I have no doubt that that will be debated in some detail over the next few weeks. In my view, and in that of my party, it is clear that further work must be done to ensure that the decisions that are taken about the future of policy in that area are soundly based. I look forward to continuing dialogue with the islanders and their elected representatives on those matters.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

Earlier today I announced that we will address traffic issues on the A76 by building a climbing lane at Glenairlie, south of Sanquhar. The previous proposal to realign the road at Gateside, north of Sanquhar, will not now proceed.

I am not saying either of the things that Alasdair Morgan suggested. On the contrary, the scheme at Glenairlie that I have announced today is the option that we have chosen to address problems of traffic delays on the A76. I recognise that there are problems on the north side of Sanquhar, to which the member referred. The scheme at Gateside has been abandoned because of a failure to agree with local farmers and landowners on access. That is to be regretted, but we are continuing to consider other options for convoy busting, to reduce the backlog of vehicles behind slow-moving vehicles on the stretch of road between Sanquhar and Kirkconnel.

I do not agree that the measures that we have taken to improve visibility on the A76 are in any way cosmetic or beside the point. On the contrary, they are part of a strategy for addressing safety issues on the road—the Glenairlie scheme that we announced today is also part of that strategy. We will continue to use that approach for that route.

I congratulate Richard Simpson on raising this matter. It is parallel to another members' business motion some weeks ago about the proposed site of Forth Valley NHS Board's new hospital at Larbert. Several of the issues that have been mentioned this evening were also raised during that debate. Of course, infrastructure is of great importance to wider issues connected with economic development opportunity. I shall come to some of those infrastructure issues in a moment, but I should like to say something about the proposed new hospital site at Larbert, the development of which will be significant. It is important that the services that it will provide are accessible to everybody—patients, visitors and staff. Members can be assured that my officials will be involved in discussions with the health department and the health board to ensure that transport impacts and costs are taken into account in the decision-making process.

It means that transport considerations will be taken into account in the decision that health ministers seek to take. That is as much as Mr Raffan would expect me to say this evening. The Forth Valley NHS Board will carry out a transport analysis that will provide all partners with a clear view of what needs to be done to ensure that that site can be planned and delivered to best effect.

That transport analysis is critical to the decision that must be made on the siting of a new hospital in the area. Therefore I have no doubt that those costs, as well as other matters, will be taken fully into account. Almost all speakers have referred to a number of specific infrastructure projects. Everyone who referred to the new crossing at Kincardine welcomed that development. I will pause to touch on the issue of what the bridge may be called.  Richard Simpson clearly has a view on the matter and will no doubt seek Clackmannanshire Council's support for his proposal. He may also want to canvass support more widely. Other speakers have indicated that there are a number of stakeholders around the upper Forth. We will listen carefully to all the views that are expressed about the appropriate name for the bridge. A new road bridge is not a small undertaking—

I cannot renege on my commitment to consider all possibilities. However, in this case I am tempted to do so.

Because I want to make progress, I will spend no more time on the question of the bridge's name. Instead, I would like to reflect on its purpose. As a number of members have indicated, we consulted very widely on the route of both the bridge and the access roads. The final decision on the route was announced towards the end of last year. We aim to publish the draft orders this summer and design work is proceeding as we speak. The detailed design will seek to address potential congestion at the bridgeheads. The route that we have announced has been widely welcomed locally and planning for the additional jobs that the bridge will create in the area is already well under way. We are also taking care to ensure that the bridge causes the least possible disruption to wildlife habitats and to people living in the area. Those are important statutory requirements and they are not small tasks. A local inquiry might be a necessity and if that is the case, we must ensure that all the facts are examined and all objections are dealt with fully and properly. We hope that we can work through the process to start construction by summer 2005, with the new bridge open to traffic by the end of 2007 or early the following year. Closure of the existing bridge for repair can happen only when the new bridge is open. We expect that closure to be for a period of 10 to 12 months. Those developments are a little way off, as is any major hospital development, but other developments are under way. The eastern link road at Kincardine is an important part of the infrastructure and construction on it will start this summer. It is part of an overall package to improve traffic flows around the settlement of Kincardine. By replacing the small roundabout that has to  handle all the traffic through the village with a new signalled junction, we aim to make a significant difference to the village and to traffic using the existing bridge, as well as avoiding the risk of congestion, which has been flagged up. More widely, we have provided more than £20 million to a variety of projects through the public transport fund and we have provided funding to complete the reconstruction of the A907 in Clackmannanshire, to which a number of members have referred. That is on top of more than £2.3 million in additional funding in the most recent period for Falkirk Council, Stirling Council and Clackmannanshire Council to improve and repair local roads and bridges in their areas. It is of course for councils to develop schemes for local roads and we expect to do that, whether in relation to Tullibody or to other parts of the local road network.

The first stage of providing the new slip roads at the M876, which I think are the subject of Mr Canavan's question, is to put in place an indicative valuation of the economic case for construction. We expect that to be completed by the end of next month. That will provide the basis for a full and robust economic case, which will be required in the event of a public local inquiry. As members will know, a local public inquiry on the subject is currently sisted and will reopen if the project goes forward.

By definition, if the economic case is brought forward in full, it will have to reflect the position that applies at the time and also the position that is expected to apply thereafter. It will take into account plans and proposals for developments in the area. As far as the rail project is concerned, the leading body in bringing forward the Kincardine rail link is Clackmannanshire Council, rather than the Scottish Executive. We would expect the council to carry forward the proposal that came before the Parliament only a couple of weeks ago—the very first rail bill to be presented in the Scottish Parliament since devolution. It will be for the council to justify and project manage the rail link in partnership with us and with  other partners within the project execution team. I am of course always willing for local MSPs and residents who have concerns about these matters to meet me or officials, depending on the timing and the circumstances and I have no doubt that the matters that have been raised will continue to be raised.

It is intended that all such studies will be put in the public domain in the usual way. I hope that that will meet Dr Simpson's need.  The debate has been useful. It has covered a range of local infrastructure improvements, many of which are planned or are at a detailed design stage and some of which will clearly be required in the future. There is increasing recognition of the importance of the interface between health and transport; Edinburgh royal infirmary is a good case in point. Another point that is current is the wider interface between transport and economic development. Today's debate has helped to address that matter. All the issues that have been raised will be included within consideration of the transport assessment for the Larbert proposal, should that go ahead.  Meeting closed at 17:56.

The learn to let go campaign is designed to encourage people to consider a wider range of options when undertaking their daily journeys. Recent independent research indicates that it has been successful in raising travel awareness for significant numbers of people throughout Scotland.

An attack on advertising by the Scottish National Party is a fascinating political initiative. I will set some of the facts straight, because  Stewart Stevenson is clearly not aware of them. The research to which I refer includes research conducted by two different agencies; it was conducted in February 2001, October 2001, December 2002 and January 2003. I am sorry that he has only now got round to reading that research but, now that he has, he will appreciate that the campaign contributes significantly to our strategy of raising awareness about the availability of public transport throughout Scotland.

I agree with Mr Davidson's point about the importance of rural public transport. I am glad to put on the record the Executive's contributions in the past few weeks, such as another £150,000 towards rural community transport in Aberdeenshire alone. Our contributions to scheduled rural bus services in Aberdeenshire are significant and, at the end of last year, we agreed to provide a further £2 million for the consideration of bus access from Aberdeenshire to Aberdeen. The appropriate body, which is Aberdeenshire Council, is considering Laurencekirk railway station, and I look forward with interest to the council's conclusions.

I am pleased to join those who have welcomed the lodging of the motion and who have congratulated Angus MacKay on securing the debate. Ethical investment is rising up the agenda and, as members have said, is part of the wider corporate social responsibility agenda. It is moving up the agenda for private business as well as for other institutions, which is to be welcomed. Clearly, Scotland's universities are autonomous bodies, and it is up to them to take decisions about how to spend and invest their money. Ministers cannot tell universities what to do or how to do it, and we would not seek to have that power. That said, universities make an important contribution to the delivery of the Executive's priorities. They provide key services in education and training, which underpin our skills base. As Angus MacKay rightly said, the universities help us to close the opportunity gap. University research generates new knowledge and is key to our economic strategy of generating wealth on the basis of skills, excellence and the knowledge economy. In return, the universities receive significant public funds. By 2005-06, higher education in Scotland will receive more than £800 million in public funds, which is around 60 per cent of their income. That represents a huge public investment by any standard, so it is right and proper that there  should be public interest in what the universities do with their money—I am talking about public interest as opposed to Government direction. The Scottish Higher Education Funding Council is required to encourage universities to maintain or develop funding from other sources. Indeed, our universities have a good track record in competing for research funding from both the United Kingdom research councils and the private sector as well as in winning money in the wider marketplace. However, tonight's motion refers to funds that are principally the universities' endowment funds. Those are funds that have been donated by benefactors over many years, and they are of particular importance to all of Scotland's older universities—even the youngest of Scotland's older universities. Like other universities, the University of Edinburgh must maximise the returns on those funds to ensure that the income generated meets the aims of the endowments. On the face of it, a tension could be seen to exist between maximising those investment returns and circumscribing the areas in which funds can be invested. However, the co-operative movement, for one, has shown over many years that there is no contradiction between the pursuit of a policy of ethical investment and making money to reinvest in local communities or, indeed, in education and research. The University of Edinburgh is not alone among universities in grappling with the issues and in seeking to address them. My own university, the University of Aberdeen, has followed a policy that it should not invest in any company that is substantially involved in the tobacco industry or in companies whose activities are known to be conducted in an environmentally unsound way. Like others, I will mention the origins of that policy. They go back to my student days when many of us campaigned against investments in companies that were linked to the apartheid regime in South Africa. There is clear evidence that making one's views known can make a difference not only in the short term, but in the longer term. Like the University of Edinburgh and others, the University of Glasgow has decided on an ethical investment policy that concentrates in particular on avoiding investment in tobacco-related companies. It is clear that it is up to individual universities to take decisions on such matters, including decisions on whether to put details of their investment portfolios into the public domain. All universities already publish a considerable amount of information. One example is their annual reports, which give details of what they have done over the year and how their income has been distributed. Indeed, in the era of electronic information, it is remarkable just how much  information can be gleaned from universities' websites about their governance, their court, committee proceedings and financial policies. The information that we are discussing relates to universities' private income as opposed to the public funding that they receive, and that is a matter for each university court to decide for itself. As others have done, I welcome the decision by the University of Edinburgh court to pay heed to the concerns of the People & Planet group and of the wider student body. The court has decided to publish details of its investment portfolio in the interests of transparency and of providing a channel of communication for views on investment policy. I know that other institutions will observe with interest, and I will watch with interest to discover how universities respond. Ethical investment is not an issue for universities alone. I have mentioned the long-standing and outstanding example of the Scottish Co-operative Society and other co-ops. I am delighted to report that such an approach increasingly attracts support from the private sector. Corporate social responsibility has been embraced by many businesses and essentially addresses issues of corporate behaviour and standards. The Department of Trade and Industry has lead responsibility for the matter at Whitehall. It already has a comprehensive framework for corporate social responsibility and Scottish ministers are happy to work with the DTI in that area. We have been thinking about what more needs to happen in Scotland, over and above what is going on in Whitehall, Europe and the wider international community. In the Executive, as in the Parliament's European Committee, we have been thinking about the characteristics of a socially responsible business or public body. Ethical investment is part of that, but it is only one strand. Responsiveness to a range of stakeholders, to staff, to investors and to the general public is another strand, as is being good to work for—encouraging and not exploiting the work force—and working in partnership with trade unions instead of opposing trade unionism. Those are features of a responsible corporate approach.

Absolutely. I want to emphasise that, in developing our approach to  corporate social responsibility and continuing to promote it, we already have a number of instruments to hand, such as regional selective assistance, public-private partnerships, local economic forums and the promotion of community planning, which we are also undertaking. We will seek to promote corporate social responsibility via existing programmes in higher education as well as in the other areas that I have mentioned, and to take a co-ordinated approach to how we proceed. I expect that my colleagues will have more to say about how we make that progress. The students of the University of Edinburgh have done a service to their university as well as to the wider Scottish public by drawing attention once again—as has been done several times over the years—to the desirability of ethical investment, to the desirability of greater openness about the accounts of public and other bodies and by raising debate about such important matters. The Executive welcomes the University of Edinburgh court's decision to place information about the investment portfolio of the university in the public domain. That is very much in keeping with our general approach of supporting openness and transparency, and is in line with the emerging approach to corporate social responsibility. I look forward to others choosing to follow that good example.  Meeting closed at 17:39.

We are currently reviewing a range of route action plans in order to consider which outstanding minor improvement schemes might be brought forward into the trunk roads programme. I hope to announce the outcome of that review in the near future.

I am aware of the reporter's findings, which were recently made known to Midlothian Council with respect to its local plan. The member has indeed already raised with me the tragic death of a cyclist on the A68. I assure her that when we determine our priorities for the trunk road network, we will continue to put both road safety and economic development very high on our list of considerations.

As the member is aware, we have made substantial investments in the M77, in the northern part of the route, and we are carrying forward plans in relation to both the A75 and the A77, in consultation with the north channel partnership, which has an interest in those trunk roads serving Stranraer and the south-west.

Watch this space.

As the A9 is one of our major trunk routes, it is subject to the route action plan process. Although the yellow route of Helmsdale might have appealed to some as a sensible compromise, I am interested in Jamie Stone's conversion to the red route, and will take that into account in considering all the responses.

We have announced funding of an engineering study to consider requirements for the reopening of the line and to provide a timetable for delivery, which will allow work to commence. I expect development work to be completed by spring next year.

I assure Bristow Muldoon that the economic benefits that an Airdrie to Bathgate line can deliver are among the factors that have persuaded the Executive to make the commitment that it has made to that route. I join the member in encouraging all those who have the interests of communities in West Lothian at heart to welcome and support the commitment that the Executive has made.

Our investment in rolling stock, announced in December, will result in new trains operating on the Aberdeen to Edinburgh and Aberdeen to Glasgow routes. In addition, the Scottish  Executive has supported the cost of progressing the Aberdeen crossrail proposals and is working with the Strategic Rail Authority to improve services on the Aberdeen to Inverness line.

I agree entirely about the potential benefits of additional services on this route. Nora Radcliffe mentioned Dyce and other industrial areas around the city. The challenge is to link improved rail services to other aspects of the public transport network, such as the evolving strategy for public transport access to Aberdeen airport, which is important. We will consider the crossrail proposals as they evolve to the next stage and encourage work on them to continue. We will examine the proposals with a clear view of the important contribution that they may make to the public transport network in and around the city of Aberdeen.

As Elaine Thomson is aware, we will proceed with the construction of the western peripheral route around Aberdeen. That is one of the key projects in the modern transport strategy that has been developed by Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council. The strategy comprises both public transport and roads investment, which is a good, balanced approach and we will continue to work with the authorities in carrying it forward. Of course, we will continue to provide direct instructions to the Strategic Rail  Authority on matters relating to the Scottish rail passenger franchise.

Scottish Executive officials meet the management of Caledonian MacBrayne whenever necessary, most recently on Monday of this week, when the future investment programme for Clyde and Hebrides ferry services was discussed.

I am afraid that Mr Hamilton is slightly out of date with developments. Some weeks ago, I announced that we will issue shortly a draft service specification for the Gourock to Dunoon service that will separate it out from the overall network. The requirement that the service should be let to the operator that provides the service at the lowest possible cost accompanies the requirement that the service should be compliant with the terms of the tender. In letting the service specification and the tender, it is for the Executive to define the terms of the tender. We will accept the bid that is compliant with the requirements of the tender and that comes in at the lowest possible cost.

We expect to begin that consultation shortly. We will have to ensure that the necessary amendments are made to the wider draft service specification, as well as prepare the current draft service specification for the Gourock to Dunoon route.

The point on restrictions is similar to the one raised by Duncan Hamilton. It was made clear in our most recent discussions with the European Commission that a proposal that was founded on the existing restrictions on the service would be more likely to survive any challenge that might be made by a third party. That advice and the discussions that we had drew us to reach our conclusions and to produce the proposals. Clearly, we will take into account the need for public transport services on the route when we produce the final service specification.

From the Executive's point of view, the objective is clear: an economy that is based on competitive advantages. The advantages will be a highly skilled and flexible work force, a culture of enterprise and support for innovation. Those are the only ways in which to bring our productivity levels up to and beyond those that obtain elsewhere and to achieve sustained economic growth. I hope that we can build a consensus around our strategy for a smart, successful Scotland, although it is clear from the debate that that will be easier in some aspects of policy than in others. We are rolling out our strategy for the medium to long term, while delivering the things that matter to business now. Our strategy is not based on promoting Scotland as a cheaper place in which to do business, although we certainly compete already on those terms; it is based on science and skills. Driving down costs is fine—any business will seek to do that—but undercutting the competition is not the primary basis on which Scotland will compete in the wider world. I recognise the difficulties that sectors of the Scottish economy have faced in the recent past and the impact of global economic conditions on many of our exporters. We were hit particularly hard in the last reported quarter by the restructuring of the electronics sector, which has become so important to the wider economy in recent years. Of course, I regret last week's announcement by Boots of its intention to close its manufacturing plant in Airdrie over the next two years. Our immediate priority in that case is to ensure that everything possible is done to assist the people who are likely to lose their jobs. Job losses are always regrettable, but, compared with a few short years ago, the Lanarkshire economy and labour market is now buoyant. As Bristow Muldoon said in reference to West Lothian, those who are affected can, with the right support, move quickly into other jobs or training. Alex Neil raised some important points, but I disagree profoundly with his attempt to talk down the importance to the Scottish economy of increased employment. Today's labour market figures show that the number of jobs increased by 47,000 in the last quarter of 2002. Not just on the claimant count, but on the International Labour Organisation count, unemployment is down to just above 150,000, which means that unemployment in Scotland is lower than unemployment in London. I would not suggest for a moment that the gain in jobs is a ground for complacency, but I reject the suggestion that employment, interest rate and inflation levels are irrelevant to economic growth.

The reality is that levels of employment are much higher than they were in the recent past and that levels of unemployment are much lower. We are not complacent. If Mr Wilson were serious about building a consensus, he would recognise, acknowledge and support the achievements that have been made in those areas in recent years. Annabel Goldie and other members have accused Andrew Wilson of underachievement, but he is to be congratulated on the conversion of Mr MacAskill—consensus Kenny is a new experience for the Parliament and a significant achievement. Part of Mr MacAskill's consensual approach is his enthusiasm for a Government strategy to extend the electronic infrastructure. Such a strategy is already in place and is designed precisely to address the inability of the market to deliver full coverage to rural areas. We have invested £200 million in rolling out broadband and an additional £24 million for the pathfinder projects, as was announced in December.

On the contrary, as I just said, we have put in place a strategy and, in the past few weeks, we have extended that strategy through the provision of a further £24 million of investment. We are making similar investments in transport. David McLetchie conceded that his party would cut the Scottish Enterprise network's budget and Andrew Wilson appeared to cast doubt on his party's plans in that regard. Perhaps Adam Ingram will tell us what his plans on business rates would cost the network and what he would cut to pay for them. Would it be Careers Scotland, Futureskills Scotland, the intermediary technology institutes, the proof-of-concept fund, Scottish Development International, the Scottish co-investment fund, the new business growth fund or the modern  apprenticeships that we have heard so much about? The business community is entitled to know which of those measures the other parties intend to sacrifice. No doubt we will find out, if not today, at least in the next few weeks. We welcome the debate and the drive for consensus, which we have led. We have no interest in arguing about the source of good ideas; we want good ideas and we will apply them with whatever support we can obtain. Our focus is on implementing our policies and strategies and on the effectiveness of those policies in boosting the Scottish economy. We are also focused on using our present powers. We do not see any purpose in being distracted by arguments about powers that the Parliament does not possess. We are not prepared to jeopardise any part of our strategy in pursuit of quick headlines, but we are keen to ensure that our strategy is applied fully. We have a coherent, focused and balanced set of policies for achieving economic growth in Scotland in the years ahead. We will work to increase our policies' impact in partnership with business and any political party that chooses to support us in our objectives.

I take Ms Hyslop's point, but her party has described certain parliamentary powers. In what way and to what degree does the SNP propose to drive down the tax burden on business with powers other than those that the Scottish Parliament already has?

I should like to begin in the spirit of Mr Wilson's welcome press release, rather than in that of his opening remarks today, because I want to begin with some agreement. Clearly, there are significant areas of agreement. For example, we are agreed on the need for sustainable long-term growth in the Scottish economy. We are agreed that increased productivity is the key to such growth, and that only by generating more wealth can we pay for the public services that we want, create opportunities for all and lay the basis for sustainable development in the years ahead. A consensus within Scotland on how to achieve that growth, and sustain higher productivity, is certainly desirable. I welcome the SNP's recognition in its press release, which backs Labour, that—and I think I use its words, not mine—an enterprise strategy focused on science and skills, on global connectivity and on growing Scottish businesses provides a basis on which such a consensus can be built. "A Smart, Successful Scotland" is that strategy for growth, but it does not stand in isolation from the wider economic and political context any more than Scotland's economy can grow in isolation from the wider world. The political context of our enterprise strategy is the devolution settlement, which the SNP does not accept but which we see as critical to the successful delivery of our aims for sustainable future growth. The economic context is critical too, specifically the stable macroeconomic environment delivered by sound management of the UK economy.

Devolution gives us the opportunity to concentrate on growth and skills, which is precisely what we need to do. We are able to address sustainable growth precisely because we are operating in a stable macroeconomic environment, which has delivered record low levels of inflation, record low interest rates and the lowest level of unemployment in a generation. Those indicators are significant in setting the context for growth and should not be taken for granted. The debate is not just about the relationship with the rest of the UK, as important as that is. It is also about what kind of competitive advantage we should seek and where we should position ourselves in the global economy. We are clear about how we want Scotland to compete, which is as a high-skill, high-knowledge economy. That is why "A Smart, Successful Scotland" places such emphasis on investing in people and on the links between enterprise and lifelong learning. That is also why we do not want to depend in future on inward investment alone, or to make our pitch to overseas investors as a cheaper place to do business, be that on labour costs or tax rates on business profits.

"Life Through Learning Through Life: The Lifelong Learning Strategy for Scotland", which was launched yesterday, points us in the direction of how we should be growing that sector of the economy and ensuring that it makes a contribution to the wider economic benefit. I shall touch briefly on corporation tax rates, because the SNP has raised the issue in the past, although I was struck by the lack of direct reference to it in Andrew Wilson's introductory remarks this morning. Perhaps more light will be shed on that in due course. It is worth noting that the UK already has lower corporation tax rates than the United States and Japan, and the level is below the European Union average. The rates are competitive on the world stage and at the same time provide the revenues that we need to sustain investment in the wider economy.

Yes.

I do not agree. In fact, that is precisely the flaw at the heart of SNP policy. Instead, we need to sell Scotland as a high-quality, high-value, highly productive and enterprising economy. Seeking to undercut our competitors on labour or tax costs is the wrong direction to go in. That argument is not abstract. After all, a penny on corporation tax means £90 million in tax take for the Scottish economy. We do not need to take many pennies off that tax to remove the budgets for training and skills, research and development and business start-up and growth that Alex Neil mentioned. Some might think that that is a price worth paying for a few big inward investors—we do not agree. The same argument applies to business rates. Although business rate poundage in Scotland is higher, many comparable rateable values are lower. One could make a legitimate argument about the balance of burdens on individual businesses. However, complaining about differential tax rates in Scotland and England while in the same breath demanding full fiscal independence makes very little sense. We will freeze business rates from 1 April, and will be delighted if that change results in increased business investment this year, next year and beyond. However, we do not concede the point that we should never diverge from England in devolved areas, and we recognise that there are opportunity costs in every measure we take that reduces public revenues. It is self-evident that cutting business rates, as others intend to do, will impact on public spending. To meet its pledge, the SNP will have to take £150 million out of the enterprise budget; the Tories will require to take even more. Those are legitimate choices to place before the electorate, as no doubt will be done in the next few weeks. However, no one should pretend that it is possible to reduce public revenues while increasing public investment. That simply cannot be done. Targeted public investment is part of our strategy for growth. For example, we are seeking  to support business through the intermediary technology institutes that the First Minister announced a few weeks ago. With an energy institute in Aberdeen, a life sciences institute in Dundee and an information technology institute in Glasgow, we are focusing on the real strengths of Scotland's knowledge economy. The ITIs will focus work on those issues through the investment of public money. Such an approach is jeopardised by reducing the revenues that are available to the enterprise network.

I am afraid not. Of course, we are also investing our tax revenues in the electronic infrastructure and the transport infrastructure to give Scottish companies a competitive edge. All those investments are part and parcel of our strategy for growth, which is designed to overcome the gap between where we are and where we want to be. We welcome support from all sides for that strategic approach. I move amendment S1M-3880.2, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "supports the Scottish Executive's aim of increasing sustainable economic growth over the long term; recognises that increasing Scotland's prosperity is essential to the fulfilment of the Executive's objectives of closing the opportunity gap, building first-class public services and ensuring sustainable development; calls for all leaders in Scottish public life to work towards a national consensus around the drive to bridge the gap between Scotland's economic performance and economic potential, and endorses the work being undertaken by the Executive to use the powers of the Parliament to help business grow and to secure a smart, successful Scotland by developing the science and skills base, improving global connections and investing in transport and communications infrastructure."

The A92 dualling between Dundee and Arbroath is a local road project and is the responsibility of Angus Council. The council estimates additional costs due to aggregates tax of £3.75 million, compared with a total cost overrun of £20 million.

Alex Johnstone will be aware that the aggregates tax is the responsibility not of this Administration but of the United Kingdom Government. The UK Government, in the light of its responsibility, has undertaken a review of the impact of the aggregates tax. Its impact on any road contract will depend on the materials and constructions used, and the way in which the contract is rolled out. I do not think that there is a single, straightforward percentage impact on road projects. The issue depends on how quickly the roads construction industry responds to the purpose of the aggregates tax, which is to increase the use of recycled aggregates and other environmentally less damaging materials.

That is helpful. I begin by congratulating Gordon Jackson on securing the debate, which has given us the opportunity to affirm the importance of the upper and the lower Clyde to Scotland as a whole. The Executive shares the aspirations that have been expressed for the acceleration of growth and prosperity across the region and for the regeneration of the Clyde as a world-class waterfront. The debate is timely. As members know, only a few weeks ago we published the cities review, which sets out a new direction for Glasgow and all our cities. As well as providing additional funding through the city growth fund and setting aside specific funding for the reclamation of derelict land—a significant issue for Glasgow and North Lanarkshire—the cities review looks to the cities to work in partnership with neighbouring authorities and the private sector to draw up proposals for a  shared partnership vision by May of this year. That is the right approach for Glasgow and the Clyde valley and we are keen that it is developed. Gordon Jackson mentioned last week's publication of the OECD report on Glasgow's urban renaissance, which was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise Glasgow. The report pays particular attention to the River Clyde, and recognises it as the heart of Glasgow and as an under-utilised asset of national importance. It accurately describes the waterfront as the interface between the old and new economies and between the Glasgow of the past two centuries and the Glasgow of the centuries to come. Annabel Goldie alluded to that. Like the OECD, the Scottish Executive acknowledges and supports the partnership activity that is already under way on the Clyde, which is demonstrated by the work of a number of groups. Not least among those groups is the Clyde shipyards task force, which continues to address the future of shipbuilding on the river. In response to the recommendations of the task force's report, Scottish Enterprise recently made a welcome announcement of £5 million over three years for the Govan/Scotstoun action plan. Clearly, the recent BAE Systems announcement of likely redundancies was disappointing, but we look forward to better news to come. For those who might lose their jobs as a result of those redundancies, the next few weeks of consultation will be important, but I hope that the wider prospects for the company will allow the number of compulsory redundancies to be kept to a minimum. Every effort will be made through the partnership action for continuing employment to help those affected to find alternative employment or training opportunities. Even as we speak, the House of Commons is preparing for Geoff Hoon's announcement, which will confirm the Ministry of Defence's decision to proceed with the aircraft carrier contract. I have no doubt that the Clyde shipyards are well placed to secure a significant share of those contracts, regardless of which company is chosen as the main contractor. Shipbuilding has been, and will continue to be, important to the Clyde, but our agenda goes wider than that one industry. In November 2001, Wendy Alexander, who was the minister at the time, established the Clyde waterfront working group to which Gordon Jackson referred. That group is tasked with progressing a partnership strategy to maximise social and economic development along the Clyde between Glasgow Green and the Erskine bridge. The group aims to add value to the many development and regeneration initiatives that are under way in that area.  The working group is chaired by Scottish Enterprise, which recently awarded landmark initiative status to the project. That means that national resources will be top-sliced to support it. The group brings together representatives from not only the Executive and Scottish Enterprise, but the local authorities in Glasgow, Renfrewshire and West Dunbartonshire, the local enterprise companies, the Glasgow and Clyde valley structure plan committee and Clydebank Rebuilt Ltd. Phase 1 of the group's work culminated in the publication in June last year of "ClydeRebuilt: A National Development Opportunity". That report predicted that a regenerated Clyde could make a substantial contribution to the economy as a whole and it recommended that those who are involved in its development should look to other parts of the world, as well as nearer to home, for models of how to progress. Iain Gray and Margaret Curran have approved the findings of the report and endorsed the next step, which is the development of a detailed and deliverable strategy to create the conditions for success. Consultants have been appointed and are working up a development framework and an action plan. Sub-groups have been established to address the two important but distinct issues of community regeneration and transport and river engineering. As several members said, transport is emerging as one of the most important issues for the regeneration of the Clyde. We have seen how major regeneration schemes across the world take good public transport as a given. Public transport is also important for the regeneration of the Clyde and for the wider context, as a number of members have said. An example of that is last week's announcement on the Airdrie to Bathgate line, which will bring a direct connection between, on the one hand, Partick and Clydebank and, on the other, the east of Scotland. This week, Iain Gray and I met the chairs of Strathclyde Passenger Transport and the west of Scotland transport partnership to discuss how we should carry forward the investments that are already in place in the transport infrastructure in the west. We expect that the consultants will soon produce their report on the new rail link to Glasgow airport. It is clear that the Clyde has exciting transport possibilities. The Clyde waterfront working group is awaiting a report on work that was led by Glasgow City Council. The report will make proposals for new light rapid transit systems on both sides of the river, so we will no doubt hear more about Glasgow trams when that work has been done.  A couple of members mentioned the proposed recycling plant at Linthouse. Members will be aware that the application may come before Scottish ministers for a decision as part of the planning process, so I will not comment on the merits of that proposal. Members may also be aware that there is a parallel application that does not include that recycling plant. Clearly, we will watch developments with great interest. Several members referred to the Finnieston bridge. I reassure members that the bridge has been redesigned specifically to ensure that there will be sufficient clearance to allow river bus services to be delivered up river in the future. Such services are one of the issues that will be examined by the transport and river engineering sub-group to which I referred. River engineering is about addressing the risk of flooding by working on the riverbed, for example. Glasgow City Council has taken the lead in that, but we are working closely with the city and other local authorities. Karen Gillon mentioned the Larkhall to Milngavie rail link. SPT is working on that and it hopes to move into the delivery phase in the next few months. Clearly, we attach great importance to that project and we will continue to talk to the SPT about it. In terms of joining up all our transport proposals and feeding them into the strategy for economic development, the joint working of the Executive with the SPT and WESTRANS is something that we are committed to and investing in. The regeneration of the Clyde features highly on the Executive's agenda. Officials from across the Executive have been actively engaged in meetings of the Clyde waterfront working group. We look forward to considering the group's interim findings in some detail shortly. We recognise that the work of the group is the initial stage in developing a strategy for the area. We all agree about the importance of a vibrant and dynamic Clyde to the region and to Scotland and we will continue to work with local partners to bring that about.

I am not aware of any representation from Scottish Borders Council about the funding of repairs to the A72.

To answer the question in the context in which it was framed, it is quite clear that our responsibility for the road and rail network in south-east Scotland, as elsewhere, is to support the infrastructure, including the trunk-road network. The responsibility for the A72 lies with the local authority, as the local roads authority. Christine Grahame comments on the time that it has taken to reopen the A72. It is worth reminding members that the road was closed by a landslide on 27 December and that Scottish Borders Council has taken measures to reopen it very quickly indeed. The Bellwin scheme is designed to address emergencies. Scottish Borders Council has clearly addressed that issue and if it wishes to come to us to seek additional capital consent for longer-term issues on the road, ministers would consider such an approach on its merits in the usual way.

I would certainly be happy for Scottish Executive road engineers to talk to colleagues in Scottish Borders Council. The member will be aware that the roads department of Scottish Borders Council has an exceptional technical reputation. The way that it has dealt with the problem of the A72 has demonstrated that it is capable of dealing with such issues. On the wider question of the possible financial implications of  future work on the road, any application for capital consent would, as I said a moment ago, be treated in the usual way.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to address this issue and I congratulate Brian Adam on securing the debate. I suspect that the speeches that have been made reflect a broad consensus that such issues ought to be addressed. Although primary responsibility for this matter lies elsewhere—as Brian Adam said—aspects of it are relevant to the Executive and, therefore, of interest to the Parliament. I want to put my response in the context of our general road safety policy. Members will be aware that we have set a target for a 40 per cent reduction by the end of this decade in the number of people who are killed and seriously injured on our roads, compared with the average figure for the years 1994 to 1998. We have made significant progress towards achieving that target. By 2001, the number of people killed and seriously injured on our roads was 22 per cent below the baseline figure. We are moving in the right direction, but major issues remain to be addressed. One or two of those have been mentioned specifically in today's debate. Any road death is one too many. Rightly, our approach to road safety strategy is based on partnership with our United Kingdom colleagues in the Department for Transport. We share responsibility for measures to address specific issues relating to motorcycle safety and, as has been said, for road safety education and publicity. We recognise that, as Brian Adam said, oil or diesel on the road constitutes a danger to road users and that motorcyclists are particularly vulnerable in such circumstances. The figures that Brian Adam cited on the proportion of road accidents in which oil or diesel on the road was involved are different from those that I will cite later in my speech. Nonetheless, I recognise the  significance of any accident that is avoidable and of measures that can be taken to avoid such accidents.

A number of pieces of legislation are in place, but Richard Lochhead's question highlights one of the difficulties in this area, which is securing enforcement. Brian Adam referred to a legal case that relates to a diesel spillage. To support the police in securing the enforcement of legislation, we require the co-operation of all road users. The witnessing of an offence by a police officer, or the reporting of an offence to a police officer, is the only way in which enforcement can be secured and we encourage all road users to take that seriously. Primary responsibility for ensuring that road users are responsible lies with the Driving Standards Agency. Matters relating to spillages on the road are included in the syllabus for the theory test for road-vehicle drivers. The theory test for motorcyclists includes the dangers of oil and diesel on the road. David Mundell mentioned the sticker campaign that the Institute of Advanced Motorists launched with the support of the Road Haulage Association. Such initiatives are welcome and can help us highlight those issues for road users. This morning I announced that we will support, through the Scottish road haulage modernisation fund, a number of important schemes that we identified as priorities in partnership with the Freight Transport Association, the Road Haulage Association, the Transport and General Workers Union and the Road Haulage and Distribution Training Council. Reference was made to technical aspects to do with evaporation and other emission issues, which Robin Harper raised, rather than to do with spillage, but I take the points that were made. This morning we announced a number of training schemes for road-vehicle drivers, which could be of benefit in that area.

I am happy to discuss those  technical matters with those in the UK Government who have responsibility for the technical standards that are applied to freight vehicles. As I said a moment ago, the training provision in the fund, which we will fund to the tune of £5 million over the next three years, will include measures to secure cost savings and greater efficiency in the use of fuel. Part of that will be to identify how fuel spillages can be avoided, which we welcome. The industry has been invited to continue to talk to us about other ways in which road haulage modernisation can be progressed with public support and I am happy to discuss that. We regularly meet representatives of the motor cycling community in Scotland, including the Motorcycle Action Group, the Motor Cycle Industry Association and the British Motorcyclists Federation. They have not raised directly with us the issues that have been mentioned this evening, but they have raised them with the UK Department for Transport, which is considering closely the problems that are posed by diesel spillage. Among other things, the department is considering raising the profile of existing legislation in England and Scotland and it is considering enforcement. I am happy to draw to the attention of my colleagues in the Department for Transport the issues that have been raised this evening and to have discussions with them, particularly where the issues relate to devolved matters. That relates to the role of the Scottish Road Safety Campaign, to which I will come. I mentioned that the figures that we have do not indicate that a large proportion of serious and fatal motorcycle accidents are caused by diesel spills. In 2001, out of a total of nearly 15,000 accidents involving injury in Scotland, there were 33 accidents in which oil or diesel on the road was identified as a significant component. Nonetheless, we take on board the fact that such accidents occur.

The Scottish Road Safety Campaign works with the Motorcycle Action Group in identifying issues of concern and in promoting the "Bikesafe Scotland" training initiative, in which the Scottish police forces co-operate.  The Scottish Road Safety Campaign has to found its decisions on major publicity campaigns on the available evidence. As has been mentioned, drink-driving, drug-driving, excessive use of speed and the inadequate use of safety belts are the key issues on which major publicity campaigns have been conducted. The Department for Transport is considering enforcement and raising the profile of existing legislation, and we will pay close attention to its conclusions. Last year, the UK Government ran a publicity campaign on motorcycle safety in Scotland, as well as in the rest of the UK. I understand that further screenings of that campaign are planned for this year. We welcome that.  We will continue to liaise with the UK Government on the relevant issues and to look for ways of reducing the number of motorcycle accidents. We will also pay attention to the European directive as it develops. Our efforts will focus on raising public awareness. In doing that, I am sure that we can count on broad parliamentary support.  Meeting closed at 17:32.

The Executive is supporting free local off-peak bus travel through existing local schemes in order to meet the vast majority of the everyday travel needs of Scotland's elderly and disabled people. Our current priorities are to monitor the implementation and impact of free local off-peak bus travel and to extend the benefits to men aged over 60 and under 65 by April this year.

Monitoring of the enhancements that we have introduced will allow us to ensure that the schemes are working well and to identify problems of the kind that Cathy Peattie has described. I am aware of those concerns, which have been raised in the chamber before. I agree that free local off-peak bus travel has been widely welcomed, and it is certainly here to stay. The feedback that we receive will allow us both to address problems and to consider ways in which such schemes can be further developed in the future.

I can say only that that is a Conservative spending commitment that we would struggle to match.

As I said to Cathy Peattie, we are aware of the issues that have been raised about cross-boundary travel. As a consequence of our awareness of those issues, they have been raised with local authorities and operators at the concessionary fares working group, in which my officials also participate. The operators have undertaken to make clear to all their staff the rules and procedures that apply to cross-boundary journeys and I understand that the issue will be discussed again at the working group's next meeting so that any further anomalies that need to be resolved can be identified.

Some £10 million.

Executive officials have met Angus Council on several occasions to discuss the project. The most  recent meeting, on 13 January, covered procurement and funding issues.

I dispute that. The details of the project are the responsibility of the local authorities. Clearly, it is their responsibility to carry the matter forward. It would not be appropriate to discuss the details of the project in the middle of a procurement process. We will continue to work with the local authorities to assist them in completing their undertaking.

I certainly encourage Dundee City Council, Angus Council and other local authorities in the area to talk to each other and to work together to identify the appropriate priorities and to carry forward those that bring maximum benefit to the transport infrastructure and which are to the wider economic benefit of Dundee and its surrounding areas.

What the cities review has done is to recognise the key role played by Dundee, as by Scotland's other cities, in the surrounding region. It is precisely on transport infrastructure and other such matters that Dundee City Council and its local neighbours can work together. Consultation on transport and other priorities between Dundee City Council and its neighbours is what we want to happen in encouraging a voluntary approach to developing transport infrastructure on a regional basis.

I am grateful to Duncan Hamilton and to those who have allowed today's debate for providing the opportunity to discuss the Glasgow to Barra air service. The debate also allows me to set out to Parliament the main thrust of the dialogue with the Barra community in which I took part last week. There is also an on-going dialogue with Western Isles Council, with Alasdair Morrison, who is the constituency MSP, and with those others who have talked to us on the community's behalf. As I said when I was in Barra last week, the starting point for any discussion of air services that are tendered under a public service obligation is to consider the relevant European regulation that allows a member state to impose a PSO and to offer subsidy for the operation of a service that could not produce a profit if it were run on a purely commercial basis. That regulation requires us to show that air services are essential for the community's economic development and that other transport modes would not adequately meet the community's needs. The Executive supports three air services in that way—Glasgow to Barra, Glasgow to Tiree and Glasgow to Campbeltown.  It is worth recording that our support for the Barra service over the years has been based on demonstrated need. Furthermore, that support has responded to change. For example, in the current three-year franchise we introduced a requirement for a back-up aircraft in order to ensure greater reliability and continuity of service. It is not the case that we are required by the European Union to take a particular course of action in considering lifeline services to Barra. However, any subsidy that we provide to transport services must be well founded and in conformity with European regulations. The reviews of frequency, capacity and pricing that were referred to simply involve specifying what the operator who wins a PSO service must deliver. Under the same European regulation—that is, regulation 2408/92—we are also required to consider adequacy of the service with regard to whether there is "recourse to other forms of transport", which the regulation mentions particularly in the case of island communities. We have therefore advertised the next PSO for Glasgow to Barra for one year only. As has been said, that was a ministerial decision, not a European one. It is critical to stress that we have made no decision regarding the future of Barra air services, but we recognise our obligation to have regard to European requirements. It seems to us better that the review should be instituted by Scottish ministers and that it should be undertaken in partnership with our local and Scottish partners so that we can reach properly informed conclusions about the way ahead.

It is always the case, it has always been the case and it is well known to any who take an interest in public service obligations that there is a requirement to justify any such public subsidy in the context of the transport infrastructure that is serving those communities at the time. Kenny MacAskill suggested that the creation of a rail service to the central Borders might in some way result in the withdrawal of trunk road status or road services. Of course, that does not apply. We are talking about a public subsidy to a transport service that might, under other circumstances, be provided on a commercial basis by a private company. That gives us certain obligations with regard to the way in which subsidies are provided and it  would be remiss of us not to take those obligations into account. The European regulations ask us to consider recourse to other forms of transport when deciding upon the need for a PSO. As has been said, within a few months there will be a step change in the ferry service that connects Barra to Eriskay and onwards to the Western Isles, including Benbecula and Stornoway. Of course, when ministers are taking any funding decisions, it is incumbent on them to consider those decisions in the wider context of value for public money.

I am not aware of any such step, but I am sure that the Irish Government and the Northern Ireland Administration are both aware of the need for them to conform with European regulations in the provision of public subsidy. The enhancement to which I refer is not the ferry to which Alasdair Morrison referred and on which I and others travelled last week, but the introduction of a new, larger and, I trust, more stable vessel that is expected to arrive within the next few months. That ferry will make a material change to the connectivity of Barra with the Western Isles. That change has been made possible by significant recent investment in ferries, causeways and harbour facilities.

It requires that we review the provision of that PSO in the context of the wider transport infrastructure. Our continuing investment in the provision of air transport cannot be considered in isolation. That is why we are conducting a review in the context of a one-year continuing PSO with public support for the air service. That is also why we are working in partnership with the local authority, Comhairle nan Eilean Siar, and with Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd. We have made it clear that we are committed to an open and transparent review that will be conducted with the involvement of those local parties, and that we will listen to the community's views.

No, I am conscious of the time.  Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd is owned by Scottish ministers but, as operator of Barra airport, it is a partner in the review in its own right. Clearly we have invested in the airport through the subsidy that we provide to HIAL. Current capital expenditure schemes for the Western Isles alone amount to £1 million. Of course, we will continue to work with local partners and to take their priorities into account. During my visit to Barra last week, I was made well aware of the concerns that have been expressed by the community. I also received a report that was commissioned by Western Isles Enterprise on the economic aspects of any change to the PSO service. The issue is complex. Executive funding of the airport is even more substantial than our funding of the Glasgow to Barra air services. The rising costs of operating that airport and the continuing viability of the beach airstrip and of the aircraft operating there are all issues with which we have to grapple, as Maureen Macmillan said. Previous discussions on proposals for a hard airstrip in Barra failed to deliver local consensus and the proposal for a hard runway was rejected by the community. Clearly those issues will have to make progress if the air services to Barra are to be retained and the financing of any such proposals would be critical. The review will tackle all those matters. Last week, I visited Barra to give my personal commitment to the openness and transparency of that review. I undertook to reach a decision within the next few weeks on whether a one-year review will be sufficient to allow an in-depth consideration of the future provision of air services to Barra. I assure members that the issue is being considered as a priority by my officials in partnership with the local authority, and that we will seek to reach a decision in order to agree a basis for future lifeline services to Barra at the earliest possible date.   Meeting closed at 18:00.

Does Christine Grahame accept that it is an agreed priority that the Borders rail project should be developed, that the responsibility for doing so lies with the Waverley Railway Partnership and that it will be for the Parliament to decide whether to approve a private bill to make that happen?

The Executive welcomes the work done by the Transport and the Environment Committee in its inquiry report. We also welcome the opportunity to respond to its recommendations today. We have, of course, made a full written response to the committee's findings, but I want to highlight a number of specific issues, the implementation of which will contribute to the vision that we share with the committee of a bigger, better and safer railway in Scotland. To ensure that we can deliver that, we must build on the good partnerships that already exist among the various players in the Scottish rail industry. Most important, we will continue to work closely with our UK colleagues and with the Strategic Rail Authority to agree and develop our investment priorities. We agree with the committee's recommendation that we should have a productive and well-defined working relationship with the SRA. We have had a close working relationship with the SRA since it was established and we intend to continue that partnership approach. The committee has recommended that a concordat should be established and I am pleased to confirm that work has already begun on drawing up such an agreement. The intention is that a concordat between the SRA and the Executive will be drawn up. The concordat will be subject to annual revision to ensure that it continues to be a contemporary and relevant document. The committee further recommended that the SRA should have a substantial presence in Scotland. That recommendation has also been taken forward. Since giving evidence to the committee in May last year, the SRA has established two offices in Scotland. The office in Glasgow is for the Scottish stakeholder relations manager, who is responsible for day-to-day contact with the Executive, Strathclyde Passenger Transport, the Rail Passengers Committee Scotland and local authorities. The other office, which is located in Edinburgh, is responsible for work specifically on managing the replacement  process for the Scottish passenger rail franchise. It must also be noted that there is a regular presence in Scotland of SRA directors and managers in general and that the full range of SRA resources is deployed as required to address specific issues as they arise. Several other recommendations made by the committee cover issues that have now been addressed by the directions and guidance that we have issued to the SRA in relation to the Scottish rail passenger franchise, or which will be addressed by the new franchise. Those issues include service improvements and enhancements, performance regimes and fares integration. As Bristow Muldoon said, I answered a written parliamentary question this morning about the progress that is being made towards reletting the new passenger rail franchise. I want to provide the Parliament with a little more detail about that important matter. It is worth reminding ourselves of the various roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders in the reletting process. The Executive is responsible for issuing directions and guidance to the SRA. We approve the specification and we will fund the franchise once it is let. The SRA procures the franchise on our behalf and is a co-signatory to it. In turn, Strathclyde Passenger Transport specifies the service for its area and is also a co-signatory to the franchise. Although the SRA is responsible for the administration and day-to-day management of the reletting process, it is acting as our procurement agent and is at the behest of the Executive in delivering that new franchise. As members know, we issued the directions and guidance for the next franchise to the SRA at the end of June 2002, ahead of the deadline set for reletting to be completed on time. Following that, the Executive and SPT set up a franchise team to work on the reletting process and the SRA, in turn, set up a franchise team of its own to work on the Scottish rail franchise. At the end of October, the SRA formally invited expressions of interest in bidding for the next franchise. Ten expressions of interest were received from a wide range of transport operators, including UK and continental railway operators. One has since been withdrawn, but the nine existing expressions of interest constitute a healthy level of competition, which can only be of benefit to rail users in Scotland. Members of the committee will also be aware that, in early November, the SRA published its new franchising policy for the passenger rail industry throughout Great Britain. That policy reflects the development of thinking within the SRA about how to secure the greatest benefits from public money invested in rail passenger services. That new approach by the SRA placed a greater focus on service delivery and on improved  services for passengers, such as reliability, punctuality and reducing overcrowding. The shift in SRA thinking closely reflected our thinking for the ScotRail franchise. Our directions and guidance to the SRA, which was issued some four months previously, had already identified the top priorities of improved punctuality and reliability and of reduced overcrowding. We also took the opportunity that arose from the SRA review to look again at the length of the next franchise. When we published our transport delivery report last March, we indicated, in line with the SRA, that a 15-year franchise was our preferred option at that stage. However, we were careful not to specify a franchise length when we issued our directions and guidance to the SRA, in order to retain the flexibility to take account of changes in the industry. Events over the past year have confirmed that that was the right approach. Last month, Iain Gray announced our intention to set a seven-year franchise with the possibility of a further extension of up to three years. That decision reflects some of the big changes that have taken place in the industry. It also fits much more closely with the pattern of the real, major investment that we and our partners are making in our rail services. Bristow Muldoon touched on some of that investment in his speech. Substantial additional resources were secured for transport in the recent Scottish budget. They will contribute towards the delivery of key strategic projects such as rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports, the development of Waverley station and the development of the Airdrie to Bathgate line.

Sarah Boyack will recall from that members' business debate that a steering group has been set up to make progress on that project with Executive support, taking into consideration all the options for the redevelopment of the station and the implications for Haymarket station. I expect the initial output from that work to be available to us in the spring. I also expect the SRA to carry that work forward with us. A result of all those major planned investments in infrastructure is that a series of significant new services is likely to come into play on the Scottish rail network in the second half of this decade. Those new services will now coincide more closely with the end of the next franchise and the seven- year plan that we have announced. That will allow us to relet the franchise for the following period in a way that will reflect the extended rail system and which will achieve the best match between the franchise and its operator. As part of its policy review, the SRA recognised the complexities of the franchise process and the significant costs involved. It has sought to simplify and improve the process and to invite bids from a smaller number of bidders for a single stage of bidding, which will involve a comprehensive best-value bid. We think that that is movement in the right direction, although it means that considerably more work is required from the Executive and the SRA at the front end of the process. That is why we have made it clear that the possibility exists that we will need to take up the option in the current contract of a six-month extension. That is a non-negotiable extension and does not require us to return to the existing franchise holder; it can simply be put in place, if it is required, on 1 April 2004 to allow the mobilisation of the new franchise to be completed quickly and efficiently, in line with the SRA's new plans. It was important to take the opportunity to explain some of the background to the process and how we have got to where we are. I give the Parliament a reassurance that the franchise process remains very much on track. We have made the necessary provision for any delay, but we do not expect that delay to be significant or to throw the process in any significant way. Along with implementing the recommendations that have come from the committee—for example, our development of a concordat with the SRA—we will carry forward our plans for the railway industry in a way that will help to bring tangible benefits throughout Scotland. I look forward to working on those plans with the Transport and the Environment Committee in the years ahead.

Maintenance, replacement and repair of track and signalling equipment, including on the Forth railway bridge, are operational matters for Network Rail, with which we have a wide range of discussions on a wide range of issues.

Like Tricia Marwick, I look forward with interest to the findings of the scoping study that Network Rail is carrying out on meeting its responsibilities for the Forth railway bridge. I understand that it expects to have the results of the scoping study early next year. The study will address both the short-term and the medium to long-term refurbishment needs. Only after those results are known will Network Rail know what time scale will apply and what the costs might be.

As I said in response to the last question, the final costs to Network Rail are  not clear. Network Rail is still in the process of receiving a report from those whom it has commissioned to scope costs. I am aware of the concerns of people in North Queensferry, which the member has raised with me, and I know that Network Rail will take those into account. I understand that Network Rail's contractors have begun repainting and repair work along the most affected sections of the bridge.

We expect to receive the outcome of the transport appraisal of the modern transport system from NESTRANS early next year.

I am aware of that evaluation. It is clear that it is for Aberdeenshire Council, as the lead authority in the investigation, to examine how best it can include the information in its wider proposals. The modern transport system rail proposal in Aberdeenshire is specifically for the Aberdeen crossrail project to deal with and is, as I understand it, currently being specced on the basis of improved train connections between Inverurie and Stonehaven via Aberdeen. That is the project about which we expect first to receive detailed results from the transport appraisal. Further proposals for rail links in the north-east are a matter for the local authorities. Both the local  councils that are promoting the modern transport system have done so in a constructive way and have entered into an effective partnership in carrying forward the proposals. I expect that partnership to continue, and that it will attract the support and partnership of the councils' private sector partners.

If Mr Adam had listened to my first answer, he would have heard me say that we will receive the transport appraisal early next year. As has been made clear on many occasions, the decisions that follow that will include decisions about carrying forward the project. The timetable will depend partly on how quickly the promoting local authorities—Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council—are able to bring forward the final transport appraisal. We will examine that as quickly as we can and thereafter conduct an appraisal as rigorously as we appraise every transport proposal that comes before us.

I congratulate Karen Gillon on securing a debate on such an important question for the Scottish newspaper industry. As has been made clear, the future of The Herald,  the  Sunday Herald  and   the  Evening Times is of great interest to many people. There has been great concern about whether their prospective sale might result in the compromising of their editorial independence or in a reduction in editorial diversity in Scotland. As a result of those concerns, a great deal of debate has taken place, not least in the chamber a couple of weeks ago and within the Scottish media. As it happens, the timing of the debate could not be more opportune. Melanie Johnson, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Competition, Consumers and Markets in the Department of Trade and Industry, announced that the proposed acquisition by Gannett UK of the titles is to be referred to the Competition Commission following the company's application for consent under the special newspaper merger regime. The Competition Commission will be directed to report on whether the proposed transfers might be expected to operate against the public interest. It will consider in particular the need for accurate presentation of news and free expression of opinion. As has been said, the Competition Commission will report back to DTI ministers by 10 March next year. The importance of the sale of the titles was also recognised in a debate at Westminster last week. That is as it should be, given that policy on competition, including competition in the media industry, rests with the UK Government and the Westminster Parliament.

I can indeed assure members that the terms of reference of the Competition Commission allow it to make a  judgment on what is the appropriate market to be considered. In one case that might be the United Kingdom, in another case it might be Scotland, and in a third case it might be a region within Scotland or within another part of the UK. That is one of the considerations that the Competition Commission must address. Although responsibility for policy and legislation on competition lies with the UK Government, the Scottish Executive clearly has a number of interests in the matter. First and foremost, we have an interest in a healthy future for key Scottish businesses. It is important to say that the business that is selling The Herald , the Sunday Herald and the Evening Times is itself an important part of the Scottish media world and of the Scottish economy. The newspaper and publishing business within SMG has, like SMG as a whole, achieved significant growth over a number of years. Members will be aware that, besides the three titles, the newspaper and publishing business that is up for sale includes a number of magazines and an online business and accounts for some 800 jobs. The issue is clearly significant, simply in economic and employment terms. SMG is the 12 th largest Scotland-based company and a major player in the economy with its radio, television and advertising businesses. It has recently invested significantly in its corporate headquarters and, on the newspaper side, in a state-of-the-art printing plant at Cambuslang. SMG's decision to sell its publishing arm is a commercial judgment for it to make. If the sale goes ahead, we would wish to see not only the newspaper business continuing to thrive but SMG continuing to play a major and positive role in broadcasting and in the economy in general. It is not for the Scottish Executive to pass judgment on the details of Gannett's application for consent, or indeed on the interests of any other potential buyer. Those are highly sensitive commercial matters and it is for DTI ministers to make judgments on them and to consider the acceptability of proposals under the merger provisions of the Fair Trading Act 1973. It might be useful to set out some of the processes by which the sale of the business falls to be considered under merger control provisions. In the situation that has now been referred to the Competition Commission, the bidder for SMG's newspapers is already a player in the UK newspaper market. A circulation threshold has been met and the bid is therefore being referred to the Competition Commission under the special newspaper merger regime. The threshold is that the total circulation, both of the newspapers already owned and of those being purchased, exceeds 500,000 a day. Because the bidder's  circulation falls within the terms of that regime, the transfer would require the written consent of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. When a formal application for consent is made, details are published for consultation and an opportunity is offered very widely inviting comment. That is why the process will take three months. We should welcome the opportunity for people to respond to the consultation process. Except in specific circumstances, the secretary of state cannot give such consent without a Competition Commission inquiry. The commission has therefore been directed to report on the public interest aspects of the bid. As I said in response to Brian Monteith's intervention, one of the decisions that the Competition Commission must make in that regard relates to the part of the market that is being considered, whether that be the UK, Scotland or a smaller area.

Perhaps the member has heard something that I have not said. I have attempted to lay out the facts of the case rather than predict the likely judgment of the Competition Commission. The Competition Commission will make a judgment on the matter and DTI ministers will consider it in due course. The Scottish Executive or Scottish ministers should not second-guess the judgments of our colleagues south of the border, but I would expect the secretary of state to have regard to the commission's report in deciding whether to consent to the proposed transfers. I do not accept the view that competition issues should be addressed only with reference to Scotland. If that were the case, it would have been less likely that the Gannett bid for the Herald titles would have been referred, given that Gannett does not have an existing portfolio of titles in Scotland. There is indeed a distinctive Scottish media, but that operates in a UK context. For that reason, the competition laws and procedures that govern ownership of the Scottish media operate within a UK context. We look forward to the updating of UK merger control provisions by the UK Government and we regard such updating as significant. Under the Enterprise Act 2002, which reforms UK merger control and which is likely to come into force next spring, the vast majority of mergers will be assessed only on a competition basis, but with retained recognition that a plurality of views in the press is vital to the public interest.

Far from there being a conversion, as Michael Russell suggests, a key role in the debate has been played by my colleague Karen Gillon, as he acknowledged. That reflects the Labour party's historic commitment to a diverse and democratic press in this country. I support that commitment and welcome the support of the SNP and other parties for it. We have been proud of that commitment throughout our history. On the amendment to the newspaper merger regime, we welcome the commitment of UK ministers to maintaining a plurality of views in the press. The Enterprise Act 2002 and reforms in the Communications Bill provide for the means to ensure that that plurality of views is protected and maintained. The reforms in the Communications Bill will simplify those procedures and make them more transparent for the general public. We should welcome such moves. Every member is aware of the importance of our diverse newspaper and broadcasting media in Scotland. Many views have been expressed and Brian Monteith was correct to say that unanimity does not exist, as has been clear in the debate. For reasons that I have explained, it is not for the Scottish Executive to comment on individual merger cases. However, the debate has provided a useful opportunity for views to be recorded in the Official Report . The Executive will continue to follow the issue closely and I will ensure that a report of the debate is passed to those who are considering the matter. I am glad that we have had such a timely opportunity to discuss the issue.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

We ensure that people have a say either by consulting the wider community on major strategic issues or by working in partnership with local authorities and community groups so that a wide range of views can be taken into account in reaching decisions on specific projects.

I will be happy to meet Alasdair Morrison and members of Comhairle nan Eilean Siar to hear their views and to consider how best they and other local interests might make an input to the process of review that we will conduct next year. I will, of course, be happy to meet them again as the process moves on and to consider any relevant data that are presented by local organisations when we review the service.

It is precisely in order to establish a set of priorities and objectives that the Highlands and Islands transport partnership is drawing up a strategy. I understand that the partnership will consult widely on what the strategy should contain. We would expect it to address all modes of transport in the Highlands and Islands.

We are consulting communities across Scotland, as part of the current air transport consultation on future strategy, including air links to the Highlands and Islands. We will consider all the responses to that consultation in the further development of our aviation strategy.

The representations that were made to me by Alasdair Morrison contained a much more balanced approach than the one that has been cited by Duncan Hamilton. We intend to review the service in the light of all the evidence. That is the kind of objective basis on which we would seek to proceed.

The First Minister recently announced the establishment of a £6 million interim route development fund for Scottish air links, which will include specific provision for air links into the Highlands and Islands. We regard that as the best way to support those new routes in order to enhance services for the people of the Highlands and Islands.

I am glad, if a little surprised, that the leader of the SNP has used a members' business debate to introduce this subject. I am grateful that he has offered the Parliament the opportunity to debate the A9, as that gives me an opportunity to set out clearly what ministers see as the priorities on that major strategic route. We have heard about unacceptable levels of death and injury on the A9. As Keith Raffan and other members said, any deaths or injuries that result from road traffic accidents anywhere on the Scottish road network are unacceptable. That is why I reconvened the A9 road safety group in April this year. I believe that there are things that we can do to improve safety on the A9. Complacency is as unacceptable as alarmism, but it is important that we get the facts into perspective. The facts are clear and this afternoon I made the most recent figures available in the Scottish Parliament information centre. I am happy to share that information with members, as I know that we will return to the issue again. Let me summarise the information. The rate of injury accidents on single-carriageway sections of the A9 is, in fact, half the Scottish average accident rate for single-carriageway trunk roads and less than the Scottish average for dual carriageways across the network. The whole A9 route between Perth and Inverness has a lower accident rate than the average for either single or dual carriageways across Scotland as a whole. Therefore, the facts show that the A9 is far from the worst road, as I said in the chamber a couple of weeks ago. Accident rates in Scotland as a whole are too high and must be reduced. That is why we are vigorously pursuing a road safety strategy and have adopted within that a tough target of cutting deaths and serious injuries on Scotland's roads by 40 per cent by 2010. Road deaths have been lower in each of the past three years than at any time since records began, so progress has been made. However, there is a good deal still to do, not least on the A9.

Keith Raffan is right to say that accident rates are only part of the picture and that traffic volumes are another part. I shall come to the latter issue later in my speech. I will deal first with the safety issue, because it is central. As I have mentioned, I recently reconvened the A9 road safety group to review the measures that are already in place and to consider what more can be done. The group includes Tayside police, Northern constabulary, Perth and Kinross Council, Highland Council, Executive officials and BEAR Scotland Ltd, which is the trunk road operating company. The group has access to the technical expertise of the former Transport Research Laboratory. In April, I chaired the group's first meeting, to show the importance that ministers attach to the group's work. I expect to meet the group again when its work is nearing completion. The safety group will commission Highland Council, working with Perth and Kinross Council and BEAR, to examine several safety issues on the A9 and to provide short, medium and long-term proposals to improve safety for all users. Those proposals might include: the use of average-speed cameras as a route speed-enforcement measure; additional variable message signs to enhance driver information, which is particularly essential in the summer months when many strangers drive on the A9; and a review of the provision of rest areas, including refreshment facilities. It has been mentioned that driver fatigue is a key issue on the A9, so a review of the provision of rest areas is essential. The proposals might also include: improved overtaking opportunities, which might include dualling particular stretches or building climbing lanes, to which members referred; and measures to improve drivers' awareness of junctions and accesses by improving visibility and signage, not just for daytime driving, but for night-time driving. We will continue to introduce measures for cost-effective, targeted improvements to the A9 that will help in maintaining and improving safety. We will consider each of the road safety group's proposals on its merits.

I expect the road safety group to set its own agenda and timetable, but through Executive officials it has direct access to ministers. The group is commissioning work that I  expect to be brought forward over the next few months. That will be welcome. We will also continue to conduct our examination of the A9 and other roads across the network to identify where improvements can be made. I expect the road safety group's approach to reflect the Executive's strategy, which is one of smart, targeted improvements to bring the biggest benefits for road safety and the driving experience, not only on the A9, but across the network. For example, there is the improvement at Ballinluig—which John Swinney welcomed in April this year—where a stretch of dual carriageway that is too dangerous to use because of the junction alignment will be brought back into full use by a £4 million junction improvement. Another improvement is the one at Helmsdale—where I was this morning—towards the northern end of the A9, where we committed £4 million to road improvements earlier this year. Today I invited the Helmsdale community to comment on options for a further single-carriageway upgrade, costing perhaps a further £4 million, which will again bring significant improvements. Another improvement is the one at Bankfoot, at the southern end of the A9, where there will be a new junction on a single-carriageway stretch of the A9. In Helmsdale, as in Ballinluig, we are listening to and consulting the community. We will act in concert with the community as far as we can to identify priorities for the route as a whole. Our approach will continue to be to make targeted improvements, not grandiose gestures. Constructing a dual carriageway will be the right thing to do where it demonstrates effective and cost-effective benefits. Already, as has been mentioned, a quarter of the A9 between Perth and Inverness is dual carriageway. Traffic flows are important and, while we are examining the prospects, it is a good idea to state the current situation. Between Inverness and Drumochter, there is an average flow of around 7,500 to 8,000 vehicles per day. At Dunkeld, average flows are around 12,000 vehicles per day. Closer to Perth, flows exceed 15,000 vehicles per day. I believe that that information was given to Murdo Fraser in a written answer this week. The whole of the existing road is within the maximum capacity as determined by the current design and construction standards for rural roads. A high-standard single carriageway—and the stretches on the A9 are generally good—provides for a maximum traffic flow of 22,000 vehicles per day. The northern half of the Perth to Inverness route is not even at 50 per cent capacity. There is certainly a case for examining the creation of enhanced overtaking opportunities, but there appears to be no case for wholesale dualling of the full length of the route, certainly not in the  foreseeable future. The point has been made that having a mix of single and dual carriageways is incompatible with road safety. I do not accept that point. I noticed that Murdo Fraser criticised the mix of single and dual carriageways on the route and then claimed for his party the credit for short, isolated stretches of dual carriageway, such as that at Killiecrankie. The important thing is to emphasise to drivers the difference between single and dual carriageways. As John Farquhar Munro said, signage would help in that regard. We have already put in place 60mph repeater signs, to warn people when they are entering a single-carriageway area, and proper warnings on the road surface. We would expect the road safety group to examine such issues. Rhoda Grant alluded to the priority that councils in the Highlands and Islands give to the A82 route. That is an important point. It is our policy to support transport partnerships, to encourage their formation and to help them to identify priorities. The work of the Highlands and Islands transport partnership has allowed us to identify the A830 and the A9 at Helmsdale as key priorities. We have responded to what HITRANS said on those matters. Even if a case for complete dualling of the route could be made, it would need to compete for funding with other priorities across our transport network, including the rail links to airports and the increased support for lifeline services, never mind the other roads priorities. Stewart Stevenson talked about the economic benefits and I assure him that economic benefit is part of our consideration. All transport projects are appraised for economic benefit as well as for cost. Keith Raffan's figure of £281 million for the cost of dualling the A9 from Perth to Inverness was correct, but that was the 1994 figure and did not include VAT. The best estimate now suggests that, including inflation, increased standards, for example for sustainable drainage, and VAT, the cost would be somewhere between £450 million and £500 million. That is a cool £0.5 billion, which is quite a significant sum. To achieve a £500 million saving in our roads budget, we would have to cancel the three towns bypass in Ayrshire, agreed schemes on the A1, A75 and A77, the new Kincardine bridge and eastern link road, two junctions on the A90 between Perth and Dundee, the Fochabers bypass, the new junction at Ballinluig, upgrades at Helmsdale, and the M74 northern extension and the M77 to Kilmarnock. If we did not want to cancel those commitments, we would have to raise the money from somewhere else, but from where? Stewart Stevenson mentioned the peripheral route to Aberdeen, which is close to my constituency.  Cancelling that, as well as the planned upgrading of the A8 and A80 to motorway status, would save something like half a billion pounds, although those projects have not yet been costed. We will not do that. Instead, we will continue with our policy of targeted improvements across the network, including the targeted improvements on the A9.  I expect to consider further route improvements soon, to discuss them with the road safety group and to include in our roads programme those schemes that can deliver the greatest benefits in the places in which they are needed most.  Meeting closed at 18:00.

Does Mr Ewing accept that freight facilities grant awards have taken 1.5 million lorry miles off Highland roads?

We are working with local partners in the Ayrshire economic forum, which agreed on 8 November the principles of an action plan to boost the economy and create jobs. We also continue to invest in transport services and infrastructure in Ayrshire.

I agree with that sentiment, which is why I fully support the economic strategy of the UK Government and the Executive, which is to put the focus on science and skills as the way of creating jobs in Ayrshire and right across Scotland in the future.

No, I do not accept that at all. I accept, of course, the important contribution that Prestwick international airport is making to the economy of Ayrshire and, indeed, the economy of Scotland. That is why the consultation document identifies opportunities for Prestwick, as well as for Scotland's other major airports, to expand in the future. The member made a point about the projected figures for low-cost air travel. I recognise that low-cost airlines are a relative newcomer to the market. We do not yet know their capacity for growth, but if it exceeds the figures that are given in the consultation document, no one will be more pleased than the minister with responsibility for transport.

Yes. Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire is already doing good work in promoting the new road connection to the Glasgow area as a gateway to Ayrshire and as an opportunity for economic development. We very much encourage Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire to continue doing that and to work in partnership with the local economic forum in advancing those economic opportunities.

Gritting of local roads is the responsibility of local authorities, and it is for each council to identify adequate resources to meet adverse winter weather conditions.

It is certainly not for ministers to second-guess the decisions of local authorities, whatever party they are controlled by. We expect local authorities to plan adequately, and, when they make their plans, to take cognisance of the weather conditions that they can predict for their own areas and of their responsibilities for the local road network. We also expect them to work jointly with the police and the trunk road operating companies to ensure a co-ordinated approach to maintaining the safe flow of traffic during the winter months.

It is certainly the case that Stirling has more than its fair share of main roads that lie outwith the trunk road network, and the council has made significant efforts to maintain that infrastructure and keep roads clear in winter. Stirling Council should be commended for that work. It recognises the importance of spending money on roads, as do many other councils. It is the responsibility of local authorities to carry out that work, and I have no reason to doubt that they will do that this winter, as they did last winter.

I would be interested to know how much expenditure Christine Grahame is committing her party to, given the implicit terms of that question. It is important to say that the responsibility for trunk roads lies as clearly with the operating company as the responsibility for local roads lies with the local councils. That is why we have in place a performance audit group to carry out independent audits of the performance of the trunk road operating companies. Information about that is available in the Scottish Parliament information centre for any member who cares to read it.

Keith Raffan makes a fair point. We recognised that there is a close relationship between the trunk road network and the local road network when it comes to maintaining the free flow of traffic. That is why this year we have encouraged local authorities to hold a winter maintenance conference with the operating companies, the police and ourselves to address those issues and to find ways of resolving them in advance of the worst winter weather.

We have no current plans to impose tolls or charges on the trunk road network, but we will continue to explore all available options for tackling congestion.

I am sure that the people of central Scotland will come to conclusions about what we will do with the A80 when we announce our decision, which we expect to do in the next few weeks.

We expect to make an announcement soon. For the removal of doubt, I clarify that none of the recommendations in the consultant's report is for the introduction of tolls or charges on the A80 in the period that is under discussion. I confirm that we will consider carefully the consultant's recommendations, the responses to the consultation process and the views that have been expressed by the community that Cathie Craigie represents and other communities in the affected area.

We have no plans for tolls in Maybole.

I congratulate Duncan McNeil on securing the debate and on providing an opportunity for broad and useful discussion of such an important issue. Members have commented on the numbers of cases that have been raised throughout Scotland in urban and rural areas, but the sheer volume of cases is not the main reason for concern. We must also consider the consequences of mis-selling, such as the inconvenience, uncertainty and distress that such practices cause consumers, particularly vulnerable consumers, which a number of members mentioned. As Duncan McNeil described so graphically at the outset, those practices also undermine confidence in the energy industries. The regulation of utilities is indeed a reserved matter, but it is also a matter of great consequence to all our constituents. That is why there has been such support for this evening's debate and for the view that Duncan McNeil expressed so clearly at the beginning, which is that mis-selling must be stamped out. Although many of the measures that are in place are Westminster's responsibility, I will start by rehearsing the safeguards that exist to protect consumers. Brian Fitzpatrick asked how much we monitor the development of the market and competition. It is worth saying that since competition in domestic utility markets was introduced, there has been a good deal of movement within the market. About 7,000,000 out of about 20,000,000 gas consumers and 10,000,000 out of 30,000,000 electricity consumers—a third in each case—have changed their suppliers. The latest figures show that the number of transfers is still running at 750,000 consumers a year. That happens because of the benefits that people can acquire by changing supplier. Although it is important that we bear that in mind, we do not want competition alone—we want consumers' rights to be protected, too. I mentioned existing means of protecting consumers' rights, some of which lie in criminal law and some of which lie in general consumer protection legislation. The industry regulator, Ofgem, and the consumer watchdog, energywatch, have specific powers in that regard. Other regulations are specific to the gas and electricity industries; they take the form of conditions in supply licences, which govern sales and marketing on the doorstep, over the phone and in the shopping centre. Among other stipulations, they include clear rules on selection and training of sales staff and auditing of sales. Although those regulations were introduced some time ago, Ofgem has extended and  developed them several times, which reflects its concern about the continuing practice of mis-selling in the marketplace. Most significant is that, as I think Kenny Gibson and Sarah Boyack mentioned, Ofgem acquired in April a new power to impose a fine of up to 10 per cent of turnover on a company that is guilty of breaching the licence conditions. Ofgem is already considering whether further new powers might be required to allow those conditions to operate more effectively. The first use of the power that Ofgem acquired in April was made in October. It is highly significant that a financial penalty of £2 million was imposed on London Electricity and its affiliate company Virgin HomeEnergy for failing to prevent mis-selling of gas and electricity to domestic consumers.

The fine has not yet been collected. I will write to Mr Gallie about that. I noted his point that it would be good if the imposition of the fine produced a direct benefit for consumers. The purpose of the fine is to produce such a benefit by highlighting to the supply companies the consequences of failing to stick to their licence conditions. Members might be aware that Ofgem confirmed the imposition of the fine on Monday, after considering representations in the interim period. In doing so, Ofgem indicated that all the representations that it had received provided strong support for its tough action. I want to add the Scottish Executive's support for that tough action. I also want to intimate our support for the work of energywatch in standing up for consumers. Several members have said that the consumer must be put at the centre of such considerations. Several members—Duncan McNeil in particular—made the point that the energy companies whose agents sell gas and electricity on the doorsteps are our partners in promoting energy efficiency and warmer homes. That is why we look to energywatch to bring those companies on board and to ensure that they take their social responsibilities seriously not just in one area of policy, but across the board. Earlier this year, energywatch launched its "Stop Now!" initiative, which is directed at mis-selling. The initiative brings together the suppliers, energywatch, Ofgem and the Department of Trade and Industry to discuss the problems of mis-selling and to identify possible solutions. That has resulted in the piloting by a number of companies—including Scottish Power—of EnergySure, which is a new effort to promote best practice in energy selling. There are two aspects to EnergySure: the training processes of participating companies will be audited to ensure  that they reach approved standards and a national database of accredited agents will be established. If an agent's performance falls below the required standard, that agent will not be permitted to continue to sell without undergoing retraining and demonstrating that they are fit to work in the industry. In addition, the Office of Fair Trading launched an investigation into doorstep selling earlier this month, which will examine not only gas and electricity, but other commodities that are sold on the doorstep. It will seek to identify why the selling of some of those commodities causes the kind of problems that we have heard about during the debate and why the selling of others does not. The aim is to identify what causes such problems and how that can best be addressed. Automatic compensation payments for the victims of mis-selling are on the agenda. Duncan McNeil and Phil Gallie raised that issue. The energy selling steering group, which includes suppliers, regulators and energywatch, is considering such proposals and is drawing up a code of practice to govern suppliers' contracts with customers. The group will also consider how proper checks might be introduced into the transfer process. I very much look forward to the proposals that the energy selling steering group will make when it concludes its considerations.  In summary, I can confirm our view that the practice of mis-selling is unacceptable, as are its consequences. We will continue to support the work of Ofgem, which strengthens market regulation, and the work of energywatch, which advises and supports consumers. We will also continue to encourage the industry to face up to the problem by continuing to engage in schemes such as EnergySure to eradicate the menace of mis-selling. To consumers and to the constituents who have been represented in the chamber tonight, we convey the clear message that we are on their side and that we intend to ensure that the problem is cracked. Following this evening's debate, I will write to Ofgem and to the energy selling steering group to draw to their attention the concerns that have been expressed by members from around the chamber.  Meeting closed at 17:46.

We will continue to discuss priorities for improving road safety on the A9 with the local councils, the police and other interested parties.

No, I do not accept that, although I will consider carefully and in the usual way Murdo Fraser's request for a meeting. Our priority on the A9 is not to dual the entire stretch from Perth to Inverness because the volume of road traffic simply falls far short of the levels that would justify doing so. Instead, our priority on the A9 between Inverness and Perth is to identify areas where investment can address road safety issues, to make that investment and to improve the safety of the road for all those who use it.

If Mr Swinney were to check the accident rates on the A9, he would find that they were very far from the extreme end of the range. In fact, the rates are very close to the average for trunk roads of its type in Scotland. Instead, what we need to do on the A9 is precisely what I set out in an announcement in Mr Swinney's constituency only a few months ago, which he was delighted to welcome. We made proposals to tackle a specific problem at a specific junction and put it to rights. At the Ballinluig junction, which Mr Swinney agreed had the most pressing case for investment on the A9, the road is dual carriageway.

On the A9 and, indeed, throughout the Highlands we have already made significant investment in moving freight from road to rail. In fact, 1.5 million lorry miles a year have been removed from the Highlands through measures such as the freight facilities grant and the track access grant. We will continue to do that and to identify particular cases. For example, I mentioned Ballinluig just a moment ago; there is a clear need for investing in that stretch of dual carriageway, which includes a junction at Aberfeldy just before the settlement of Ballinluig itself. As I said, we will continue to identify where we should make such investments. However, we will do so in the context of the whole trunk road network.

It is precisely because we recognise that there are road safety issues on the A9 that in April, when I visited Ballinluig, I chaired the first meeting of the A9 road safety group. That group has continued to meet since then and brings together the local authorities, the police and other interested parties to identify places on that route where further investment will make a difference.

I announced last week a second round of funding for child pedestrian training pilot schemes. A third round of funding will be awarded next year. Funding for that initiative totals £810,000 over five years, and a number of other initiatives are also in place.

I visited Netherton Primary School only a couple of weeks ago and saw in practice the enthusiasm and commitment of staff and parents to ensuring that the scheme works. That initiative is part of a pilot scheme; additional entrants to that scheme in three other council areas were announced recently. The purpose of a pilot is clearly to test the effectiveness of the scheme in achieving improvements in the safety of children of that age. If the pilot is successful, we will certainly consider rolling it out further.

We have a set of schemes in place for cycling, walking and safer streets. There is funding for all local authorities and we encourage them to learn from one another's best practice. We expect some of that money to be used for improving safety at school gates. We are aware that certain areas of road safety relate to children who are particularly vulnerable. Children from low-income families who are starting primary school and children from all backgrounds who are moving from primary school to secondary school are particularly vulnerable and we welcome projects that successfully address such matters.

The Executive works jointly with other partners through the concessionary fares working group to oversee implementation of free local off-peak bus travel through local schemes.

I am aware of the specific case that the member mentioned. I have no doubt that the working group that is considering the implementation of the scheme will take such issues into account. However, it is for SPT, as the agency administering the scheme, to set the rules for the scheme. It is for SPT to work with the bus operators to ensure that the bus operators are fully aware of the rules of the scheme and how they should be applied.

I am aware that Citylink and other operators give priority to passengers who pre-book. That would be the same whether we were talking about long-distance coaches, air travel or other forms of travel. The incidents to which Mr Ingram refers are cases of that kind. It is important that we are clear about the purpose of and the basis for our support for free local off-peak bus travel through the existing concessionary fare schemes. From the outset, it was made clear that the purpose of introducing such schemes was to close the opportunity gap and to allow the majority of weekly and daily journeys that are made by our pensioners and old people to be made for nothing. That is what the scheme is designed to achieve. That is why we believe that the scheme should be implemented by local authorities through existing fare schemes. We will continue to work with local authorities, including Strathclyde Passenger Transport, because they are best placed to judge how to implement local schemes.

I gathered that, and I am glad that Phil Gallie has taken the opportunity to support our approach to integrated transport.

Again, as I said in my answer to Bill Butler's initial question, I recommend that Karen Whitefield takes up that matter with Strathclyde Passenger Transport because it is the administrator of the scheme. It is my understanding that all operators in the area should be signed up to the rules of the scheme. Those rules cover journeys of the kind that she has described and so it is for SPT to ensure that the bus operators are aware of how they should interpret the rules.

I, too, congratulate Sylvia Jackson on securing a very worthwhile debate. I also congratulate the Royal Society of Chemistry and its partners on organising today's science in the Parliament event, which I was able to attend—albeit briefly—this afternoon and which my colleague Iain Gray will address later this evening. I agree with those who have said that we do not focus often enough on science in the Parliament. I know that many of my colleagues will take the opportunity this evening to talk to scientists and hear about their successes and concerns first hand. I believe that the event will help to highlight to the Parliament the vital contribution that our science community is making. It is important that we raise the profile of the science agenda and celebrate the enormous contribution that science makes to our economy and to our quality of life. Let us not forget that Scotland has a wonderful tradition in science. There are a number of indicators of that, such as the number of Nobel prizes that Scots or people who have studied in Scotland have accumulated over the years, which at the latest count was around 20, and the groundbreaking discoveries and inventions. Science today is still thriving. Elaine Thomson talked about the centres of excellence in Aberdeen and there are many others throughout the country. Scotland consistently wins 12 per cent of the funding from UK research councils, which is above the average. We rank third in the world in citations per head of population and research shows that our existing spin-out process at universities is as efficient as that of the United States of America. The 2001 research assessment exercise found that half of our researchers work in departments that produce internationally competitive research. We now have 19 departments that have achieved the highest rating in research, which is around double the figure for the previous assessment exercise.

No. I have tried to indicate today that the higher education sector in Scotland is perfectly capable of making its own case and it does not require any special treatment in its relations with the Ministry of Defence, or anybody else, because of the excellence that has been  achieved. Alex Neil might have ambitions for our universities to enter other areas of research, but I think that we should build on the excellence that is already in place. There are many good stories to tell, but we have heard tonight from Sylvia Jackson and others about the concerns that interest in science and technology in schools and universities might be on the wane. We acknowledge the importance of those indicators. That is why our science strategy, which was published in August last year, committed the Executive to ensuring that enough people study science to meet the needs of our country. More broadly, we see science and skills as the main drivers of the modern knowledge economy. For that reason we are concerned about any decline in interest in those subjects within the education system. The UK-wide Roberts report investigated those concerns and concluded that significant issues were at stake. We will certainly wish to address those. The question was asked about comparators outside Scotland. The Roberts report considered that the problems in Scotland were fewer because of the higher participation rates in post-school education compared with those south of the border. There is encouragement in that. There is encouragement in the fact that half of all children leaving school with highers have achieved at least one science higher and a quarter of all children have achieved at least two. It remains the case that, after English and Mathematics, the most popular individual subjects include a number of science subjects. The situation with technological studies is less happy at standard grade, but at higher level the situation has remained fairly steady. There is a mixed picture in higher education. As has been said in recent years, students have been taking pure physics and chemistry in smaller numbers. At the same time, the number of students who are taking biological studies and information technology courses has been on the increase. Many students now take a mixture of disciplines and so comparisons over time have become difficult. It is worth noting that between 2000 and 2001, the most recent year for which figures are available, the number of students who were accepted to take up science and engineering courses increased by 4 per cent to a current total of more than 9,000. Although I acknowledge that there are issues and concerns to be addressed, I do not believe that we are facing an insoluble crisis in the study of science. I acknowledge that there will be areas of both growth and loss.

I can see that John Young is following a European project this evening. I will be happy to respond in writing to his earlier query to Sylvia Jackson and to his latest query about recognition of qualifications. That will give him the full picture. We acknowledge that science will play an important part in contributing to our economic future, both in a European context and in a global context. We seek growth in areas of science that are strategically and economically important, as well as in those areas that are fashionable. That is why the independent science advisory committee that we have recently established will give us advice on those issues. We have been working on a range of initiatives to promote science in schools. As has been mentioned, we have injected additional funding of £8 million into the school science infrastructure and have provided £1 billion of additional funding for school infrastructure in general. We have established the improving science education five-to-14 project, which is a major programme that has been designed to improve the image of science education in Scottish schools. In March, we will hold a major conference on science education over the next 20 years, to stimulate innovative thinking on the teaching of science. We must lift the teaching of science and make it more relevant to young people. The attitudes of young people are influenced by many pressures and by many role models. Many people in the gallery would acknowledge that scientists have an important role to play in projecting a positive image of science. Tackling public perceptions of science can be a long process that requires patience. The scientific community, above all, can work with Government in seeking to achieve that outcome. Our science strategy sets out a firm statement of intent on the importance of science within our wider strategies. We will continue to take every opportunity to assist the universities in getting out the good stories on science and in celebrating their achievements and aspirations. The science strategy played an important role in shaping the spending review, which was set out only a few weeks ago. We will increase investment in science and research in universities by nearly 20 per cent during the next three years. That represents an increase of £45 million.  Sylvia Jackson and others made specific suggestions, to which I wish to respond. We are aware of the proposals for a national centre of excellence in science teaching that have been introduced south of the border. Although there are no plans for such a centre in Scotland, we recognise the issues that the Roberts report identified. We are working with the Wellcome Trust on various ways in which those issues could be addressed. The science advisory committee will advise us on that and on other issues, such as continuous professional development for science teachers. We have made the recruitment of physics teachers a priority for education colleges, which has resulted in an increased take-up. If the need arises to do the same in other areas of science teaching, we will take the necessary action. Science centres were mentioned. As Sylvia Jackson knows, we have occasionally provided short-term funding to address specific problems with science centres. We will develop our future policy on where science centres fit into our overall strategy in the context of the on-going joint review with UK ministers. Margaret Ewing referred to Paula Hedley's experience. The promotion of science and technology will work only if the rising generation becomes confident of gaining well-paid and well-supported jobs in which to use scientific skills. There is an issue about the relative lack of research and development in industry in Scotland. We acknowledge that, in many respects, we lag behind. We need Government action to tackle the situation and we need a push from the science base, through the commercialisation of scientific research. I assure Alex Neil that significant energy and dynamism are being applied to introducing proposals for intermediate technology institutes. We consider them a vital part of commercialisation and of making industry provide role models, as well as scientists. The Government will provide a push in that direction. I agree that it is important to proceed with the institutes quickly, but it is also important to get them right, which we will seek to do.

That is a scientific assessment of the position, to which I will respond. We are keen to make progress on the institutes  quickly, as Mr Adam and others know from previous debates. Members should rest assured that we will introduce proposals as early as we can, when they are ready to be taken to the next stage. Much activity is being undertaken in the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council. At Scottish Enterprise, the ITIs are an example of how we can achieve commercialisation. As members know, we are undertaking a review of higher education, which will cover that matter. That will present us with a major opportunity to ensure a better strategic fit between the research base and our economic future. I welcome the debate and the motion. I assure Parliament that we will continue to do all that we can to promote the role of science in education, in the economy and in our overall strategic approach.  Meeting closed at 18:16.

I thank the last speaker for her brevity. I am particularly pleased to congratulate Sarah Boyack on lodging the motion and providing us with the opportunity to discuss such an important issue. I know that Sarah will understand as well as anyone that the Scottish Executive has long recognised the strategic significance of Waverley as a station that provides a hub for regional and local services. It is central to our aspirations for an enhanced Scottish railway network. As Sarah Boyack said, whether the issue is existing long-distance services, central Scotland services, the proposed new services that a number of members have mentioned, or the existing commuter services from places such as Fife, Waverley is the strategic hub that allows them all to be meshed together, which is why it is right at the top of our list of strategic priorities and is one of the key projects that we recognise must be delivered over the next few years. Sarah Boyack rightly highlighted capacity as a fundamental issue. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton mentioned, the number of trains that use the station has increased, even in the past three years, by something in the order of 65 per cent. That number is expected to increase yet further over the next few years simply given the projects that are planned, quite apart from any of the additional aspirations that we have heard about this evening. Other aspirations include: those of Virgin and GNER for increased cross-border services; the reopening of the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine link, which will free up space on the Forth Bridge for additional passenger services from the north-east and Fife into Edinburgh; the Edinburgh airport rail link; the potential line to Midlothian and the Borders; and the potential opening of the link between Airdrie and Bathgate. All those will have a direct impact on Waverley, which is central to delivering those aspirations.  The Scottish Executive and the Strategic Rail Authority recognise the capacity constraints and recognise that something needs to be done to address them. If we fail to do that, we will constrain the operational flexibility of the station, will cause passengers to spend time delayed in the Mound tunnel or in Princes Street Gardens, and will fail to achieve the potential of Waverley in promoting the growth of further services. We are keen to make progress on the basis of the best available scheme. Many members will have seen the master plan that Railtrack presented last year for the station's redevelopment. Scott Barrie mentioned that. The master plan involved the construction of an upper storey to house a travel deck and a shopping mall, and important and essential requirements to address capacity issues in the station. Track and platform requirements are central, but Railtrack itself would concede that its master plan is a concept design only and that work was not undertaken behind the plan to allow it to be turned immediately into a detailed and fully costed proposal. We acknowledge that other options might achieve the required capacity increase without the same superstructure requirements. Technical investigative work is needed. That may support Railtrack's master plan or flesh out other options that would achieve similar improvements and offer better value for money. Before a decision can be made about the final shape of the new, improved Waverley, that investigative work must be completed to assess site conditions and determine other technical factors, before work can get under way. It is important to ensure that Waverley can handle the growth in train and passenger numbers that we foresee. That is why we must assess objectively all proposed developments at platform level and set them aside from some of the potential commercial developments. To do that, a steering group was established to develop the project and consider all the options. The steering group, which is chaired and led by the Strategic Rail Authority and includes representatives from Railtrack, the City of Edinburgh Council and the Executive, provides a good example of the rail industry and central and local government working together to progress one of Scotland's key transport priorities. That priority is high up the list for all the partners. To do the work, the steering group created four sub-groups to consider the technical aspects, planning, the commercial aspects and the business case, to attract and produce a funding package. In response to members' comments, I confirm that every option to be considered will include new and improved facilities for passengers who pass  through Waverley. The chosen option will be planned and integrated to ensure that change is delivered with the needs of all station users in mind and with minimal disruption. Whatever is done will impact on Haymarket station, as one or two members said. The work that is being done on Waverley includes assessment of the impact of any potential projects on Haymarket. Like us, the SRA is mindful of the relationship between the stations. It is too early to discuss the impact in detail and whether Haymarket could become the terminus for some services, for example. It is recognised that the two stations depend on each other. Angus MacKay talked about the south suburban line. The lead on that lies with the City of Edinburgh Council, as one or two members said. The matter is of some significance. We will continue to follow with interest the city council's proposals for the south suburban line and to work with the council on issues that relate to east Edinburgh and East Lothian, which Susan Deacon mentioned. As a measure of Waverley station's importance to the enhancement of services under the new Scottish passenger rail franchise, we made available £1 million in May to fund the essential work that is being done. The sub-groups that I mentioned are investigating several critical issues. Site investigation is being undertaken, which should not be underestimated. Waverley station lies in a glacial valley and geological work is part of what requires to be done. Assessments are also being undertaken of potential passenger growth and platform provision, and future traffic is being analysed. I expect the initial output from that work to be available as a basis for decisions early next year. I cannot emphasise too strongly that that work must be completed before a final decision on the design can be made. Only when that decision has been made can we examine funding in detail. We will look to the SRA to be part of that picture, but the project is not for the SRA alone. I emphasise the SRA's commitment to several other railway projects. It lies with the Waverley railway project partnership to produce the funding package for the Waverley line project—the Midlothian and Borders line project. We have given £2 million to allow that to happen. That is a critical matter in which Waverley station plays a key role. Let me assure members that the work on the redevelopment of Waverley station is progressing as quickly as possible. It is doing so with our full support. The transport delivery report "Scotland's Transport: Delivering Improvements", which was  published in March 2002, identified Waverley station as one of our top transport priorities. We will continue to proceed on that basis in partnership with the SRA and other partners.   Meeting closed at 18:00.

Yes .

The debate has been useful, as a review of air transport is overdue. The previous aviation policy white paper was published in 1985. Since then, the industry has been subject to considerable change and development. More than ever, air travel is an integral part of the way in which countries do business. By its nature, aviation is highly interconnected. That is why the consultation process sees us bringing forward a consultation document in partnership with the UK Department for Transport. The consultation covers reserved and devolved matters and will lead to the publication of a UK white paper next year. That will lay out a strategic framework within which we will develop our vision for the future of aviation in Scotland. We will add detail to that vision by producing a route development strategy and by adapting the proposals that come forward through our land-use planning system. Clearly, the tragic events of September 11 last year led to a major restructuring in the industry, both by accelerating existing trends and by creating opportunities. We have seen the demise or the realignment of some international flag carriers and the welcome rise of low-cost, no-frills airlines. The role of second-force operators has also increased. That is why this is a good time to review the focus and direction of aviation strategy and why the consultation process is important. The process provides the opportunity for a full and thorough debate. I am glad that many members have taken that opportunity in the spirit in which we brought it forward. In general, the issues are complex and do not lend themselves to quick fixes. We need to approach them in a mature and considered way. We must shape support for the industry and achieve the capacity requirements that are necessary to meet Scotland's needs. In doing that, we must strike a balance between economic, environmental and social priorities. That balance  must maximise benefits and minimise disbenefits. Several members have mentioned the disbenefits, which occur locally and nationally. Noise pollution, planning blight, additional road congestion and increased generation of greenhouse gases are all potential disbenefits of increased airport capacity. That is why it is important, as we look to continue growth in air transport, that we consider those issues carefully and in good time. Technological improvements, better operational practices, provision of rail links and the efficient use of existing facilities can all help to reduce the disbenefits. Alternatives must be adequately considered. Our aim in the consultation is to generate a broad consensus on the best overall strategy for sustainable development. Scottish aviation is clearly a fast-moving industry. There has been clear market segmentation in recent years and we are looking for ways in which to develop all those potential markets. We will do so in a way that strengthens the role of all our existing airports for the benefit of Scotland as a whole. Some members have emphasised the options for enhancement of capacity. It is important to stress that, at this time, we are considering the enhancement of capacity and not the construction of new runways. The limiting factors are different for each airport. We recognise that, if the demand predictions are correct, we may need an additional runway at some point in the future. One of the purposes of the consultation exercise is to preserve long-term development options at the pressured airports in order to avoid having them sterilised by other uses. In response to Sarah Boyack's question, I can say that no decision on extra runways is required at this stage and none will be required for at least 10 years. We recognise the long-term pressures and the need for incremental additions to terminals, aprons and taxiways to meet some of the short to medium-term pressures. We also recognise the possible need for runway extensions. The capacity issues in the north of Scotland are of a different sort from those that apply in the central belt. At airports such as Inverness and Aberdeen, the ability to operate the latest generation of aircraft will be vital for future development. This is why the Government, together with the operators of the airports, will look at the issues closely.

I will return to that matter. I know that Brian Adam will join me in welcoming the new routes that Ryanair and Air France have established in recent weeks from Aberdeen airport. We are engaged in the consultation to identify the means that are required to develop such routes. An important aspect of the improvement of existing facilities relates to surface access. A number of members have raised the issue of rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. We are looking to be in a position to announce preferred routes for those rail links within the next few weeks. Our ambition is, as Iain Gray said, to be able to carry those forward by 2005.

I confirm Iain Gray's comment that the timetable for work to begin on the rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh by 2005 is ambitious but achievable. An agreed strategy on surface access to Aberdeen airport, which was devised by local partners, including BAA and the local authority, is also in place. I am delighted that the Executive kick-started that strategy a few weeks ago by providing funding. Much has been said about HIAL, which is the publicly owned operator of lifeline airports in the Highlands and Islands. HIAL has a crucial role. Some of the criticism that has been made of its charging structures is simply unfounded. The figures that I have seen show that Inverness's landing charges are on the median for airports of comparable size in the United Kingdom. HIAL is publicly owned precisely because it operates in a different environment to that in which Prestwick, Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh operate. Because of that unique operating environment, we have provided heavy subsidy, which, as Iain Gray said, has trebled since 1997.

That is certainly the case. Both Governments recognise the particular situation of Highlands and Islands airports. Maureen Macmillan and Mary Scanlon mentioned the prospects for development of the smaller Highlands and Islands airports, which are lifeline services. In that context, we will examine proposals to enhance air travel through a continuing programme of investment in terminals and infrastructure. The consultation offers an opportunity for such proposals to be introduced.  Bristow Muldoon mentioned some of the investment and support that has been given. The new terminals at Stornoway and Kirkwall airports are a tangible benefit of our increased support for HIAL. The proposed PSO on the Inverness to Gatwick route has been mentioned. We support that proposal because we recognise the importance of routes to London as well as elsewhere. It is eminently sensible that the UK Government should respond to that proposal in the context of the consultation, which includes consultation on access to the south-east hubs and on PSOs. Fergus Ewing's suggestion that the UK-wide consultation is a device to postpone the decision is, frankly, bizarre.

The decision lies with the Department for Transport and not with the Scottish Executive, which is why we continue to talk with our colleagues in the Department for Transport and to support the application in the context of the consultation. HIAL has worked successfully with airlines to encourage and attract new services. For example, it has attracted low-cost easyJet flights to Inverness and has recently secured a new BMI service linking Stornoway and Edinburgh. As Iain Gray said—although one or two members might have missed it—yet another new service that HIAL has attracted to the Highlands of Scotland will be announced later this week. Given that at least Duncan Hamilton gave a mature response to one or two of the points in the debate, I look forward to the SNP's welcoming the establishment of that service. We are committed to ensuring the development of an expanded network of routes for Scotland. We are mindful of the needs of low-cost operators and the freight industry. We have a clear remit and strategy for route development and we intend to act on it. This time next year, 1,000 delegates—representing every major airport and international airline in the world—will meet in Scotland to do business with one another and to agree the basis for new routes and services. The world routes development forum will come here because Scotland is where airlines want to be and because the Scottish Executive, Scottish Enterprise and VisitScotland have made the forum possible and welcome. The forum will come to Scotland because the Scottish Executive wants to encourage direct routes overseas as well as securing and enhancing existing routes to London. We are in the midst of an extensive consultation  process. With our colleagues in the Department for Transport, we are striving to ensure that all the issues are given a thorough airing, as many of them have been today. The resulting policy will say much about Scotland's place in the world. The consultation offers a platform for growing our air transport industry and our air route development networks over the next 30 years.

The consultation document addresses the issue of ownership and considers proposals that could incentivise greater route development. Will Brian Adam respond to the  consultation in that context?

Does Mary Scanlon accept that the figures to which she refers primarily reflect the position at Scatsta and Sumburgh airports, and that Inverness airport, the hub airport for HIAL's network, has experienced an average annual growth of about 6 per cent over the past 10 years?

rose—

Far from saying nothing about it, the Scottish Executive has been fully supportive of the bid and has enabled the Department for Transport to carry it forward in co-operation with Highland Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise.

I have listened with great interest to the speeches  and I thank George Lyon for the opportunity to debate this important issue. The matter is of great concern to communities on both sides of the Clyde and I was glad of the opportunity to meet community representatives in Dunoon at the end of August. A consultation process is being undertaken, which is why I met them and met various elected members, local authorities and the Clyde shipping services advisory committee. As Maureen Macmillan said, I also gave evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee a few weeks ago. The context of our proposals is the need to bring subsidised west coast ferry services into line with European law, by inviting tenders under public service obligations, known as PSOs. In April 2000, "Delivering Lifeline Ferry Services" sought views on options for putting our lifeline ferry services out to tender to comply with European rules. Following that consultation, we sought European approval for tendering the network as a single bundle. That approach was designed to maximise service reliability, simplify vessel management and prevent cherry picking of the potentially most profitable routes. Most respondents to the consultation exercise supported that approach. We were also keen to overcome the presumption in European rules against subsidies for mainland to mainland routes such as the Gourock to Dunoon route and the Tarbert to Portavadie route—particularly on the Gourock to Dunoon route, which is in direct competition with a private sector operator that provides an unsubsidised service. We worked hard to show that the unique circumstances of Scotland's west coast justify a single-bundle approach, PSOs on mainland to mainland routes and a continuing subsidised service between Gourock and Dunoon. We have made important progress in discussing those matters with the Commission.

The discussions were conducted in Brussels, as is the way of these things. I am sure that Dr Ewing is more than familiar with how the European Commission operates. We concluded from those discussions that the network can be tendered as a single bundle; that mainland to mainland routes can be justified; and that a subsidised passenger service between Cowal and Inverclyde can be continued, as it provides a direct connection for foot passengers between the bus station at Dunoon and the railhead at Gourock, which the private sector operator's out-of-town vehicle service does not. However, following those discussions, we  concluded that the existing combined passenger and vehicle service on the Gourock to Dunoon route would not comply with EC rules, as it would breach competition law by providing an unfair advantage to the successful tenderer in attracting vehicle custom between Cowal and Inverclyde.

I will give way in a moment. That decision was not reached lightly. We continue to talk to the Commission about possible interpretations of the European rules, enforcement of which is the Commission's responsibility, but our view is that the proposal that we have published for a continuing passenger-only subsidy on a passenger-only vessel is the best way to secure the future of a subsidised service between Gourock and Dunoon.

The discussions with Europe have been held informally. That is the usual way in which such advance discussions with the Commission are held. That is why we will not publish the documentation.

As I said a moment ago, we continue to discuss the matter with Europe. Although the Executive will take the decision, it would be completely remiss of the Executive to take our decision without considering the discussions that we have held with the European Commission. The consequences of making the wrong judgment on the matter are not trivial. We could jeopardise any future Gourock to Dunoon service. We might also close the door on other mainland to mainland routes and put at risk the whole strategy of tendering the network as a  single bundle. I do not know where Duncan Hamilton got his nod-nod, wink-wink idea. In response to George Lyon's point, I said that it is firmly the case that when Sarah Boyack went to Dunoon on behalf of the Executive, she made it clear that the Executive would continue to work to achieve a combined passenger and vehicle service. No guarantee was given at that time, nor could one have been given. As a number of members have mentioned, the key difficulty is finding a way to ring fence robustly the subsidy for the passenger-only service. The simple fact is that to allow a vehicle service to operate on the same vessel as a subsidised passenger service would mean subsidising one operator to run against an unsubsidised private competitor. Any subsidy that is received in respect of passengers cannot fail to contribute to the common overheads of a vessel that carries passengers and vehicles. That is the fundamental problem with a dual tendering approach. As I said, we will continue to explore with the Commission whether we can identify a way of ring fencing that would demonstrate that subsidy for passengers does not reduce the cost of carrying vehicles.

Those points arose from the Deloitte & Touche report. The final conclusion was that it was difficult to justify any subsidy on the route. If we could find a mechanism for ring fencing the subsidy, we could consider whether to seek to implement that on a single route within a larger bundle or, as at least two members have mentioned, whether to explore the option of a separate PSO for the Gourock to Dunoon service. In that case, there would be no certainty that the successful bidder for the service would be the same as for the rest of the network. It is worth noting that we could undertake a separate tender for passenger subsidy of a combined passenger and vehicle service only if we first found a way to ring fence the subsidy. As with the single-bundle approach, that is the first requirement. If what we propose does not conform with European regulations, a separate PSO will be no more likely to be acceptable than the route being part of a single bundle. One further option, which has been mentioned in the debate, is to place no PSO on the Gourock to Dunoon service. That would allow an operator to provide a combined service at their own commercial risk. CalMac operates the current  vehicle service as an out-of-undertaking service. If there is no PSO, there is no obligation on any company to provide a commercial service. The consequence of taking the Gourock to Dunoon service out of the undertaking altogether might result in no service of any kind. Given the real benefits that we believe can continue to be delivered by a passenger service between the two town centres, it would take a lot to persuade us that the no-PSO option was worth the risk. We are mindful of the consequences on both sides of the Clyde if the result is the end of the present combined service. As far as Dunoon is concerned, a public transport fund award was made last year for construction of a breakwater, and preparatory work on that is under way. It is up to the council to consider whether it should put forward a case for a new linkspan and other shoreside works. As a private sector operator might, indeed, wish to operate a vehicle service from Dunoon pier, there may well be a case for those works. If that case is made, we will consider any funding options, whatever the status of the PSO service. In response to Duncan McNeil's points about Gourock, responsibility for Gourock pier, as with other CalMac piers, will fall to the vesco. There is no reason why Gourock's current use as a safe refuge for vessels should not continue for as long as it is required. The vesco would be responsible for maintaining the pier, although it might delegate that responsibility through the management contract. I should also point out that decisions on the ferry service will not impact directly on the Gourock interchange project. We share concerns about the delay to the project and are exploring with Network Rail, Inverclyde Council and others ways of moving the matter forward. We will also discuss concerns about traffic problems in Gourock with the local authority should such infrastructure problems arise. One of the protections for the headquarters facility at Gourock is the application of the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations, which are built into the entire tendering process and impact on the work and conditions of the people who are employed there. In any case, we see no reason why the headquarters would move. We have made significant progress since we concluded that our ferry services required to be tendered to comply with EC rules. I recognise that we have not made the progress that we sought to make on the combined passenger and vehicle service between Gourock and Dunoon. The strong response to our consultation paper reflects concern about that issue. The responses have been helpful to us and we will consider their  content carefully, in particular to find out whether they contain any suggestions that would enable a combined service to fulfil the terms of the proposed passenger PSO and meet EC rules. If so, I will explore those suggestions further with the Commission, which is aware of local feeling. My officials and I have a continuing dialogue with the Commission on the issue, and we will consider the options carefully.  We will wish to announce the decision on the final service specification as soon as possible to allow us to proceed with tendering the whole network. At the heart of our decisions will be a determination to protect fares and services as far as we can. We recognise that to do that, we must make proposals that comply with European law, and I hope that any such proposals will have the Parliament's support.  Meeting closed at 17:53.

I start by commending Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for securing tonight's debate, which offers us an opportunity to discuss the future of an area and an industry that are important to Scotland's future economic prosperity. On 23 July, we, together with the UK Department for Transport, published the consultation document on the future development of air transport in Scotland. That is part of the process of setting out our air transport policy for the next 30 years. When we discuss aviation in Scotland in the next 30 years, we will be addressing one of the key infrastructure issues for the future prospects for economic development. Therefore, I welcome this opportunity to discuss the commercial opportunities for Edinburgh in the air freight sector. Along with the significant passenger growth that is predicted in the consultation document, there are predictions of dynamic growth in freight. That promises an exciting future for Edinburgh airport and our other major airports throughout Scotland. Edinburgh is already a dominant airmail centre and has great advantages for express parcels and airmail now and in the future. Those come from its position close to many destinations in the central belt, its strategic road links and its proximity to freight users. The consultation document predicts significant growth in freight at Edinburgh airport over the next 30 years. Of course, rail links to the airport will only add to that potential. The possibilities are huge and the capacity of the air freight sector to deliver is vital to the development of many important industries, many of which, as Bristow Muldoon said, are of low volume and high value, for which air freight is particularly suitable. As with the growth in passenger travel, there are many considerations to take into account, not least environmental factors. It is right that those be taken into account at the same time as we study  the benefits to the economy. It is also right that major developments be viewed as part of the broader picture and considered in the context of the planning process. We must look ahead and ensure that we safeguard our options for the future. That is why the Lothian structure plan acknowledges the important role of Edinburgh airport in the wider economy and gives strategic planning policy support for its future growth. BAA Lynton bought the former RAF Turnhouse site from the Ministry of Defence more than two years ago. It has planning policy support for the kind of development that Lord James has described and it has specific permission in place at the outline stage for redevelopment for airport-related business activity. It would not be appropriate for me to comment on the merits of a specific future development proposal at Turnhouse. As members will be aware, decisions on such matters could arrive on the desk of Scottish ministers, so, as a minister, I can say nothing that might prejudge any such decision. However, I can advise members that the Executive has been considering the long-term strategic future of the area through the preparation of a national planning policy statement on west Edinburgh. West Edinburgh, which is centred around the airport, is of huge importance to Scotland's economy. It is also regarded as being of national significance in transport and environmental terms. For that reason, on 23 August 2002, the Scottish Executive, the City of Edinburgh Council and the local enterprise company jointly issued a draft planning framework for public consultation. I know that Margaret Smith and others have been closely involved in that consultation process already. In our view, providing that congestion problems can be overcome and issues of accessibility and environmental quality addressed, west Edinburgh creates a unique opportunity in Scotland for an internationally significant business location. The planning framework is intended to safeguard long-term opportunities for economic development and sustainable transport and to provide a sound basis for guiding investment and planning decisions. From a planning perspective, the existence of a rapidly growing airport is a major factor. BAA, as the owner of the airport, has been involved in a stakeholder advisory group, which was set up to inform the work on the planning framework. We are well aware of BAA's aspirations and concerns and look forward to receiving feedback on the draft planning framework, as part of the wider consultation process. It is important that members are clear about the position of the Turnhouse site in planning terms.  Plans for the redevelopment of the site for air cargo and related purposes received outline clearance in June 2000. An application for detailed planning permission has not yet been made, but that is a matter for BAA, and there is no constraint that would prevent the company from submitting such an application if it so wished. Outline planning permission is one of the considerations that face present and potential owners of the site. The establishment and management of accommodation centres for asylum seekers are reserved matters, but social justice ministers in particular have been in regular dialogue with the Home Office and the Scotland Office on a range of asylum issues. We are clear about the importance of enabling asylum seekers in Scotland to feel welcome. Over recent months, my colleagues have discussed the issue with Home Office ministers and they will continue to do so. The discussions include our role as formal consultees on any new development of an accommodation centre in Scotland, for which the Home Office would be the developer. Although Government departments have Crown exemption from the requirement to submit formal planning applications, non-statutory notice of proposed development procedures are followed in such cases. Any proposal for the Turnhouse site would be a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council in the first instance. If the council objected to the proposal, the Home Office could then refer it to the Scottish ministers for a final decision. As I have said, it would not be appropriate for me to comment on proposals for development, as a planning application might come before Scottish ministers. It is important that members note that such use of the Turnhouse site would require not only that the Home Office decide to pursue that course of action—and it has not made such a decision so far—but that the Home Office purchase a highly valuable site that has existing planning permission for a different use. The Home Office would be required to follow the planning procedures that I have described. That is a matter for the Home Office to consider, but it is fully aware of the transport and economic significance of the site, which we will continue to discuss with it.

Responsibility for policy on accommodation centres lies with the Home Office. Responsibility for planning permission—whether in relation to a detailed planning application for the development of the site as intended by its present owners or for any other use by the Home Office or  anyone else—lies with the devolved planning system and, ultimately, with Scottish ministers. I reassure all members that we are well aware of the significance of west Edinburgh and of the air freight industry. We are also well aware of the outline plans that exist for the use of the Turnhouse site. We will continue to address those important issues, and I am glad that we have had an opportunity to do so today.

Proposals to reopen a particular station are for the local transport authority or transport partnership. In this case, it would be for Aberdeenshire Council or the north-east Scotland transport partnership to bring forward any such proposals.

I am aware of the position that Mr Rumbles describes and the campaign for the reopening of Laurencekirk station. I reiterate my view that the appropriate step for Mr Rumbles, as the constituency member for the area, to take is to talk to the local authority and to NESTRANS. They are the appropriate bodies to implement a project of the kind that he suggests.

Mr Davidson mentioned the Aberdeen crossrail proposals, which NESTRANS and other partners are carrying forward. The Strategic Rail Authority and Network Rail are involved in the discussions and are taking a close interest in the proposals. If the proposals present a value-for-money case, as they will, and that case includes Laurencekirk station, those responsible for timetabling and the operation of the infrastructure will be fully aware of that.

The Scottish Executive has undertaken no such investigation.

We want both sides in the dispute to use the talks that are being held today to avoid the kind of damaging dispute that the member describes. In a situation of free collective bargaining, that is the appropriate course of action. That is what we would expect to happen. We would encourage the resolution of the dispute to avoid the inconvenience that the member has referred to.

No. The primary role of any congestion charging scheme is to tackle congestion. However, the scheme that is being developed by the City of Edinburgh Council would also raise additional streams of funding that could be used for additional transport enhancements.

The rail projects to which the member refers are both projects that are being implemented with rail partners. In that respect, the role of the City of Edinburgh Council is of less significance. Clearly, the City of Edinburgh Council is the lead authority in relation to the A8000, which is its responsibility. The council is making progress in conjunction with the Forth estuary transport authority. I am pleased that that authority will be free, if it wishes, to use tolls from the Forth road bridge to assist to pay for that scheme.

I am pleased to respond to some of the points that have been made. The budget settlement is clearly good for business as it promotes growth and opportunity. It is a good budget settlement for public transport as it will help to bring about a public transport system that is a clean, efficient and reliable alternative for everyone. It is a good budget settlement for sustainable development as it will help to tackle congestion and lessen the use of fossil fuels. It is a good budget settlement for social justice as it will close the opportunity gap, widen access to transport services and maintain lifeline links with record sums of public support. The settlement delivers a huge uplift in spending on transport infrastructure over the next three years. By the end of the spending review period, Executive spending on transport will exceed £1 billion each year. That is a step change in funding across the transport network. Those resources will enable a transformation of our transport infrastructure by the end of the decade. The M74 will be completed to Glasgow city centre, the A8 and A80 will upgraded and new rail links will be created to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. All those developments will be in place or significantly under way within that period. Our other priority projects will also be completed or well under way. The budget settlement provides the resources  required in the period that it covers to take those projects forward. In some instances, where the value-for-money case has yet to be demonstrated, progress will also depend on the level of commitment from our partners. The injection of funds that the spending review provides is our statement of intent that our priority projects will be delivered. I reaffirm what I said about Aberdeen. I agree with Elaine Thomson that north-east transport is not only about the western peripheral route, important though that is. I remind north-east members about the Aberdeen crossrail project, which is among the priorities that we want to be brought forward. As with the western peripheral route, great progress has been made and further progress is expected in the next few months. I will respond to Brian Adam's red herring about local roads and national roads. He and other members are aware of the timetable for making a full assessment of traffic in and around Aberdeen. That is the responsibility, as was made clear in the letter to Andrew Welsh and elsewhere, of the local partners—Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council. On that basis, discussions will be held between the Executive and the local partners on how to carry the matter forward.

Is it not a shame that, rather than welcoming the work that is being done by the City of Edinburgh Council through its partnership in the Forth Estuary Transport Authority, Kenny MacAskill wants to fight an old battle and use that as a diversion from the issues that are in front of us? What we are doing on the A8000, the M74, the A8 and the A80 is equitable across the board. We are working with the other partners who have an interest in carrying forward the projects in order to deliver them effectively and efficiently. I want to say a word about aviation, which I was not able to address in my opening speech and about which a number of questions were raised during the debate. I reassure John Farquhar Munro that we continue to pursue a public service obligation for the Inverness to Gatwick route. We recognise that that is a key priority for air transport in the Highlands. Within the framework of the air transport consultation, we are also considering  other aspects of air transport that affect the Highlands and Islands as well as those that affect central and north-east Scotland. We are quite clear that the potential growth of air traffic from Glasgow and Edinburgh airports is sufficient to sustain both airports. That is why rail links to those airports lie among our priorities. The consultation that we are undertaking on air transport, in collaboration with our colleagues in the UK Government, will address those issues among others. It is important that I make clear the basis on which the policy on concessionary fares has been introduced and will be implemented from Monday of next week. That social justice policy is designed to meet the vast majority of the local transport needs of elderly and disabled people, which is why it is being applied through local authorities' existing concessionary fare schemes. The policy is simply the most recent example of the Scottish Executive delivering on the priorities that we set out. From Monday, every pensioner in Scotland—that is, 1 million people—will be able to travel free on their local bus trips to shops and hospitals and to visit their neighbours. That is only one example; many others are coming through the pipeline. I look forward to announcing each of them to Parliament in the months and years ahead.

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Johnstone acknowledge that the Executive has provided match funding throughout the development of the NESTRANS strategy for the Aberdeen area?

I am interested to know the differences between Mr MacAskill's proposed re-regulation bill and the quality contracts that exist under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the increase in the Scottish transport budget over the next three years. The budget settlement for 2003-06 reflects the fact that transport is one of our top priorities. The settlement provides the tools that we need to transform and modernise Scotland's transport infrastructure. Excluding capital charges, our transport budget will rise from £671 million in the current financial year to more than £1 billion by the end of 2005-06, which in cash terms is a rise of 52 per cent. That unprecedented level of funding will allow us to act on our priorities and compares exceedingly well with the £100 million of additional funding that the Tories proposed when they last initiated a transport debate. The budget settlement is about allocating resources, but it does not stand in isolation from the rest of the transport policy process. The origins  of that process lie with the white paper "Travel Choices for Scotland", which the Scottish Office issued in 1998. That white paper set out a distinctive modern agenda, which highlighted the importance of integration, of transport as a tool for addressing inequality and of a range of solutions to meet the range of different transport challenges in Scotland. Since devolution, the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 has carried many of those ideas into legislation. It provided the framework to begin delivering an integrated sustainable transport system. The third stage was to set out priority projects and to address the gaps in the transport network, which we did with the transport delivery report in March of this year. The report identified the greatest single transport challenge facing Scotland as road traffic congestion and proposed a series of measures to contain traffic growth. It established clear priority projects and a clear agenda for working in partnership with other bodies to tackle the growth in road traffic and to complete the missing links in the transport infrastructure. The budget settlement does not, as has been implied, set out priorities for the first time—that has already been done—but it provides sufficient resources to meet those priorities.

I will address the matter of the western peripheral route, but the point that I was making, in response to Mr Mundell's motion, is that the spending review and the budget do not aim to make substantive decisions on projects and priorities. That was done in the transport delivery report. As a former member of the Audit Committee, Brian Adam will know that level 3 spending details will be shared in due course with the Finance Committee as part of the budget process. That will provide more detail on some of the figures that have been announced. The decision on Aberdeen's western peripheral route is important. We are making progress on tackling Aberdeen's congestion. As Mr Adam knows, we made provision for that earlier this year. The budget settlement includes provision for whatever work might be required for the western peripheral route in the spending review period, provided that the value-for-money case and a basis for further progress are agreed. As all members with an interest in north-east Scotland will be aware, the transport modelling to provide the basis for that further discussion is under way and is expected to produce results later this year.

I have covered the issue, so I will press on. The re-letting of the Scottish rail passenger franchise is at the top of the list of priorities for the next 18 months. Directions and guidance have been issued and a joint franchising team of Executive and Strathclyde Passenger Transport officials is working to deliver the service specification. We are working with the Strategic Rail Authority to let the franchise by March 2004. That is a specific commitment. We are considering proposals from the central Scotland corridor studies and we will make an announcement on the way forward later in the year. We expect to begin preparation on the A8 and A80 motorway upgrades shortly, which will lead to a likely construction start date of around 2008.

I am happy to investigate the matter, as I am happy to investigate any case in which an agreed transport priority has been stalled for reasons that can be addressed. As well as picking up the specifics, we must look at the wider picture. We must recognise that by the end of the decade we will have transformed Scotland's transport infrastructure. The budget settlement provides the resources to allow that to happen. It will allow the completion of the central Scotland motorway network, the provision of new railway links throughout the country—including rail links to Edinburgh and Glasgow airports—and significant public transport improvements in and around our cities. For some projects, discussions are on-going to establish a value-for-money case and, for other projects, progress depends in part on commitment from partners. We have sought to provide in the budget settlement the necessary resources to allow projects to be carried forward in the spending review period. I am confident that that has been achieved. We will continue to fund and support lifeline air and ferry services and to make provision through the public transport fund. Between 2002 and 2006, we will increase Executive support for public transport by 70 per cent. The budget settlement  sustains social inclusion objectives, such as free local off-peak concessionary bus travel, and environmental objectives, such as an increase in public transport to reduce traffic congestion. We have sought in the budget settlement to make the resources available to deliver on our priorities. Over the coming months, our tasks will be to deliver on those in detail, working in partnership, and to bring to completion the projects that we have identified and established as our priorities for a sustainable transport system. I move amendment S1M-3422.2, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "welcomes the increase in spending that the Scottish budget settlement for 2003-06 provides for transport as one of the Scottish Executive's five key priority areas and recognises that these resources lay the foundation for priority projects set out in the Transport Delivery Report that will transform Scotland's transport infrastructure over the next decade, delivering a sustainable transport system fit for the 21st century, which supports business and economic growth and meets the needs of all in society."

rose—

The temporary shutdown at Torness is not affecting the local economy as the plant remains fully staffed while remedial work continues. We are well aware of the importance of British Energy to the Scottish economy and we are in close contact with the Department of Trade and Industry in relation to its current discussions with the company.

I welcome the progress that is being made on the necessary remedial work and the guarantees on the security of supply and the safety of the installation.

I realise that the work force of 2022 may still be at school, but we should attend to the matter even at this early stage. We are continuing to work with local enterprise companies to ensure that we have a skilled decommissioning work force.

We are in close contact with Her Majesty's Government because it has lead responsibility for the generation of electricity, although, clearly, we have an interest in ensuring security of supply to Scottish businesses and consumers. For that reason, we are working closely with Her Majesty's Government on the work that it is doing with British Energy to ensure that the company has a future and to ensure the security of Scotland's electricity supply.

The ports policy paper "Modern Ports: A UK Policy", which was produced jointly by the Scottish Executive and the UK Government, provides a clear strategy for the future development of ports and harbours in Scotland.

I am aware of the issues relating to the Peterhead Bay Authority. I am also aware that the authority has a very ambitious investment project. I would not expect that to be delayed or put off by relatively marginal costs. It is for the authority to produce a commercial plan that takes into account the existing tax framework. Like other commercial harbours around the country, Peterhead bay is expected to produce its own surplus for investment. It is not our policy to invest public money in commercial harbours—that position will not change.

Jamie McGrigor will be aware that we have a continuing programme for funding piers and harbours in the Highlands and Islands. They are supported differently to commercial harbours elsewhere in the country, because they provide lifeline services to local communities. We will continue to roll out our programme over the coming years.

As Iain Gray said, we welcome the opportunity to demonstrate that economic growth and jobs remain two of our top priorities, along with transport, health and education. Economic growth is at the heart of our economic and social strategy. Fundamental to our prosperity is a buoyant and dynamic economy. I welcome the SNP's ringing endorsement of our economic framework strategy and "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks", which aim to achieve our objectives. Andrew Wilson spoke of other areas of consensus on economic policy. There is a clear understanding and wide agreement that our future economic success and prosperity depend on raising our game. For too long, our growth rate has failed to match the UK average. That is true and, as has been said, it has been true for almost 30 years, but it is not the whole story. Take this week's report on business start-ups, which was quoted during the debate. Yes, the percentage increase in the business birth rate was lower than in the previous year, as the report states, but the total number of start-ups was the largest ever recorded in Scotland, at 12,100 in 2001-02. We have heard much about business rates and the perception that an unfair additional burden is placed on Scottish business. To talk about poundage without dealing with rateable values is to miss half the picture. The rise in rateable values at the most recent revaluation was 15 per cent, compared with 25 per cent south of the border. That is what determines the rates that businesses pay.

Of course business has concerns about such issues and of course we listen to those concerns. It is inevitable that the impact on some industries, including the chemical  industry, is different. We are listening to those concerns and we will reflect on them and propose policies in response to them. We have set out clearly our expectations and aspirations for the Scottish economy and the big picture from which all our detailed economic policies follow, whether pan-Scotland or more locally. Those policies are being implemented. The vision that was set out in "The Way Forward: Framework for Economic Development in Scotland" when it was published two years ago was to raise Scottish people's quality of life through increasing economic opportunities for all on a socially and environmentally sustainable basis. That vision still holds. Stimulating actions to secure economic growth and sustainable development is central to our economic vision. To put it another way, we want to restore and accelerate economic growth, but we are also fundamentally concerned about the quality of economic growth. Growth must be socially just and sustainable by embracing all the people of Scotland. That is why it is important that such solid progress has been made on employment and unemployment in recent years. The labour market remains relatively strong, with a high level of employment and a low level of unemployment historically and in a European context. As Iain Gray said, yesterday's figures confirmed that the employment rate in Scotland continues to grow.

Our challenge is to take every opportunity to boost our sustainable growth rate and to close the gap in economic growth. That is why we have set out a strategy. Some of the strategy for addressing economic growth lies with the UK Government at a macroeconomic level. It must be noted that the UK Government's prudent handling of the macroeconomy in the past five years has provided the stable economic environment in which we can make progress. Andrew Wilson seems surprised that our economic position is stable, but he need cast his mind back only five or six years to appreciate what the Scottish economy's position would be without that stable environment. We must build on the platform of a stable UK economy and we must do that principally and centrally by enhancing productivity. That is the most critical element in stimulating economic growth and in closing the gap. Improved productivity is the key source of international competitiveness. By raising productivity and improving our competitiveness, we can raise the  level of employment and raise living standards.

I enjoyed Richard Lochhead's speech, in which he said that Scotland should have control of oil taxation in order to invest more in our social services, but in the same breath demanded that oil taxes be cut. That did not show much coherent vision. The Executive has a coherent vision. To overcome the growth deficit, we need policies that will stimulate increased productivity. That is why the strategy in "A Smart, Successful Scotland" is important and why it is important that the SNP warmly endorses and supports that strategy. Clearly, the priorities of growing businesses, improving learning and skills and growing global connections are the way for us to move forward. We must embrace learning at all levels and promote a culture of enterprise and a can-do approach that will support those important structural changes. However, we do not underestimate the size of that task. We recognise that it cannot be achieved overnight. To pretend that the performance of our economy can be transformed overnight or by constitutional change is simply disingenuous. As Wendy Alexander described so eloquently, the SNP's prescription for full fiscal freedom is based entirely on its political rejection of the United Kingdom. We do not pretend that we can determine the strength of the Scottish economy on our own. We will seek to generate the conditions to encourage growth and enterprise. We will do that in partnership with the UK Government and all the other actors in the economy who see the need for a productivity-based growth strategy for the years ahead.

I thank Mary Scanlon for providing an opportunity to debate such an important subject and all members who have contributed to the debate for the constructive way in which they have done so. Reliable and affordable ferry links to the mainland are critical to Orkney and Shetland and the Executive is committed to safeguarding such lifeline services to Scotland's island communities. We are determined to ensure that we safeguard such services in a way that is affordable to users and the taxpayer, while recognising the vital importance to the islands of ferry connections and services. We are required by European Commission rules to tender public subsidy contracts—including the northern isles ferry contract—every five years. A couple of members have mentioned that we are currently preparing to tender ferry services in the Clyde and Hebridean isles. Tendering for the imminent northern isles contract started in 1998. The tender is for passengers and accompanied cars only, on the same basis as the existing contract with P&O Scottish Ferries. As before, we were bound to accept the lowest bid that met the service specification and, on that basis, NorthLink's bid succeeded. It has been mentioned that it is bringing in three new, larger vessels that are built to the latest safety standards, more frequent services and substantially lower fares. First, I would like to address the issue of livestock. It is worth noting that livestock are outside the subsidy contract. That is not something new nor is it something that we have invented; it has been inherited and was operated under previous Governments when active competition for livestock carriage was perhaps greater than it was in 1998-99, when we drew up the current contract. I will correct a couple of factual inaccuracies. The livestock vessels that have been chartered this year to meet the immediate needs this season have been chartered by P&O, not by the Scottish Executive. P&O has done that every year for a number of years, so there is nothing new about it. It is not the case that the demolition of layerage at Aberdeen was a pointless exercise. That had to happen to allow work to begin on the new terminals required for the new and larger vessels that will be used. One of the major concerns has been the future  of the livestock shipments. Members have all recognised the importance of livestock to the islands' economies. The worry has been about the position after 31 October, when the P&O service will end. My understanding is that NorthLink now plans to carry livestock in livestock transporters that have higher sides than the standard general livestock transportation and so which are more suitable for the larger Orkney cattle. That provision of livestock transporters will meet the need in the immediate period following 31 October. There is a good deal of confidence that cassettes will be on stream and will arrive soon thereafter. As has been described, there has been considerable uncertainty about those proposals, but I now understand that Orkney Auction Mart, which is the main facilitator in providing the cassettes for use on NorthLink vessels, or other vessels, will place its orders shortly. The time from placing the orders to delivery of the cassettes should be in the order of 16 weeks, so they will be in place well before next year's peak livestock season. I also understand that NorthLink is actively considering buying some single-deck cassettes, as well as double-deck ones, and will, if necessary, carry those on its passenger and vehicle ferries. I think that that will allay any remaining concerns. Members have mentioned that other carriers may wish to apply for tariff rebate subsidy. That subsidy can be made available to any operator who satisfies the key requirements of the scheme. All applications are considered on that basis and there will be a level playing field. Likewise, freight lies outside the current contract. As we know, last week Norse Island Ferries started a roll-on, roll-of freight service from Shetland that is in competition with P&O and ultimately will be in competition with NorthLink, when it takes over the service at the end of the month. It is for the companies in question to resolve their commercial interests in meeting that competition. It is for NorthLink to meet that competition as a commercial company; it is not subsidised for the provision of freight. It has to satisfy us, by providing an annual account and annual performance indicators, that it is not using the subsidy that we provide for passengers and accompanied cars to subsidise its freight carriage. Therefore, it is a matter that NorthLink will have to deal with in the usual way. Of course, it is no surprise that NorthLink is concerned about competition; any commercial company would be. NorthLink looks to make a profit from its freight carriage and it is for it to do that by providing a competitive service. We do not regard competition for freight as a bad thing and it is not new. If competition has the effect of  providing a better service for customers in due course, that will be welcome in the islands. A number of questions have been raised about harbours. Responsibility for harbour developments rests with the harbour authorities. They have responsibility for bringing forward the necessary works on time. There have been delays, which in the case of Scrabster will go beyond 1 October. That is to be regretted. It is for Scrabster Harbour Trust and its contractors to resolve the problem. In the meantime, until NorthLink's vessel, the Hamnavoe, which will serve that route, is ready, I understand that a charter arrangement is in place with CalMac. We will work actively with them and with other interested parties, after the Hamnavoe is available, to ensure that that lifeline service continues to ply the route between Stromness and Scrabster. I hope that members will be reassured that it is our commitment to do that. We will work with all interested parties to ensure that that is done. The transfer of undertakings is a critical issue. There is a particular legal difficulty relating to TUPE. The system was inherited from a previous Government and, in the case of the northern isles, has been shown to be unsatisfactory in two respects. First, it is not clear until the point of transfer whether TUPE applies to particular members of staff. Secondly, the incoming operator gave guarantees from an early stage to seafarers, but not to shore staff. That has operated to the disadvantage of shore staff.  I understand that P&O intends to pay a loyalty bonus to staff who stay with them until 30 September and who have not been offered a job by NorthLink or one of its contractors that has terms and conditions that are substantially equivalent to those that they enjoy at present. The bonus, which is equivalent to 13 weeks' pay, means that no one will leave the company without either a job in the successor operator or a significant cash sum. I welcome that, although I realise that it does not address the whole issue, which is why I raised the matter with my colleagues at Westminster, as members have acknowledged. We do not want a situation to arise again in which people face uncertainty late in the day. The transfer of the ferry contract to NorthLink has been a complex process, but it will be the single biggest improvement in ferry services for the northern isles in 50 years. There will be three new vessels, more sailings, new harbours and terminal facilities and lower fares. P&O Scottish Ferries has served the northern isles well over the years and I am sure that many islanders will want to pay tribute to the company. I am also sure that many islanders will look forward to the step change in provision that will take place in the northern isles in a few weeks' time.  Meeting closed at 17:47.

I, too, welcome Mrs Ewing back to business. I was happy to hear the views of local representatives when I visited Elgin last week. Moray Council has agreed to let me see the results of its recently commissioned investigation into traffic issues, which will inform future discussions.

I will not, but I shall await the results with great interest and read them closely. As Margaret Ewing said, Elgin is a town that I know well and I am familiar with its traffic situation. When Moray Council and its partners lobbied me last week, they were clear that they needed to put a case together before looking to us for whatever support might be available. I was  impressed with the rational basis on which they put their case and with their broad base of support, which included the town's trade unions and business community as well as Elgin community council. I was also impressed with the informed way in which they recognised that, although it was useful to us to hear views and opinions, we would need to make a judgment on the basis of evidence.

We are aware of those issues, some of which have been highlighted by the significant roadworks in Elgin this summer. That is why the Executive has asked BEAR Scotland Ltd to undertake a review of pedestrian-crossing facilities in the centre of Elgin. I also understand that the local authority will seek the inclusion of two pedestrian crossings in Tesco's scheme for the development of a new store.

Mr Johnstone will be aware that we have a significant programme of capital investment in our roads and transport systems generally, which will continue to bring the benefits to business to which he refers. There is no proposal in the programme for a bypass at Keith. However, there is an agreed proposal for a bypass at Fochabers, which will make a significant difference to traffic movement on the A96. That will be implemented as quickly as possible.

Significant progress has been made and, by the end of last week, more than 2,500 payments had been made to pensioners, to a value of approximately £20 million.

We are continuing to discuss with the Inland Revenue the taxable status of individual ex gratia payments. As Mr Canavan will know, the rules of the schemes in Scotland are different from those in England and have produced some differences in terms of their taxable status. In addition, the trustees of the Scottish schemes chose at an early stage not to make payments direct from the pension scheme in the way that the trustees from the English schemes chose to do. That was a matter for the trustees and is not something over which ministers have authority. However, we are continuing to discuss with the Inland Revenue whether there is any way of addressing that issue in order to improve the tax position of the Scottish pensioners. I should add that, since my appearance at the Public Petitions Committee in the chamber a few weeks before the recess, we have spoken with the Treasury and have obtained an additional £8 million in accumulated surplus over the period to the wind-up of the scheme.

The progress that has been made is that, where a beneficiary has died since the key date of 7 June 2002, which is when the scheme was wound up, the position is now straightforward: the benefit is paid at 100 per cent, as it would have been in other circumstances. We have also found a means by which to address the position in those cases where a beneficiary has died since 18 December 2000, which is the date on which the Scottish ministers announced agreement with the Treasury on distribution of the surplus. Those arrangements will allow 100 per cent of benefits to be paid to those widowed since December 2000.

If Mr Ewing had listened closely to my answer to Mr Canavan, he would appreciate that the difference between the arrangements in Scotland and England is not one that lies with the Government or the Executive, but one that relates to the means by which the trustees of the different schemes chose to make payments to pensioners and beneficiaries. We are aware of the points that have been made by  pensioners, which is why we have sought and obtained additional funds from the Treasury, so that the average pay-out to Scottish pensioners will be at least £1,000 more than the average pay-out to English pensioners. Clearly, we also want to address the tax position, which is why we are continuing to discuss the matter with the Inland Revenue.

Good progress is being made in a number of areas, including the launch earlier this week of ENABLE's thistle travel card with Executive support, the agreement that the national free concessionary travel scheme for blind people will continue indefinitely in its present form and the introduction of free local off-peak bus travel for pensioners and disabled people at the end of this month.

The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 requires local authorities to consult representatives of users when setting up quality partnerships or quality contracts with private bus operators to secure services in their areas. That provides general support for the objective that Johann Lamont identifies. The thistle travel card, which I launched this week, is for use by people who have learning disabilities. The transport operators that have signed up to that scheme, including the Confederation of Passenger Transport, agree to undertake training of their staff to assist those who have disabilities in using public transport.

Does Andrew Wilson accept that the initiatives that are under way to address the public transport system in Edinburgh and the links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports may well involve investment in light rail infrastructure?

As has been said in the debate, the Executive's priority is to get the best possible rail services in Scotland. We believe that the fundamental requirement for that to happen is for the rail industry to be enabled to enjoy a period of prolonged stability. That is why we support the balanced railway devolution settlement as it has been developed by the Executive and as it currently stands. We look forward to the establishment of a single network rail company for the entire rail network in Great Britain. We have made clear the fact, which we do not apologise for, that our priority at this juncture is to deliver improved services for Scottish passengers when we take forward the new passenger franchise from April 2004. We have issued directions and guidance to provide the right framework for doing that. The Scottish rail passengers committee, Strathclyde Passenger Transport and others have very much welcomed the terms of the directions and guidance. We are working daily with the Strategic Rail Authority; its new Scottish officer is based at the rail passengers committee in Glasgow. The SRA has expertise in letting franchises and will be responsible for letting all the franchises across Great Britain, including the one for Scottish rail  passenger services. The authority will issue that franchise according to our directions and guidance. It has indicated a timetable for the Scottish franchise and is confident that it can be delivered. We will formally issue directions and guidance to the SRA early next month. Expressions of interest will be invited this summer. A detailed service specification will be issued, with an invitation to bid in the autumn of this year. Shortlisted bidders will be invited to submit their best and final offers in the spring of next year and a preferred bidder will be announced in autumn 2003. The new franchise will be awarded in spring 2004.

The service specification, which will be issued this year prior to the invitation to bid, will be founded on the existing level of service across the network. However, as several members have said, the franchise can be enhanced. Those who make bids will be invited to offer a price for the specified services and to suggest alternative services if they can provide them at a comparable cost.

We have said that we will consider carefully the entire range of recommendations from the central Scotland transport corridor study, but specifically those that relate to public transport, which clearly include the recommendation for reopening the Airdrie to Bathgate line. Obviously, we will have to examine those recommendations in terms of their value for money and whether they can be delivered. However, it is our intention to develop such projects in a way that allows the passenger rail franchise to specify that, when such infrastructure improvements are in place, the successful operator will provide a certain level of service on that new infrastructure. Not only will it be possible to enhance services on existing infrastructure, but, under the terms of a long, 15 to 20-year franchise, it will be possible to enhance new infrastructure.

There are a number of assumptions in what Fiona Hyslop has said, and I will conclude my speech by dealing with them. Andrew Wilson and others have implied that current arrangements cost Scotland in terms of infrastructure and investment, but they have failed to provide any evidence of that. Our view is that a separate Scottish infrastructure company would require separate funding for upgrades to the east and west coast main lines and would mean that Scotland had to provide a significant amount of funding for upgrades to those lines north of the border. It would also mean that we would have to adapt to what is currently, as Railtrack Scotland made clear in its evidence to the Transport and the Environment Committee, a net loss-making operation. In other words, the track access charges that are raised in Scotland are not adequate to fund the necessary maintenance and repair work. The argument about other European countries ignores the fact that the European Union is facing serious difficulties in ensuring inter-operability among the European rail networks. To go for a smaller and separate rail network at a time when the rest of Europe is seeking a more unified approach is clearly to go in the wrong direction. We live in a single island and the case for a GB rail system is that it will greatly strengthen safety, growth and unity of purpose within the network. Our ambition is to provide the best possible rail service for the people of Scotland. We believe that we can best do that by acting on Scottish passenger rail interests and freight interests within the context of a GB rail network.

We recognise rail as a priority, but today's debate is about not only the rail industry in Scotland, but the devolution settlement within which that industry operates. We believe that devolution has brought new opportunities for Scotland's railways. The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive have a major role to play in addressing the consequences of the fragmentation and privatisation that occurred under the previous Tory Government. It is right that we should do that within a strategic framework that recognises the need for a coherent approach to the rail network in Great Britain as a whole. The extension of devolved powers that has already been achieved gives us the right tools to advance Scottish priorities within that framework. Mr MacAskill has, not surprisingly, demanded further devolution. To set that demand in context, it is worth recognising the powers that have already been devolved. Before devolution, Scottish Office ministers had very limited powers over rail. Chief among those was the power to fund Strathclyde Passenger Transport to allow it to pay its share of the Scottish passenger railway franchise, which is operated by ScotRail. At the outset, the Scottish Executive inherited responsibility only for that part of the franchise. However, a package of measures to extend railway devolution was agreed in March 1998. Since then, especially over the past 15 months, Scottish ministers have acquired full responsibility for funding the Scottish passenger rail franchise. That transfer of powers and resources from the UK Department for Transport has more than doubled the Executive's railway budget.

Mr MacAskill clearly  confuses two different sets of directions and guidance, so I am glad to have the opportunity to set him right and correct his misunderstanding. We are the sole issuer of directions and guidance for the Scottish passenger rail franchise. For cross-border franchises, such as those that are operated by Virgin and Great North Eastern Railway, we are one of two partners that can issue such guidance. The guidance that we issue on cross-border rail franchises must be taken into account alongside that of the Department for Transport. The transfer of powers over the Scottish rail passenger franchise is now complete. A further transfer of resources was secured earlier this year, when we agreed to the reconfiguration of the existing ScotRail franchise in return for the consolidation of enhanced services into the franchise baseline. That means that Scottish ministers alone will issue directions and guidance for passenger services that begin and end in Scotland. We intend to do that from April 2004. In addition, we appoint the chair of the rail passengers committee for Scotland and we have executive responsibility for freight facilities grants and, within scheme rules that are agreed across the UK, track access grants in Scotland. We are also able to award direct financial support for passenger rail services. As I have mentioned, we are also empowered, in partnership with the UK DFT, to issue guidance on cross-border passenger services. That is not all. The Scottish Parliament has legislative competence for the rail responsibilities of Scotland's passenger transport authorities such as SPT. Following an order that was laid before both the Scottish and Westminster Parliaments within the past few weeks, the Scottish Parliament will acquire legislative competence for the promotion and construction of new railways in Scotland. Far from being over-cautious about railway devolution, we have in fact taken forward an agenda that gives the Scottish Executive the lead on a wide range of railway matters. We have done that not to break up the British railway network, but to strike the right balance between the needs of rail travellers within Scotland and the integrity of the GB network as a whole.

Coherence is indeed critical. Far from being a process of creeping devolution,  the logic of what I have set out is that we will continue to seek to achieve the correct balance between the needs of Scottish rail passengers—which will be met directly by Scottish ministers and so fall within the competence of the Scottish Parliament—and the integrity of the GB network. Achieving that balance will remain our guiding principle. Within that, our focus in coming months will be on getting the new Scottish passenger franchise right, rather than on seeking to revisit the devolution settlement the moment that it is completed. Of course, we will continue to listen carefully to the views of other players in the industry. We listen to SPT, Scottish Financial Enterprise, the Rail Freight Group and those who are responsible for cross-border services. We listen to a range of views on the future ownership and management of the railway infrastructure in Scotland. The industry does not have a single view on that, but it has a shared ambition to secure the best result for Scotland's rail customers. We share that ambition. On that basis, we will continue to work with those who have responsibility for the network as a whole to secure the best returns for Scottish travellers. We will work with Alistair Darling and the DFT. Above all, we will ensure that Scottish interests are fully represented and taken into account by Network Rail in the future management of the assets that presently belong to Railtrack, which is in administration. We will work with the Strategic Rail Authority on both infrastructure and service issues. In that context, I was pleased to welcome the SRA's new officer in Scotland at a rail industry reception that took place earlier this week only a few hundred yards from the chamber. Mike Connelly will work closely with my officials on the new rail passenger franchise. He will also no doubt ensure that the SRA is aware of our priorities in other areas. We will continue to work with the Office of the Rail Regulator on the regulatory framework, with the Health and Safety Commission and with Her Majesty's railway inspectorate on rail safety, and with the British Transport Police on crime and security across the network. In our view, it would be absurd to break up those GB-wide regimes, which deal with regulation, health and safety and route crime on the east and west coast main lines. At the summing up of the debate, I will be interested to hear whether the SNP accepts the logic of GB-wide remits in all those areas. The Executive's priorities are clear: to secure a long-term franchise from 2004 in the interests of Scottish passengers; to upgrade Waverley station; to take forward the best options for rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports; and to continue to support the development of key Scottish rail projects, such as the Stirling to Alloa and Larkhall  to Milngavie routes, as well as the Aberdeen crossrail and the Borders railway. Those priorities will depend on working with a range of partners in both the public and private sectors. The projects will critically depend on our continuing our close working with the SRA and the DFT. I urge the Parliament to support our priorities and our partnership approach. Members should reject any diversion that would reopen the devolution debate. I urge members to support the amendment in my name. I move amendment S1M-3229.3, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the Executive's proposals in the transport delivery report Scotland's Transport: Delivering Improvements as the first steps in meeting the objective of a bigger, better and safer railway, and calls upon the Executive to continue to work closely with the Strategic Rail Authority in re-letting the Scottish passenger railway franchise and in developing a rail freight strategy for Scotland and, with Her Majesty's Government, to ensure that Railtrack's successor company delivers improved safety, growth and unity of purpose across the entire network."

I thank Robert Brown for securing this important debate and providing us with an opportunity further to clarify our position on rail links to Glasgow airport and Edinburgh airport. Although I disagree with one or two points that have been raised, the discussion has been positive in the  main and reflects the fact that the project's importance is accepted across the board. The Executive is committed to implementing a transport policy that creates a safe and accessible railway system. It forms part of an approach that is focused as much on social, economic and environmental benefits as on direct benefits to the transport network. We recognise that the construction of rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports is an important part of such an approach, which is why, as members have mentioned, we have commissioned a major study to consider what can best be done at each airport and to indicate the best means of taking the project forward. I want to stress that there is no question of any delay or inaction by the Scottish ministers. Since the study was commissioned, we have always been very clear about the timetable and about the need for a project of such importance to be rigorously tested to ensure that the right link is constructed in the right place to deliver value for money. The study does not focus on the case for rail links, but on identifying the best solution. It is true that SPT, the BAA and others have carried out previous studies on rail links to Glasgow airport, but those studies have not succeeded in identifying an agreed and preferred option that should be carried forward. Members have claimed that no progress has been made, but the study that we have commissioned will bring together the findings of other studies to achieve what they failed to achieve: identification of a single option that is technically feasible and achievable and commands the broad support of all the actual and potential partners. That is critical if we want to deliver on our objective. The study is part of a wider process to evaluate the continuing and anticipated growth in the demand for air transport across the UK over the next 30 years, and will contribute to our Scottish air transport consultation paper and to next year's proposed UK white paper on the future of air transport. That white paper will be informed by the need to meet demand for expansion in the aviation sector and for any such expansion to make the best possible contribution to local and national economies. As a result, it will require to recognise the need to reduce surface journeys by road in order to obtain the maximum benefit from the growth in aviation demand.

I certainly will. We hope that  the two studies will dovetail comfortably together. In any case, we do not intend one study to overtake the other. Pauline McNeill asked about our strategic priorities. Our transport delivery report clearly identifies the airport rail links as among our most important strategic transport priorities. As Bill Butler pointed out, they could contribute not only to the economy of their respective local areas, but to the economy of Scotland as a whole. We commissioned the study to ensure that we have an objective basis for making decisions on what we do. The consultants undertaking the study, Sinclair Knight Merz, will examine the economic and engineering costs and benefits of the proposed rail links. They will report not only to us, but to a steering group that includes the BAA, which owns both airports, Scottish Enterprise, the Strategic Rail Authority and the UK Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions. All stakeholders must work together if we are to reach a common understanding of the problems and how they can be overcome. The final report should be ready in the autumn and will allow us to proceed with detailed development studies and to outline a likely timetable. I assure members that the progress of the study is indeed progress. Although I do not want to detail all the criteria that are being employed, I am keen to ensure that the process that we are undertaking is more fully understood than I suspect it may be. I should therefore point out that phase 2 of the report will be received by ministers during the summer recess and will narrow down the options for each airport to two or three. That will provide the basis for proceeding to the third and final stage in September. That stage will identify a single preferred route, timetable, design and construction option for Edinburgh and Glasgow. To improve understanding of the process, I will ask the consultants and my civil servants to organise a briefing session between phase 2 and phase 3, perhaps with the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on strategic rail services for Scotland, a number of whose members are present. That will provide an opportunity for members to come to terms with the process. Members will be glad that I do not accept Tommy Sheridan's assertion that Glasgow airport would not survive if Edinburgh airport had the benefit of a rail link. In addition, there is no foundation to the claim that the Executive has decided that there can be only one rail link or the claim that we have a preferred option between Glasgow and Edinburgh. Neither assertion has any foundation. Our objective is to see links to both airports, subject to a comprehensive cost- benefit analysis for each proposal and subject to satisfying ourselves that the necessary criteria will be met. The analysis will focus on the benefits of the rail links to the airports, but other benefits will also be considered. Paul Martin mentioned economic benefits and Robert Brown identified other opportunities through linking airport links to the wider Scottish railway and transport network. That is essential. The pros and cons of some specific issues, such as a link to Braehead, should also be identified. The consultants are considering those. Glasgow airport and Edinburgh airport are growing and successful and both will benefit in future from the creation of rail links. It is in our wider economic and environmental interests that the growth of those airports be accompanied by the creation of public transport options for those who use them and job opportunities that rail links can create.  I invite members to support the work that we are undertaking. As I said, we will seek to organise a briefing session to explain matters more fully to members in the early autumn, before the final phase of the study is under way. I look forward to receiving the Parliament's support for carrying the project forward as we intend.  Meeting closed at 17:57.

We expect to receive our consultant's final report in the autumn and we will then seek to agree with other interested parties a timetable for obtaining parliamentary powers and design and construction proposals.

Yes. I recognise the  economic arguments for the rail link. That is why we have identified rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports as a priority in our transport policy. I concur that the construction to Glasgow airport will not have a negative impact on any other airport in Scotland. We are implementing our policy even-handedly and in such a way as to reflect the economic priorities of the whole of Scotland.

We are talking to local authorities and the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive about the options. As Mr Young will know, consultants are working on that at the moment. We expect a final report in the autumn and an interim report shortly. The reports are based on consultations with interested parties as well as on examination of the engineering and economic options.

The Executive recognises the need for progress on the project. We will seek to bring together interested parties and to establish a timetable that can deliver quickly. We must take into consideration the proper procedures and planning requirements in relation to the route and we will not short-circuit that in an irregular way. However, we recognise the need for early progress to obtain the powers for the project to go ahead.

A code of practice for maintenance management was published by the Institution of Highways and Transportation in July 2001. The code applies throughout the UK. Responsibility for implementing the guidance in the code rests with individual local authorities.

We are aware of the difficulties that some local authorities face. It is for them to make their allocations for the services that they require to fund. We have recognised some of the difficulties by providing an additional £20 million in the current year. Dr Jackson will recall that we also allocated an additional £70 million in capital funding over the three years to March 2004. It is for councils to take the initiative in this area. They will shortly undertake a road condition survey to examine the condition of local roads and bridges. We are working with them on the technical aspects of the survey, because we believe that it is right that they should undertake such a survey in order to come up with an objective assessment of the condition of roads in various council areas.

Our policy is always to maintain an eye on the levels of traffic and levels of usage of the entire road network. We have no proposals at this stage to extend the trunk road network, but we are aware of the points that Duncan Hamilton raises. As with many other points that affect the roads network throughout Scotland, we will maintain our watching brief.

As I said in my reply to Dr Jackson, we have allocated significant additional resources to local authorities to deal with local roads issues. We will continue to work with local authorities in addressing the issues that they face. Local councils would not welcome it if we did other than leave with them the initiative in determining how they allocate the resources and what priorities they set. We will expect them to continue to do that and we will continue to work with them to assist them to address the issues that they face.

I congratulate Shona Robison on securing the debate. Scottish ministers are aware of and acknowledge the concerns about inappropriate use of fireworks. Many of those concerns are expressed in letters that we receive from members of the Scottish Parliament and from members of the public. The effect on animals is a recurring theme in that correspondence. Therefore, I am not surprised that the SSPCA has found that most people who called it about the effect on animals support tighter controls over use of fireworks. The sale and supply of fireworks is the core of the issue. As has been said, that is a consumer protection matter and is therefore reserved to the UK Government, which ensures a uniform approach throughout Great Britain. Consequently, the Department of Trade and Industry receives even more correspondence than we do. However, the Scottish Executive still plays a role. Members are aware that the last comprehensive review of controls on fireworks by central Government was undertaken in 1996. It concluded that a total ban on fireworks for private use would be unworkable and that it would lead to a black market in fireworks and to uncontrolled production and sale of home-made devices, which might be more dangerous than some of those that have been described today. We all recognise the role of fireworks in family and cultural celebrations. I understand Paul Martin's view and it is worth re-emphasising that all fireworks must comply with BS 71124. Part 2 of that standard was updated in 1998 to acknowledge some of the changes in the market. The introduction of the Fireworks (Safety) Regulations 1997 aimed to improve the safety of fireworks that are supplied to the public, and to reduce and control the levels of disturbance and noise. Since 1997, there have been new controls on the kinds of large and powerful fireworks that can be sold to the general public and there has been a prohibition on the sale of all fireworks above a small size to anyone under the age of 18. Where there is evidence that a retailer has  breached that requirement, the retailer should be reported to trading standards officers. The supply to the general public of any large fireworks, such as aerial shells and maroons, should be reported. A number of other pieces of legislation—including Scottish legislation—are relevant. Section 1 of the Protection of Animals (Scotland) Act 1912 makes it an offence to cause unnecessary suffering to any domestic or captive animal. It has been mentioned that several thousand animals have suffered; it is clear that they would be covered by that legislation. The penalty on conviction of such an offence is a fine of up to £5,000, imprisonment for up to six months, or both. Enforcement of that section rests with trading standards officers, the police and the SSPCA.

That is a very good question. I will investigate the conviction rate and write to Mr Young with the information. The point is that the opportunity for enforcement exists. In our view, it should be used. The Environmental Protection Act 1990 provides measures that can be taken to deal with the disturbance that is caused by noise. Environmental health officers should judge whether enforcement action is necessary. The Explosives Act 1875 has been referred to as governing legislation. Again, fines of up to £5,000 can be imposed on people who let off fireworks in a public place.

I acknowledge the difficulties of enforcement, but it is important that the powers that exist be used. This debate gives us the opportunity to encourage those who are responsible for enforcing the legislation to use their powers. Let me move on to discuss areas of change. It is important to note that under the Explosives Act 1875, retailers must be registered with local authorities in order to store fireworks. As Shona Robison and others said, there is no current requirement that those retailers should be of good character in order to be registered. The Health and Safety Executive has reviewed the application of the 1875 act in that regard. One suggestion is the introduction of a requirement that the award of a  storage licence should require a retailer to be a fit and proper person. That consultation closed only a few days ago. I hope that Scottish councils will have taken the opportunity to make their views known in response to that. There is a voluntary code and several speakers have mentioned the fact that the code is not observed to the degree that we all wish. The DTI has asked the industry to examine levels of compliance and the overall effectiveness of the agreement. We support that approach.

I intend to address that point in a moment. Members mentioned a specific firework—the air bomb—which causes particular distress and noise. The industry has agreed to end the supply of air bombs as soon as stocks are used up. I hope that air bombs will no longer be available for public sale or be used by the end of the year. More must be done and that is the message that has been put across from all quarters today. I welcome the announcement earlier this year by Melanie Johnson, the DTI minister, that she is considering what action can be taken within existing legislation to address the remaining problems. There are a significant number of legislative areas and policies that impact on the sale and use of fireworks. We need to consider what can be done to improve their enforcement and effectiveness. There is a mixture of reserved and devolved measures and local authority trading standards and environmental health officers already have a range of powers at their disposal, as do the police. We need to consider what better use can be made of existing powers. Shona Robison, Sylvia Jackson and Marilyn Livingstone spoke about the powers that are available to local authorities in respect of vendor licensing under the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982. The current review of the act deals only with reserved areas and therefore does not include fireworks. However, section 44 of the act provides ministers with the power to introduce additional licensing activities by way of regulations. We would have to look very carefully at any  proposals to use those powers, but we will consider that in the context of the work that is being undertaken by the DTI and Melanie Johnson.

I am aware that I have almost run out of time. We will also take into account the conclusions of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities task group. We will keep in close touch with the work that is being undertaken by DTI and we will ensure that all devolved issues are taken fully into account, including the powers that are available to local authorities.  We acknowledge that there are no simple solutions to the problem, but the Executive will play a full part, working with colleagues at Westminster and in Scottish local government, in finding the right way forward.  Meeting closed at 17:48.

We have recently received the findings of a safety review of the A9 between Perth and Stirling and further work will be undertaken on the basis of that study.

I can confirm that we are examining proposals for upgrading junctions at Auchterarder and Blackford to accommodate developments that are proposed or which are at the planning stage. We expect the developers in those cases to meet the majority of the costs involved in such roadworks.

I suggest that Roseanna Cunningham's constituents, whom she has represented in correspondence with me, should take up the offer of a meeting with local officials. Following that meeting, I would welcome any further representations that she wishes to make. We have committed significant funds to creating grade-separated junctions on that stretch of the A90—that is the priority to improve road safety on that stretch of road. We will consider how to augment the proposals in order further to improve road safety.

The future use of public service obligations in Scotland will be addressed in the forthcoming Scottish air transport consultation document, on which the Executive will seek detailed views.

Tavish Scott is right. Support from the Executive for Highlands and Islands Airports Ltd has trebled in the past five years and now stands at a record level of more than £21 million. As he says, the support that that provides to landing charges means that they account for a very small part of air fares within the Highlands and Islands. As part of our air transport consultation, we will seek detailed views on the possibilities of extending public service obligations. We will hold two major conferences—one in the north of Scotland and one in the south—and a number of further events on specific topics. I expect Shetland and other areas to bid to host some of those events in the course of the consultation during the summer.

Unfortunately, Mr MacAskill does not understand that that is evidence of the fact that PSOs require to be negotiated within a European context. Therefore the United Kingdom, as the member state, is involved in the process. Mr MacAskill's comments are clearly only an extension of his general push, which is to transfer subsidy from publicly owned airports in the Highlands and Islands to commercial airlines and the routes that they operate. We fundamentally disagree with that. We believe that to maintain lifeline services and PSOs we should continue to work in co-operation with the United Kingdom Government and continue to direct our support to the rural communities that are most in need of it.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to respond to the debate. The motion is a positive one and there has  generally been positive debate about matters in which there is common interest across the parties. I am, of course, delighted to contribute to the debate in Aberdeen. As we heard during an earlier debate, much has been achieved by the four partner organisations in NESTRANS—highlighted in Elaine Thomson's motion—which are Aberdeen City Council, Aberdeenshire Council, the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce and Scottish Enterprise Grampian. Those groups have worked together, initially through the north-east Scotland economic development partnership and now through NESTRANS, to focus on transport as a key priority in enhancing the economic competitiveness of north-east Scotland. The achievements for which NESTRANS can take credit include: the development of a coherent and integrated regional transport strategy, called the modern transport system; the obtaining of substantial community support for the strategy, and national recognition of the transport needs of the north-east as signalled in the transport delivery report a few months ago; the establishment of a significant and unique public-private sector transport partnership, which one or two members have suggested other parts of Scotland could usefully follow; and the support of the Scottish Executive for the delivery on the ground of significant elements of the strategy. I want to focus on the first of those achievements, which is the development of an integrated transport strategy. It is impossible to overstate the need for integrated transport strategies. Significant benefits to travellers, in terms of reduced and more reliable journey times, will accrue only through the combination of individual projects across all modes of transport. We do not believe that there is a crude choice to be made in Aberdeen or anywhere else between being pro-road and being anti-road. We recognise that a solely roads based or a solely public-transport based solution will not deliver long-term sustainable solutions. The trunk road network, for which Scottish ministers are responsible, is an important part of an integrated transport strategy for the north-east and the rest of Scotland. We have made, and will continue to make, significant investment in the trunk road network.

He did, and I am sure that he will continue to do so. I will cover his important point during my speech. In the light of some of the comments that have been made, it is important to note the money that  has been invested since 1999. We have invested almost £70 million in a series of important schemes on the A90 and the A96. We have invested more than £28 million north and west of Aberdeen on initiatives such as junction improvements and climbing lanes. We are committed to delivering a bypass for Fochabers. We have invested almost £18 million between Aberdeen and Dundee on initiatives such as proposed new junctions on the A90. We have invested nearly £24 million on the A90 between Dundee and Perth, which serves travellers from the north-east. Those improvements are important in their effects on safety, journey times and journey-time reliability, with obvious benefits for business and leisure travellers. That is why I was pleased to inform Parliament earlier today of my intention to progress two of the priority trunk road projects in or near Aberdeen that are contained within the proposed modern transport system. The Executive will undertake a multi-modal Scottish transport appraisal guidance assessment—STAG—of the Balmedie to Tipperty stretch of the A90, which is a significant part of the trunk road network north of the city. That study will explore the change in traffic levels since original proposals were made some years ago, and the impact of park-and-ride sites and other measures in the north of the city. The appraisal will be conducted using the Aberdeen sub-area transport model, which we have developed for application to the western peripheral route, and will report in the course of this year. In partnership with NESTRANS, we will undertake a feasibility study on the provision of stacking lanes on the A90 at Bridge of Don, along the parkway between Scotstown Road and Ellon Road. As well as having obvious safety benefits through assisting vehicles to make right turns, that will mitigate some of the problems of congestion in the area. We expect the study to be completed quickly and are committed to acting on the recommendations of the study.

When the routes are published, which I expect to happen in the next few days, I expect that they will be based on dual-carriageway solutions, because that has been the focus of the studies that have been conducted. We have extended an invitation to NESTRANS officials to meet us to discuss the remaining trunk road priorities for the A90 and A96 corridors. I note that one or two priorities were identified by members. That follows on from our continuing commitment to support NESTRANS in developing  its strategy. That commitment was reinforced in March with the provision of a further £585,000 in match funding for development of the route and detailed studies on the western peripheral route. That built on previous commitments. The modern transport strategy considers the western peripheral route and transmodal or modal shift opportunities. We acknowledge the strong case that can be made for the western peripheral route. That is why we have developed an Aberdeen sub-area model for traffic assessment. NESTRANS will use that model and STAG to assess that case and to assess traffic flows in the coming months. Members suggested that such studies are nothing more than studies. In fact, each study that we have undertaken has been a necessary step in the progress of the project. On the basis of assessment of the traffic in and around Aberdeen, we will be able to sit down with NESTRANS and the local partners and discuss the way in which the Executive and the local partners will work to advance the proposals for the western peripheral route. Only once that work is complete will ministers be in a position to take decisions.

I am sorry; I need to press on. I have a word of caution, which reflects some of the content of the motion. The construction of the western peripheral route cannot, on its own, be the panacea for all traffic and transport problems in the north-east. Car ownership continues to grow. Road traffic is predicted to grow by 27 per cent nationally over the next 20 years and by 33 per cent in the north-east. Unless we do something to curb that road traffic growth, any new road that we create—no matter how good, no matter how effective—will soon become heavily congested in the way that the M25 around London has. Building ever-wider roads with more lanes does not of itself solve traffic congestion—particularly not in an area of strong economic growth, such as the north-east of Scotland. That is why NESTRANS's approach—developing park-and-ride sites, improving public transport, creating bus priority measures and promoting walking and cycling—is the right approach. We acknowledge that public transport options would be available to almost half those who travel to work by car but that, for them to take up those options, public transport must be made attractive, effective in delivering decent journey times and reliable. That is why we regard the Kingswells park-and-ride scheme, which has been mentioned, as a success. Its usage growth rate exceeds the rate that has been achieved at the Bridge of Don park-and-ride site in a similar time. The Bridge of Don  facility now removes 2,500 cars a week from Aberdeen's roads. That is a significant step forward. I believe that the Kingswells park and ride will follow that pattern. It is interesting to read some of the comments from local residents. They have moved from great scepticism at the outset to increasing enthusiasm in recent weeks. Such facilities are not optional extras: they are what we require to achieve the modal shift that we need. Such development must go along with the expenditure on strategic roads that we have discussed. The Aberdeen crossrail has been raised. We continue to seek progress on that project. At this stage, it is premature to give precise dates, but we have already invested a significant sum—nearly £0.5 million—in making progress. We hope to achieve level 4 costs for that scheme in the autumn. The key points of contact for members who have an interest in Laurencekirk and who talk about including it in the Aberdeen crossrail are NESTRANS and Aberdeenshire Council, which are the lead sponsors of the scheme and with which members will want to work. A number of other points were made. Brian Adam asked the important question of whether the Executive would undertake to trunk a western peripheral route. It is important to recall that the bypasses and equivalent roads in Scotland's other three cities—Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dundee—were built by local authorities and later adopted as trunk routes. There are a number of ways in which issues can be addressed. We are keen to address the range of transport issues in the area. Stewart Stevenson mentioned accessible transport in the rural north-east. He will be aware of the significant expenditure on dial-a-bus in Buchan, of this week's launch of a similar scheme in Buckie in Moray and of the accessible community transport minibus that operates in Ellon, which supplement the scheduled bus services in those areas. We recognise that we can no longer ignore the consequences of unrestrained traffic growth for the economy, the environment and the health of people living in urban and suburban areas. We also recognise that in areas such as north-east Scotland, the solutions to the problem are several and include road and non-road solutions and responses. We have responded and have invested substantial sums in public transport and in trunk road improvements in the north-east. In the publication of the transport delivery report in March, we recognised the fixing of Aberdeen's congestion problems as one of our top priorities for the coming decade and beyond. We are determined to go forward. Excellent  progress has been made in the north-east because of the partnership approach that has been taken with NESTRANS at its centre. Ministers look forward to continuing to work with that partnership in delivering the many other improvements that are necessary if we are to tackle and resolve the problems that we face.

rose—

Mr Adam should be aware that an aviation summit was held in December of last year. The summit was chaired by Helen Liddell, the Secretary of State for Scotland, and was attended by the Scottish Executive, the airlines, airport operators and others with an interest in the aviation industry. As Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning, I attended the summit. The UK Government and the Scottish Executive is taking a joint partnership approach to the forthcoming consultation process. That approach was developed following the summit.

We have had a wide-ranging debate. The fundamental issues that have arisen from it are what kind of subsidy we should pay to secure lifeline services and to whom we should pay it. It is our contention that continuing support for airport operators in marginal areas through the public ownership and support of HIAL is the right way to provide the right kind of support. Let us be clear that, in real terms, the airport charges that are levied by HIAL have risen at a lower rate than the prevailing rate in the aviation sector. They are directly comparable with charges at airports such as Liverpool, Norwich, Bournemouth and Teesside. The charges that are levied on landing at those airports represent only one third of the operating costs of HIAL, because Executive support for HIAL's airports is at a record level—it is £21.5 million in the current financial year. That support has had a dramatic threefold rise in the past five years. The subsidy per passenger at Inverness airport is £7.96 and the subsidy at Stornoway is double that. That level of support has enabled HIAL to deliver a comprehensive programme of capital investment, no small part of which is an instrument landing system at Inverness airport, which was called for today and which will be introduced this year. We heard today that BAA Scottish Airports is investing £60 million in improved discounts and marketing direct routes. That is welcome, but it should be clear that the organisation is simply catching up with the discounts that HIAL already offers new operators that fly to and from Highland  airports. HIAL offers discounts that are as high as 75 per cent in the first year, which have meant a total spend in the past five years of £1.4 million. That has attracted operators such as easyJet, which flies between Inverness and Luton. However, BAA's decision is welcome, not least here in Aberdeen, where the range of direct routes will be extended. Members talked about a PSO on the Inverness to Gatwick route, which is an Executive priority. Altering the devolution settlement would not remove the need for the UK Government to support a PSO application for the Gatwick route, as the SNP's motion implied. We have worked and will continue to work closely with Highland stakeholders on the case for securing that route.

I have seen no such letters. Earlier in the debate, I was asked whether I had met Alistair Darling in his new capacity. That was optimistic, to say the least. I have not had the opportunity to discuss the matter with him. However, I have met the minister who is responsible for aviation, David Jamieson, and my officials continue to develop the matter with his officials. At the outset of the debate, I touched on the air transport consultation document, which will be issued this summer. That will start the largest-ever consultation process on air links in Scotland. It will be launched simultaneously with similar documents elsewhere in the UK. That document will seek views on the range of opportunities, policy scenarios, forecasts of demand, options for the delivery of infrastructure and the possibility of the development of direct routes.

I am sorry. Time is against me. We will hold conferences in Scotland to address those issues and to allow the maximum contribution from people who have a direct involvement in the sector and from people on whom aviation has a substantial impact. The consultation process will last approximately five months. After a thorough analysis and consideration of responses, the UK Government will issue an air transport white paper in the first half of 2003. The Executive will have a full input into that as the lead ministry for developing the Scottish wing of the consultation. The opportunity exists to make a  difference and to develop aviation and air links in Scotland. During the consultation period, I hope to hear from all those who have an interest in the matter. The outcome of that consultation will equip us with the policies and the strategy to advance Scottish aviation for the new century.

I was rather hoping to be able to welcome Kenny MacAskill back down to earth but, sadly, that was perhaps too much to hope. Anyone who chooses to spend seven and a quarter hours travelling from Edinburgh to Aberdeen by flying around the North sea is clearly not making the same travel choices as other members and the general public face daily.

I certainly can. It is from the calculation of the routes that I understand that Mr MacAskill followed. [ Interruption. ] Of course, should he wish to demonstrate that that was not the case, I look forward to him doing so when he responds later—or he can do so just now.

I have to concede that Kenny MacAskill's speed of travel was greater than we expected. Sadly, the speed of development of his rhetoric has not improved. [ Interruption. ]

In fact, what we heard in his opening speech was simply a repetition of the same tired old demands and claims that we have heard before. Of course, what Kenny MacAskill has again failed to recognise is the significant success in air transport development in Scotland over the past 40 years. We have an air transport system that was once not accessible to the  general population, but now is. Also, despite external events, that system continues to develop within Scotland. The growth of air transport has had a fundamental and positive impact on Scotland's perception of the rest of the world and has contributed to the outside world's perception of Scotland. I remind the Scottish National Party that in the past year Scotland's airports showed a 7 per cent growth in passenger travel. At the same time, London airports showed a fall of 3.5 per cent. I add that those figures were carefully audited before they were brought to the chamber. Of course, air travel is not the only way to travel. However, air links are hard to beat for speed and accessibility. Our well-developed internal air network is unique in the United Kingdom context.

I shall certainly do so in a moment. Air services provide vital links over long distances and are also vital in maintaining the economic and social fabric of our Highlands and Islands communities by preventing population decline and outward migration.

There are many direct routes from Scotland to points on the continent, such as Norway, Belgium, France and so on. Of course, the Executive will address the issue of direct routes in the coming period. There is no need to travel from Scottish airports to London, but there are routes that go along that road. New routes will be developed that exclude that requirement. Scotland is not an insular nation and we have long recognised that, to develop our full potential, we need to have access to the wider world and to be accessible directly from beyond our borders. There is no doubt that the overall market for air services to and from Scotland will continue to grow substantially during the next few years. We recognise the challenges that that will produce. We recognise the fact that we need to produce policies that will maximise the benefits of air transport to Scotland, to Scottish business, to tourism and local and national economies and which do not favour one part of Scotland, one airport or one airline over another. They must also  meet the needs of the Scottish people in a sustainable and environmentally friendly way. The domestic aviation market in the United Kingdom is a mature market and Scotland has had to work in that context in order to attract new direct international services.

We have put forward the public service obligation submission for the Inverness to Gatwick route. I want to deal with that in the context of Kenny MacAskill's motion. Kenny MacAskill asks us to move our policy from support for airports to support for airlines and direct routes. That would leave us with a choice between sustaining our existing policy of support for lifeline air services or developing support for commercial development. Working with our colleagues in the UK Government, we will consult during the coming period and publish a consultation document in the summer that will seek views on a range of policy scenarios, including the development of direct routes and the public service obligation system. We intend to pursue an inclusive consultation that will allow access and ideas to be produced by the Highlands and Islands strategic transport partnership and others who have made proposals. We will base our decisions on realistic assessment of what is in Scotland's national interest. On that basis, we look forward to meeting the challenge of developing air services in the years ahead. I move amendment S1M-3154.3, to leave out from "the importance" to end and insert: "the substantial and on-going contribution by the Executive and its agencies to the maintenance and development of air links serving Scotland; believes that the best way to develop more international services is through a strategic framework which gives priority to those routes which are best for the Scottish economy; recognises that passenger numbers through Scottish airports are continuing to increase substantially, and notes the publication of the recent report by the Highlands and Islands Strategic Transport Partnership and looks forward to the forthcoming publication of the Scottish Air Transport Consultation Document which will provide a full and inclusive opportunity to comment on the development of aviation policies for Scotland, within the context of the UK consultation led by Her Majesty's Government including the use of public service obligations and the cost of air travel."

I read Mr MacAskill's press release on that subject  last week. Will he inform members of the cost of the subsidy for the route from Derry to Dublin? Has he estimated the cost of a subsidy on equivalent internal Scottish routes?

I am delighted to have the opportunity to respond here in the heart of my constituency to a debate on a subject of such central importance to the Scottish economy. I share with Robin Harper a particular sense of place in participating in the Scottish Parliament's first debate on oil and gas in this ancient building. Unlike Robin, I arrived in Aberdeen only in 1974, at which time this building was still part of the university library. It was a place in which one was well advised not to raise one's voice. Voices have been raised all round the chamber in a lively debate on the future prospects and potential of the offshore oil and gas industries.

The member may rest assured that I will do so shortly, but not quite yet. That debate has been going on in this city throughout the 28 years for which I have lived here and I fully expect that it will continue for many years to come. King's College has seen many changes over the centuries, but few have been more profound than the changes that we have witnessed since 1974. At that time, oil was a newcomer to the north-east; it was unknown and was often unwelcome or distrusted. It was widely expected that oil would last only a decade or two and would leave no trace after it had gone. As members from all parties have indicated, oil and gas are the drivers of the regional economy and they play a key role in the economies of Scotland and the United Kingdom. They are major employers, directly and indirectly, in Aberdeen and the north-east and throughout the country. Oil and gas are as much a part of the local scene for the city's present generation as trawling and whaling were for past generations. The story of North sea oil is far from over. We are only halfway through the process of recovering the reserves of oil and gas that lie off Aberdeen's shores. At least one more generation can look forward to the benefits of that activity for years to come. As well as acknowledging that, we should focus on what the Parliament can do to secure the benefits for enterprise and employment in Scotland of extracting the remaining resources. We should also look ahead to what we can do to support the diversification of the offshore  industries to secure future benefits from the resources that we have only begun to tap.

I will certainly address the tax issue before I conclude my remarks and will comment on the member's particular question in the context of those comments. Offshore renewable energy is essential in seeking the diversification of the industry. Part of that process of diversification is about exporting the expertise and intellectual capital that have been built up in the north-east over the past 30 years. It is not unusual for Aberdonians to work in the Caribbean one year and in Kazakhstan the next. We must ensure that our businesses continue to have opportunities to operate in the global economy, so that we are well placed to provide a base for the international energy industries even when our exploitable reserves of oil and gas have been used up. Offshore renewable energy is central to the prospects for diversification. Mention has been made of the initiatives that the Executive, the Westminster Government and the enterprise networks have taken to progress that. As Mike Rumbles said, transmission and security of supply are important considerations in relation to renewable energy. Along with the UK Government, the industry regulator and the power companies, we are addressing those issues and are keen to see them resolved. I am sorry that Bruce Crawford, who raised a question about charges on offshore wind generation, is not present at the moment. I want simply to say that the charge to which he referred is a fee rather than a tax. The fee is identical to that which is charged on onshore wind operations. The third area of opportunity for diversification is in the translation of academic excellence into commercial opportunity. As several members mentioned, there is every prospect of the proposed intermediary technology institute achieving that. As Iain Gray said, Scottish Enterprise is developing the plans for that institute. We are all familiar with the litany of lost opportunities that the Scottish economy has experienced through the failure to turn inventions and innovations into commercial success. The energy institute will be designed to avoid such an outcome.  I hope that the energy institute will also cement the links between the oil and gas and renewable energy sectors. By addressing the energy industries as a whole, the institute can help put us ahead of the game in supporting oil-related enterprise to make the transition to a broader and more sustainable energy base.

Brian Adam is not alone in raising that issue. Elaine Thomson was among those who raised the call for an early decision to locate the institute here in Aberdeen. As Brian Adam suggested, the issue should be addressed in the Parliament at a later occasion. Clearly, we want that project to move forward. The energy institute should be the beginning of a process of rolling out Scottish innovations in high-risk areas of the economy. I am not in a position to give members a date, but we have today set in context tomorrow's announcement on Scottish Enterprise's work plan. We wanted to set that announcement in the context of our approach to the energy industry as a whole. When the oil industry arrived in Aberdeen a generation ago, the perception was that it might not be here for long. The industry was therefore not entirely welcome. The change in public perception that has happened over the past 30 years has not come easily. As Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned, no one who lived in Aberdeen in the 1980s will ever forget the devastating impact of the 1988 Piper Alpha disaster, when many men lost their lives. The Cullen inquiry into Piper Alpha marked a turning point not only in the safety culture of Britain's offshore industries but in the Government's role in the industry. That issue was at the centre of many of the questions that have been raised during the course of today's debate. Anger over Piper Alpha compelled both Government and industry to take safety issues seriously and it compelled them to work together. Such compulsion has not been required in recent years as the picture today is very different. The engagement between industry and government in the Pilot partnership over the past three years has been neither reluctant nor grudging. The oil and gas industry in the UK has worked closely with ministers in agreeing priorities and targets for the future. Pilot can already claim some notable achievements. Last year's targets for capital investment were exceeded by £0.5 billion while the targets for oil production were exceeded by almost 50 per cent. I believe that those successes can be built upon and continued.

Mr Wilson will be familiar with the normal procedure in the setting of budgets, which is that they are not discussed in any public forum. Mr Wilson will also be familiar with the confidentiality that governs the discussions that take place between the industry and Government in the forum of Pilot. I was pleased to chair the recent Pilot meeting in London, which was attended by officials from the Treasury and the DTI and by representatives from oil industry. We work closely with the industry.

We certainly expect the engagement of the oil and gas industry, along with the public sector, in the development of the institute. Partnership discussions must go ahead with all the players and that is precisely why we are not in a position to predict precisely the date on which conclusions will be reached. I expect the industry—innovative and enterprising as it is—not to miss the opportunity to play its part in the proposals, which will benefit the industry as well as the wider economy. Important issues of taxation have been raised today. As has been said, the budget contains benefits for the oil companies as well as what some perceive as disbenefits. As has been said, some companies are keen to take early advantage both of the capital allowances and of the opportunity to express their views on the other issue of royalties.

In an industry dominated by a fluctuating global oil price, the level of tax and profits is only one part of the wider picture. It is important that all who engage in the debate should bear that in mind. It is also important to acknowledge the underlying force of one of the issues that dominates discussions in Pilot and  elsewhere—the need to attract to the industry the bright, young and enthusiastic people who can continue the industry for a generation to come. The industry has every right to express its views—and different companies hold different views. It is reasonable to make those views known, but it is also important that nobody with a concern for the oil industry should talk down its prospects or talk down the future security of employment of graduates—from this university and other universities in Scotland—who wish to enter the energy industries. To do that would be to do the oil and gas industry and the energy industries a grave disservice. A generation in Scotland has made a living from the oil and gas industry; another generation will make that living too. I would like that idea to be the basis for a Scottish energy industry many generations into the future. If that is to happen, we have to secure the future of oil and gas in the short, medium and long term.

Will the member give way?

Can Mr Lochhead give us an example of an investment that has been cancelled since the budget?

Will the member confirm that a number of oil companies have taken a view that is quite contrary to the one that he has expressed? Talisman Energy (UK) Ltd, for example, said that, on balance, the capital allowance changes were beneficial in allowing new investment and Venture Production Company (North Sea) Ltd has announced a £90 million investment in the Sycamore field. Does the member accept that the balance of the budgetary changes differs depending on the nature of the company and the fields that they seek to exploit?

Will Mr Davidson acknowledge something that Mr Andrew Wilson was unwilling to acknowledge, which is that the decision not to proceed with the supplementary charge in 1998 was based specifically on the low price of oil at the time? Will he accept that there was a sustained, low oil price at that time, and that the present market position is quite different?

I thank all members for their contributions this evening. In particular, I thank Marilyn Livingstone for a motion that recognises the importance of the construction industry to Scotland. Tavish Scott mentioned the fact that he, I and Linda Fabiani were the founding members of the Holyrood progress group and were responsible for developing that building project some two years ago. Clearly, that gave the three of us a specific client view of the construction industry. However, as Robin Harper has more than hinted, we are all clients of the construction industry, directly or indirectly, and many people also obtain their livelihood from the industry. Therefore, it is of considerable importance to us all and makes a major direct contribution to the Scottish economy as a whole, accounting for around 5.6 per cent of gross domestic product and around 5.5 per cent of the Scottish work force. As members have said, the industry has expanded significantly over the past year or two—by more than 2 per cent on average—and forecasts suggest that the sector will continue to grow at a steady rate this year. I start with the obvious but important point that the issues covered in the debate touch on both devolved and reserved areas, and that the key to delivering some of the changes that have been identified as important to achieving the kind of construction industry that we want in the future is effective partnership between the Scottish Executive and our colleagues in the Department of Trade and Industry and others in the UK Government. That applies to the first of the specific issues to which I will respond—rogue traders or cowboy  operators within the industry. We are all familiar with that issue and it is a problem that needs to be tackled. As a consumer protection matter, it is principally a reserved matter. Alex Neil mentioned the quality mark scheme. It is important to say that that scheme, which is the creation of the DTI and was launched earlier this year, is in an initial roll-out phase in England and Wales. Through that scheme, homeowners will be able to find an independent assessment of quality work and of tradespeople who are qualified to provide such work. I will come back to the DTI position in a moment. In Scotland, the building trades associations have got together to develop a self-regulation scheme through the Scottish Construction Licensing Executive, which includes independent members from bodies such as Citizens Advice Scotland and the Scottish Consumer Council. Its Scottish construction licensing scheme, which is already under way in the plumbing industry, is aimed at combating rogue traders. We and the DTI welcome that self-regulation initiative. It fits well with our proposals for a modernised building standards system. However, we need to ensure that what the DTI brings forward is compatible with what the Scottish industry is doing. The DTI retains the option to introduce the quality mark scheme in Scotland should the Scottish scheme not work. We will certainly continue to talk to our colleagues in the UK Government about the possibility of a joint approach, based on a recognition that different schemes may deliver the same outcomes in different parts of the UK.

There is a difficulty with how we might approach that, given that we are dealing with a reserved matter. We will work with the industry and the DTI to identify ways in which we can achieve the outcomes that we desire in Scotland, which are very much the same outcomes as the DTI is working towards south of the border. A number of members mentioned developing the training infrastructure to meet skills requirements. That is crucial. In December 2000, Wendy Alexander commissioned research into the skills needs and perceptions of the industry, to establish employment opportunities and to maximise the potential benefits of the increasing buoyancy in the construction industry. That research was led by the University of Glasgow and built on earlier work by Glasgow City Council, Scottish Enterprise and Communities Scotland. The research confirms the need to make the  industry more attractive to young people, women and people from ethnic minorities, who are significantly under-represented in the work force, and for the industry to engage extensively with national training programmes such as the new deal, which is also a programme that works across the UK. In response to that research, our welfare to work advisory task force, chaired by John Milligan, has established a group to help people on the new deal to move into construction. The group works with the industry and focuses on disadvantaged groups and long-term unemployed people. It seeks to provide a package of training and work experience followed by a period of subsidised employment.

Absolutely. I emphasise that we see the move forward in quality, which has been identified, and the development of opportunities to learn skills and broaden the work force as things that go together. We will work with Careers Scotland and the Construction Industry Training Board to promote awareness of opportunities in the construction industry, in line with the promotion of modern apprenticeships. Scotland has a good record on modern apprenticeships in construction, with just under 5,000 starts. The Glasgow construction forum, which was launched earlier this month by Glasgow City Council, also arose from a recommendation in the research that was carried out in Glasgow. The forum brings together senior directors from a number of key companies that operate in that part of Scotland. They have agreed to work together to address some of the key issues. Both Marilyn Livingstone and Brian Fitzpatrick mentioned the key role that trade unions play, on the learning side as well as in improving standards in the workplace. We recognise that role and will continue to work to support that and to find ways to enhance it. The motion refers to the inspection and assessment of companies, and one or two members also raised that issue. Constructionline is a UK-wide Government-sponsored database of contractors and consultants that are approved as being financially sound and technically capable of undertaking various types and sizes of contract for the public sector. The Scottish Executive is one of the main users of that database in the UK and we actively encourage other public sector organisations in Scotland to use it when sourcing suppliers. Constructionline is a means of obtaining  information and making the checks that clients must make before they place public sector contracts. We encourage all those with whom we work in the public sector to use the system. It provides security for the client and assures a level of quality in the product. One or two members raised concerns about the system of cash retentions. The system goes back a long way in the construction industry and exists for a good reason. From the client's point of view—whether they are an individual householder or a public or private corporation—retentions provide an incentive for contractors and suppliers to comply fully with their obligations and to make good any defective workmanship before the retained sums are paid. The system reflects a culture in the industry in which financial penalties appeared to be the only way to ensure that work was done in full. The answer is to seek to address that culture and to create one that is based on long-term partnering in contracts and a more co-operative approach to works procurement among contractors, suppliers and clients. Better performance across the industry would diminish the need and the argument for cash retentions. We are well placed to act on that and we wish to do so to allow us to obtain value for money for the public from the contracts that we place.

I accept that point. The key to protecting those further down the line who are not responsible for defective workmanship or delays is a change in the culture in the industry. I want to emphasise that we recognise the importance of the construction industry to the economy and we endorse the principles of the rethinking construction initiative as a means of delivering improvements in the industry. Scottish Enterprise will work with the industry in leading a Scottish rethinking construction initiative in partnership with Communities Scotland. There are good examples of projects based on the principles of rethinking construction that were used in Wales and Northern Ireland—the Asda store at Robroyston in Glasgow, for example. We are aware of the good work in those areas and of the need to produce projects to match that work. The short-term project, pulling together Scotland, which we fund, is making significant progress and  we will introduce further proposals soon. The construction industry is a key driver in the Scottish economy. We recognise that there is a lot to be done, but the initiatives that are under way and the initiatives that we are considering demonstrate our commitment to it.  Meeting closed at 18:04.

Detailed timetabling is a matter for ScotRail and Railtrack to determine, but we will specify the levels of service that will be required under the next franchise when we issue directions and guidance later this year.

The body with the powers to monitor and seek compliance with ScotRail's franchise obligations is the Strategic Rail Authority, which operates on our behalf. The joint process of drawing up timetables that ScotRail and Railtrack undertake involves consultation with other train operating companies that use the same lines, with the Rail Passengers Committee Scotland, which represents customers, and with the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive, which has a statutory role in that process. We will continue to work with all those parties to encourage an early resumption of full services in accordance with the previous timetable. That is an operational matter for ScotRail to deal with in consultation with those other bodies. When we  draw up our directions and guidance for the new franchise, we will seek to ensure that the service that is provided is at least up to the level that was provided prior to the industrial action.

The ownership and the operation of the railway infrastructure are not the same issue as the timetabling of trains. That is how the structure of the industry stands. It is our duty to work with the appropriate bodies to ensure that services are put back in place. The onus for restoring services lies with ScotRail as the operating company, not with Railtrack as the infrastructure operator or with the Executive. Passengers should look to ScotRail for the services that they are entitled to expect.

The level of freight charges imposed on services to the northern isles is a matter for the companies concerned. Tariff rebate subsidy is available only on bulk freight of low-value commodities and on livestock from the northern isles.

I am aware of the possibility of competition on those routes. The withdrawal of competition on livestock was part of the underlying issue that we had to resolve this summer. Competition can bring benefits to the customers of freight operators. The extent of our commitment to the northern isles contract is that NorthLink is contracted to us for the carriage of cars and passengers, but not freight or livestock. Ensuring that the contract that NorthLink has entered into with us allows it to run and sustain those services in line with the terms of the contract is a matter for NorthLink.

I am aware of some of the concerns that have been raised by Maureen Macmillan and others. When we produce the draft service specification within the next few weeks, we will put it out for consultation and invite responses from all those who have an interest in the future of the services.

I reassure the people of Colonsay, Coll and Tiree that CalMac has entered into discussions with the haulier in question with a view to finding a solution. I have every confidence in CalMac's assurance that an amicable solution can be found within the time frame indicated.

The current study on rail links to both Glasgow and Edinburgh airports will report on a range of options, including options for how those links should be funded.

Our clear view is that the proposals for rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports should be examined together and jointly. The study to which I referred is being conducted on that basis. The Executive has no intention of putting one project ahead of the other. We are carrying out an objective study, on the basis of the evidence. That study is making significant progress and will allow decisions to be made in the fairly near future. We expect to narrow down the options during the summer and to receive a final report on the options for both airports in the autumn. We do not intend to pre-empt the discussions that we will have with all potential funding partners on how the projects can be best funded and developed. I would be surprised if Mr Sheridan or anyone else suggested that we should take an initiative that excluded the possibility of other partners supporting the development of the projects and providing funding for them.

Labour members do not and never will endorse an approach to transport expenditure that involves committing ourselves to major infrastructure projects without understanding what is being undertaken or planning the way in which money should be spent. The study that we are carrying out into the proposed rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports is designed to ensure that the schemes that emerge offer the best value for money to the taxpayer and the best support for economic regeneration of the communities in question.

I do not believe that what Strathclyde Passenger Transport has announced in the past few days amounts to preparatory work for the rail route to Glasgow airport. The key study that we are undertaking treats both airports jointly and even-handedly. That is the right way of proceeding. Of course, we will listen carefully to anything that Strathclyde Passenger Transport has to say. However, we have no reason to believe that it will add particularly to the evidence that we are amassing in our study of projects for links to both airports.

We intend to show leadership and to make progress on the project as quickly as we can. We will do so on the basis of the evidence of the studies and we will do so in partnership with the UK Strategic Rail Authority, with the British Airports Authority—which clearly has an interest as the operator of the airports—and with other partners. As I say, I hope to see the evidence before the end of the year.

The Scottish Executive provides a substantial subsidy to Highlands and Islands Airports Limited, which results in significantly lower costs to airlines, and provides direct subsidy to air services between Glasgow and Campbeltown, Tiree and Barra.

John Farquhar Munro will be aware that exemption from air passenger duty was introduced for all flights from the Highlands and Islands, and within the Highlands and Islands,  from 1 April last year. To my knowledge, the Treasury has no proposals to introduce exemptions for flights from other airports. We feel that the current arrangements accurately and adequately reflect the special status of the Highlands and Islands. The exemption that the Treasury granted last year was a recognition of the unique status of the Highlands and Islands. It was on the basis of European criteria for services within sparsely populated areas that Scottish ministers came to an agreement with the Treasury on the exemption. It was a marked achievement, which has provided benefits to the Highlands and Islands.

Of course. As Jack McConnell said when he and I were in Stornoway recently, the airlines ought to consider their fares structures carefully. Clearly, that is a matter for the airlines and not for Government. The Executive, through its support for HIAL, reduces significantly the charges that airlines face. A knock-on effect of that is reduced costs to passengers. Other operators are coming in and offering flights at cheaper rates in the Highlands. An example of that is the easyJet service between Inverness and Stansted. That kind of low-cost operation is clearly welcome and will contribute towards reducing costs for air travellers.

Duncan Hamilton should acknowledge that, far from being complacent, the Scottish Executive works continuously with HIAL and with the private sector to implement our policies. Those policies involve the investment of significant subsidies in HIAL that reduce its charges substantially. That is why easyJet has been able to make a commercial case for operating a service between Inverness and London. I hope that other low-cost operators that wish to operate in the Highlands will engage in negotiations in precisely the way that easyJet did. I know that Ryanair has been speaking to HIAL and that negotiations are progressing well, not on  the basis of seeking additional subsidy but on the basis of commercial opportunities for the publicly owned airports and the privately owned airline to provide better services within the Highlands and Islands.

We recognise that the cost to users is a matter on which airlines have to make a judgment. Our responsibility is to provide infrastructure and support. If, as is the case for a number of areas of Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles, a socially necessary service is not being provided on a commercial basis, but is a lifeline requirement, we will grant a public service obligation to allow the local authority or, in certain circumstances, the Executive to support that service.

The trustees of the STG pension funds wound up the pension schemes on Tuesday 30 April and we now have full access to the records of the schemes.

We estimate that approximately 14,000 pensioners are involved. Executive officials intend to write to each of those pensioners within the next few weeks to indicate what we believe their dates of service were and what we believe they will be entitled to. Once we have received confirmation of those details, we hope to be able to make payments to the vast majority of pensioners in the next four months. In addition, if I may answer Mr Canavan's point about the size of the surplus, this morning we received the audited accounts, which show that the pension funds have a surplus of £174 million. We will talk to Treasury ministers about the distribution of that money.

I thank Cathy Peattie for lodging her motion, which has stimulated a positive and constructive debate. Many useful contributions have been made from around the chamber, allowing us to focus on some important issues. As we approach international workers memorial day, it is right that members of the Scottish Parliament should remember those, in Scotland and internationally, who have died or been injured seriously at work as a result of avoidable and preventable accidents, which account for 90 per cent or more of all accidents at work. Events organised by trade unions, local authorities and others will take place throughout Scotland. Mary Mulligan will attend a ceremony in Bathgate at the recently erected workers memorial day sculpture. I look forward to welcoming Cathy Peattie to my constituency when she visits the workers memorial garden at Persley on Sunday, 4 May. Linda Fabiani asked earlier in the debate where the workers memorials are. Sadly, there are two in Aberdeen where, in addition to the memorial garden, there is the Piper Alpha memorial, which a number of speakers have mentioned and which commemorates our worst offshore disaster. There are memorials not only in the north-east but throughout Scotland. For example, trees were planted across Lothian in 1992 by Lothian trade unionists—the inspiration for that initiative was Jim Swan of the Scottish hazards campaign group, who joins us in the gallery. It is right that we should commemorate international workers memorial day in Scotland, and it is also right that it should be commemorated internationally. The international theme for this year's memorial day is that of improving public health through stronger health and safety. In the  UK, the TUC is promoting the theme of widening access to occupational health services, which is a matter to which I will return. Most health and safety matters are reserved to the UK Government, including policy responsibility, which rests with the Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions. However, health and safety matters have a direct relevance to many devolved issues, such as public health, local government, transport and the environment, to name but a few. The Scottish Executive works with the Health and Safety Commission and the Health and Safety Executive on many of its regulatory concerns. It is worth noting that the introduction of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 led to significant improvements in health and safety throughout the UK. The rate of fatal accidents is less than a quarter of the rate in the early 1970s. Although we should be proud of that achievement, we should not be complacent about it. We should acknowledge that, although the rate of injuries has reduced over that long term, it has begun to rise again in some industries, such as construction. For that reason, the Executive and the United Kingdom Government have recognised the need to take further action to improve our performance in the area. In the context of the UK's revitalising health and safety strategy, several targets have been set for the next 10 years, to which the Scottish Executive subscribes. Those targets aim to reduce the number of working days that are lost through injury by 30 per cent; to reduce the incidence of people who suffer from work-related ill health by 20 per cent; and to reduce the rate of fatal and serious injury accidents by a further 10 per cent. Those targets are important and the Executive—along with the trade unions, health and safety bodies, responsible employers and the UK Government—has signed up to them. Several members have spelled out the social cost of health and safety failure. It is also worth noting the annual cost to the Scottish economy of £0.5 billion and the loss of more than 2 million working days every year. We are addressing a workers issue and an issue for the wider economy.

My colleagues in the health department will address those issues and Mary Mulligan will respond on that in more detail at an appropriate time.  Duncan McNeil mentioned our existing commitments on occupational health and how we would address that. Although the level of occupational health support in the public sector and in large corporations is considerably higher than it was, the provision of health and safety advice to those who work in small and medium-sized enterprises remains an issue. As Duncan McNeil will know, my health department colleagues commissioned a report on what could be done in that field. I believe that a conference will be held in June this year, at which ministers will respond to that report and will spell out how the Executive's commitment will be delivered. In the year in which occupational health is the theme of international workers memorial day, it is appropriate that we have made such a commitment on occupational health and will take action on that agenda. Cathy Peattie and Brian Fitzpatrick highlighted issues that are associated with the progress in the courts of cases that involve injury and illness at work. I pay tribute to the work of victim support groups, which have provided great sustenance to individuals who are in such tragic circumstances. I hope that Cathy Peattie's constituents will take advice on the option that is described as sisting, in circumstances in which the main claimant has died. I am sure that if Cathy Peattie were to write to justice ministers about that, they might be able to provide advice on what could be done to avoid having to begin a case again, in the circumstances that she described. Gas safety, which affects customers and workers in the industry, was also mentioned. The installation and use of gas has been reviewed by the Health and Safety Commission. More than 40 recommendations have been made and the HSC's gas safety group is working on their implementation. Clear targets for reductions in gas poisoning incidents during the next 10 years have been established. Tommy Sheridan was among the members who referred to prosecution. Members will know that in the case that involved gas at Larkhall, the Crown Office has announced its decision to prosecute Transco for corporate culpable homicide. That decision followed a report from the HSE. The facility for such a prosecution exists in Scots law, but it does not exist in England or Wales. That option should be taken when there is evidence to sustain it. South of the border, the DTLR is introducing proposals to follow Scotland's good example in providing that legal option in circumstances as tragic as the ones that have been described. We in Government have taken on board the need for action. There are many in the Parliament who have been involved in workers memorial  events over the years because we acknowledge the importance of using them to highlight the health and safety issues that are of concern to us all. There is a need to transfer that highlighting of the issue and increase the narrow focus on a single day to ensure that it feeds through into business decisions, into the decisions of Government and into the partnership with trade unions that can play a key role in delivering in the workplace. It is good for all of us that we implement that agenda. It is good for the economy as well as essential for protecting the rights and interests of those who work in industry. The Executive will continue to work with trade unions, responsible employers and with all those committed to ending the kind of tragedies that will be commemorated on international workers memorial day on 28 April.  Meeting closed at 18:06.

The results of the phase 1 port approach study carried out by Mouchel were shared with members of the North channel partnership and South Ayrshire Council in November 2001. We expect a report on phase 2 of the study later this year.

The purpose of that study is to assess the schemes under consideration against the Scottish transport appraisal guidelines in order to measure their effectiveness in delivering value for money. Once we have the results of phase 2 of the report, we will consider them with the members of the North channel partnership and we will proceed from the report's conclusions. Questions of funding will have to be considered, first, on the basis of the report's findings and, secondly, on the basis of consideration of other priorities identified within the Scottish transport programme.

I am not yet responsible for the spending programme for roads in north Wales, but I recognise the force of Mr Morgan's point. Eight overtaking schemes are currently in place on the A75 and A77, and Mr Morgan will recognise that that is one of the largest commitments among the schemes available in any part of Scotland. We will continue to address the issues arising from the Mouchel study in a constructive fashion. The Loch Ryan gateway to Scotland from Ireland is an excellent transport route, which serves Scotland well, and we will continue to work with the ferry operators and other members of the North channel partnership to promote it.

No. The Scottish Executive supports the UK Government's commitment to the new Scottish centre at Prestwick and I understand that both site preparations and the drawing up of contracts are proceeding in line with the revised timetable that was agreed by UK ministers.

Of course we are aware of the importance of the centre, the development of which we fully support. As I said, that work will go ahead in accordance with the revised timetable. Employment in the area will be boosted by the construction phase in particular, and it is clear that the sooner construction begins, the sooner that  boost will happen. If construction is delayed, the boost will simply be deferred, but it will happen in any case. On the air traffic side, the number of jobs that is predicted at the new centre is similar to the number of jobs at the present centre. In that respect, there will be no employment impact. We have spoken with Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire, which has responsibility in that area. That organisation is content that the only economic impact of a delay will be a delay in the relevant construction jobs and that there will be no wider negative impact on the Ayrshire economy.

As I said to Mr Gallie, we are committed to supporting a two-centre strategy that involves Prestwick. We are not aware of any threat to that strategy. We are not aware that National Air Traffic Services or the airline group has any intention of reconsidering its commitment to Prestwick. We will continue to talk to those parties about the timing of their project and the construction. We are confident that the project will go ahead and will provide a service that protects air safety and provides employment in Ayrshire.

We are well aware of the challenges that face the Ayrshire economy. For that reason, we have committed a further £2 million to Scottish Enterprise Ayrshire to take forward its Ayrshire strategy for jobs.

Good progress is being made in delivering the objectives of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. The Executive is working with appropriate partners on implementation in a number of areas.

I am aware of the issues that Johann Lamont raises. She will know that the main bus provisions of the act came into force on 1 July last year and that we published guidance in October. The new provisions include regulations that require bus operators to notify the traffic commissioner of any changes to service, such as a new service, a variation to an existing service or the cancellation of a service. The traffic commissioner requires 56 days' notice and the local authority must have 14 days' prior notice.  Those regulations help to secure stability in bus services. It is too early to come to conclusions on the operation of quality contracts and quality partnerships. No local authority has yet made proposals for a quality contract, but we have said that, if a local authority does so because it is not receiving an adequate service, we will consider the proposals quickly.

The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 clearly gives the power to raise congestion charges to local authorities. We will not issue directions to councils on whether they should use those powers.

Contrary to what has been said by one or two Opposition members, a good deal of evidence of the Executive's investment in transport is all around us. There are new trains in Fife and Strathclyde and new park-and-ride sites serve Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Glasgow. Bus quality corridors in all our major towns and cities give preference to bus travel and promote that mode of transport. New ferries for Caledonian MacBrayne serve the Clyde and the Western Isles and a new level of service will come in later this year for the northern isles. There are new terminal buildings at the airports in Inverness, Kirkwall and Stornoway. That emphasises our continuing commitment to Highland as well as lowland Scotland. Improvements have been delivered throughout rural Scotland through the rural transport fund. Considerable investment has been made in cycling, walking and safer streets projects, and in the progression of 94 schemes under the motorway and trunk road programme, including a new bridge over the Forth at Kincardine.

Quite the contrary. If Mr Ewing had read the transport delivery report, which was published last week, he would have noted that the A96 improvements at Fochabers are one of the priorities that we established at an early stage and that we are taking forward under our motorway and trunk road programme. As I said, substantial and record sums are being spent on lifeline services in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland. Action is being taken by the Executive to help local councils to address the backlog of repairs that are within their budgetary responsibility. Last year, we provided an additional £70 million and only last month a further £20 million was announced to assist councils in meeting those responsibilities. Last week, Wendy Alexander presented to the chamber the Executive's vision of how to address the priority transport challenges of the future. The transport delivery report is evidence of our willingness to prioritise and plan ahead. The report  recognises the central importance of tackling congestion in our major metropolitan areas. Our research forecasts indicate that over the next 20 years there will be an increase in road traffic in Scotland of 27 per cent, the vast majority of which will be concentrated in our major urban areas. Above all, we must address the issues that such an increase raises. That is why so many of the priority projects that we have outlined are aimed at tackling urban and interurban congestion by improving and promoting public transport, providing alternatives to the car and seeking—as the transport delivery report makes clear—to stabilise road traffic usage at 2001 levels by 2021. Our vision contains substantial, strategic, large-scale projects. However, as many members have indicated, it is not only the big strategic projects that matter. We are investing in many other ways to upgrade our transport infrastructure. We are undertaking a series of improvements on the A77 and A75 and we are talking to local partners about how to target that investment most effectively. Only last week, we released a further £2 million to progress the Stirling-Alloa-Kincardine line, which will promote a public transport alternative for commuters and, by diverting freight, will free up capacity for passenger services on the Forth rail bridge. Next week, the new Forth estuary transport authority will be set up. It will have new powers to address transport issues such as the A8000, which will help to tackle congestion in Edinburgh. We recognise the importance of the rail capacity issues that have been raised. That is why the strategic rail study will address those issues—for example, at Falkirk—and why we are pleased to report recent progress in the discussions on the west coast main line.

I take that as a plus and a minus, Presiding Officer. Kenny MacAskill knows that we are working in close partnership with the SRA on the infrastructure provider, which is critical to the future of the railway system. I am pleased to note the progress that has been made in talks between ScotRail's operators and the train drivers unions. I understand that an announcement has been made and that the threat of strike action in the coming two weeks has been lifted. That is good news. I will touch on one or two other matters that members have raised. I confirm that this year, we hope to make progress on the assessment of Aberdeen's traffic flow and to complete the modelling within 12 months. I will meet Cathie Craigie to discuss the issues she raised about Croy and Auchenkilns. Her welcome for those projects reminds us of the progress that is being made here and now. We have developed projects and set out a larger vision, for which we invite the support of all members. They should agree with us on the priorities for Scotland's transport system and help us to make progress in achieving them. We welcome such support.

I am grateful to the Tory party for raising such an important topic again, and for providing us with another opportunity to highlight the Executive's priorities in delivering a modern transport system for Scotland as a whole. The reason why the debate has revolved, and will continue to revolve, around the policies of the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition is not simply that we are in power. It is because we have gone beyond complaining about the problems and have brought forward solutions while the Opposition has not. We have outlined priorities and laid out what needs to be done to overcome the legacy of 18 years of neglect and decline under Tory rule.

Indeed it was five years ago, but it has taken some time to get to where we are. In looking forward, we will not do what the Tories have just promised to do, and cut university funding by £100 million a year.

If I stand corrected by Mr Mundell, I must acknowledge that rather than cutting £100 million from university education, clearly his proposal is to cut £100 million from business support. That announcement will not be welcomed by the business community, but perhaps it will be more welcome to universities than was his first proposal. We will meet the challenges that face Scotland's economy and transport system in the next 20 years by setting priorities and moving forward to meet them. A generation ago, as Wendy Alexander said in the Parliament last week, the great challenge was to provide the strategic roads to link our major cities and to connect Scotland with the south. Today, the greatest challenge—and the one thing in the Tory motion with which I agree—is to tackle congestion in and between our major metropolitan areas.

We will not meet that challenge simply by girning about the problems. We will meet it by recognising that the price of urban congestion is too great for our economy and our environment to pay, and by identifying the most effective ways in which that economic and environmental burden can be removed. We will seek to modernise and improve our public transport system, not talk it down. We will seek to complete the missing links in our strategic transport networks, not just say that every single project is a priority and then avoid the tough choices that need to be made. We want a bigger, better and safer railway network. That is probably the common view in the chamber, but the Executive will focus its efforts on what is achievable and what will deliver and make a difference. We are working to deliver by April 2004 the directions and guidance that are required for a 15-year franchise for ScotRail's services. We have restructured the existing franchise so that all existing services can be built into the baseline for its replacement, whether they are part of the present agreement or not. That is real progress. We want to see real competition for the next franchise, so that Scottish travellers get the best possible deal out of whoever delivers the services from April 2004.

Members will find that the process of issuing directions and guidance and letting the next franchise will take into account the record of the present holder of the franchise, as it will take into account the plans of the present franchise holder and any other competitors that come forward.

I will come back to Mr MacAskill shortly. The Strategic Rail Authority's strategic rail plan, which was issued recently, contains a set of priorities for upgrading Scotland's railway infrastructure, which are also among the priorities for Scotland that were announced by Wendy Alexander last week. Redeveloping Waverley station is one of those. Provision of more platforms for local and strategic services will increase the capacity of the rail network on mainline routes to London, Glasgow and Aberdeen, and of commuter  services into Edinburgh. In partnership with the SRA, work on that could be under way as early as 2004. On developing rail links to our largest airports, we will consider the options on the basis of proper examination later this year, and decide on progressing routes for development.

We have increased our target for transferring freight from road to rail and water from 18 million lorry miles a year, which we achieved this month, to 23 million lorry miles a year, which is our target for a year hence. We are in discussions with the SRA, Railtrack and others that are involved in the industry on how to obtain those signalling resources. Delivering top-priority public transport projects is part of our proposals.

We also want a capital city with a public transport system that is fit for purpose. Edinburgh trams will symbolise that vision. Partnership is the key to fixing congestion in Aberdeen, which is also a key national priority.

In the course of the past 12 months, we have extended our strategic road traffic model and strategic rail planning to the north-east from the central belt. That means not more studies, but judging transport issues in Aberdeen on the same basis as those in Glasgow and Edinburgh, and fully acknowledging that Europe's energy capital is part of urban Scotland.

We expect the strategic traffic modelling that I have described to produce concrete results during the course of this year. We are investing, as we did again last week, in the development of a modern north-east transport system for the region, and in developing a Borders rail link. We will follow up the short-term measures that we announced last week to tackle the major issues on the corridors between Glasgow and Edinburgh. We will deliver our commitments to providing a national travel timetable through Traveline and concessionary fares for elderly and disabled people on local off-peak bus services. We will continue to set our priorities, which we will use to achieve the transport system that we want. We will also continue to fund the rural  transport projects that we have supported with substantial funding in the past three years, and to provide record levels of support to lifeline air and ferry services.

I am over my time and I wish to conclude. The transport delivery report and our list of priorities set out a clear route map for action, which will help us to achieve a transport system that will deliver sustainable economic growth in the next 20 years. We welcome support from all those who share that ambition. I move amendment S1M-2945.2, to leave out from "further notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the publication of Scotland's Transport: Delivering Improvements which sets out the Scottish Executive's transport vision for Scotland; endorses this Executive-led vision of an efficient, safe transport system which meets the needs of all in society: individuals and businesses, car and public transport users, cyclists and pedestrians, whilst protecting our environment and promoting sustainable development; commends the integrated package of measures that the Executive is pursuing: tackling congestion, ensuring greater access to a modernised and improved public transport system, promoting alternative modes of transport to the private car, and targeted motorway and trunk roads improvements, and further commends the specific articulation in this transport delivery report of the Executive's top priorities for delivery."

The information requested is not available centrally. However, the grant-aided expenditure, for which the Scottish Executive is responsible, for subsidised bus services amounts to £4.33 per head in Aberdeenshire and £4.32 per head in the city of Edinburgh.

I wonder whether Mr Stevenson is the only person in Scotland who is unaware of our commitment to introduce free local off-peak travel for pensioners and disabled people from October of this year.

I confirm both those points. I also confirm that Aberdeenshire Council is one of the councils that have taken further steps to take advantage of the powers under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. Those steps include a pilot scheme on through-ticketing, which is already in place in Aberdeenshire and will be extended to a community in Mr Stevenson's constituency in due course if it proves to be successful. I am also aware that Aberdeenshire Council has an existing non-statutory quality partnership with Aberdeen City Council and the two main local bus operators to provide bus services. Mr Rumbles is right to highlight that Aberdeenshire Council is one authority that has taken advantage of the provisions that we made in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001.

The Executive believes that our provisional proposals for tendering those services comply with UK and European Community law. The European Commission has taken account of our case for the single-bundle approach and the way is now clear for us to tender the network as a whole.

As Duncan Hamilton indicated, the vehicle service provided on the Gourock to Dunoon route is an out-of-undertaking service. That means that it is for CalMac to make the judgments on the commercial profitability of the service and it is not open to ministers to instruct it to increase or decrease the provision of the vehicle service. The passenger service, on the other hand, is within the undertaking and we continue to support it. On Mr Hamilton's point about competition law, I have already indicated that it is our view that there is no threat to the compliance of CalMac with the Competition Act 1998. It is for CalMac to make a judgment on the legal position, but the information that is available to us gives us no reason to believe that any of CalMac's proposals would be in breach of the 1998 act.

CalMac has not discussed with ministers any plans that would impact on the level of service. Because of his constituency interest, Mr Lyon will be aware that the Scottish Executive is considering responses to the consultation on the service specification. We will consult further on it soon. Among the issues that I am considering in coming to conclusions on the matter is the position of out-of-undertaking services such as the vehicle service on the Gourock to Dunoon route. We will consider all those issues carefully and produce a service consultation in the course of the next few months, seeking the opinions of as many people as possible.

I would be happy to confirm what Fiona McLeod would have heard had she listened to my contribution, which is that those powers lie with Scottish ministers and there is no expectation that that position will change.

I welcome the opportunity to restate unequivocally the Parliament's competence to make decisions on proposals for new power stations that will generate more than 50 megawatts in Scotland. It is remarkable that although Brian Adam was present during my opening speech, he did not hear what I said. I repeat that the Scottish Executive is the competent authority to grant consent to construct and operate a power station and to grant deemed planning consent for all power stations that will generate more than 50 megawatts in Scotland. That power cannot be revoked without an order in council. Contrary to Alex Neil's contention, such an order in council would require to be approved in draft by this Parliament and the House of Commons. The consent powers are not a new development.

In a moment. Decisions on consent for new power stations have always been taken in Scotland. The powers are executively devolved under the order that is mentioned in the Executive's amendment and are  safeguarded by the Sewel convention. There is no question of Westminster's reclaiming those powers without this Parliament's consent.

It is not a matter of a veto power. That is the language of the United Nations. The Parliament has the power to grant or not to grant consent for such developments. Such decisions will not be taken in isolation. Before proposals reach Scottish ministers, they will go through a wide-ranging consultation process. We will hear from planning authorities on the planning implications of any such development; we will hear from Scottish Natural Heritage about the implications for the environment; we will hear from Historic Scotland about the areas that are of interest to it; and we will hear from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on the issues that are of interest to it. That is not an exhaustive list. We take seriously the comments that we receive from members of the public on such matters. Those representations remind us that, in exercising our powers of consent, we are directly accountable to the people of Scotland.

Consent to construct and operate a power station, as with planning consent, will be judged on a case-by-case basis. That has always been the case and it will continue to be the case. It is not a matter that is directly under the authority of energy policy, at UK level or any other level. The issues are distinct and I hope that that is now clear to all concerned. The recent energy review outlined the options for meeting the demand for energy while safeguarding the environment. It recommended that priority be given to energy efficiency and renewable energy. There is no doubt that there is a tremendous untapped renewable resource in Scotland which will help Scotland to meet our Kyoto commitment.

No, I am conscious of my time. The energy review also recommended that the nuclear option be kept open and that it should be  debated widely. We agree with that. We will support energy efficiency and renewable energy but we must deal with the issue of how we manage radioactive waste in the long term as well. It goes without saying that decisions on how we do that must have widespread public support. We have already started to involve the public by issuing a consultation paper, "Managing Radioactive Waste Safely", which was produced jointly with the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the other devolved administrations. In Scotland, we are undertaking research into how best we can involve our people in making those decisions. Coming to conclusions on our nuclear waste strategy will be a lengthy process. There will be difficult decisions to make, but it is vital that we openly engage with people and involve them in making those decisions. As Nora Radcliffe pointed out, it is also important that we continue to work with industry, the regulator and the Department of Trade and Industry on matters such as grid and network issues that affect energy in Scotland. What we can say today is that all applications for new power stations of over 50 megawatts in Scotland will continue to come to Scottish ministers for consent. We will continue to exercise those powers in the full knowledge that we are accountable to the Scottish Parliament and to the Scottish people for the decisions that we make. That degree of accountability will also apply to decisions that we make about nuclear power, following the nuclear waste strategy conclusions. In closing, I might do worse than echo the words of Brian Wilson on the matter: "The position is unambiguous. End of story".

Will the member give way?

Alex Neil has quoted from schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. I am sure that, having seen the Executive's amendment, he will also have checked the Scotland Act 1998 (Transfer of Functions to the Scottish Ministers etc) Order 1999. Will he accept that that order makes it clear that the functions to which he referred are now by statute "exercisable by the Scottish Ministers instead of by the Minister of the Crown"?

If Mrs Ullrich had read the recent energy review published by the UK Government, she would be aware that the UK Government welcomes and supports the input of Scottish ministers to the formation of energy policy and is encouraging us to play an ever greater role in that process in the future.

I will take the opportunity to pay tribute to Professor Bert Whittington, who died tragically in a road accident this week. Bert Whittington was a distinguished scholar at the University of Edinburgh. Over the years he contributed greatly to the Scottish Executive's work on energy and the environment by making available to us his considerable knowledge of both subjects. He will be greatly missed by everybody who knew and worked with him. On Bruce Crawford's motion, the position is, in most respects, a simple one. Brian Wilson, the Minister of State for Industry, Energy and the Environment at the Department of Trade and Industry made that clear, as Bruce Crawford knows. Consents for new power stations in Scotland are not an issue. Consent powers are devolved to the Executive. Scottish Ministers are responsible for decisions on applications in Scotland to build new power stations of any kind, provided that the power stations in question would have a capacity that is greater than 50 megawatts or, in the case of hydro-electric power stations, a capacity that is greater than one megawatt. That is the case and it will remain the case—full stop.

Let us be absolutely clear about the position. In a moment, I will turn to Bruce Crawford's request for clarification on the purpose of our amendment. I have stated clearly that it remains the position that devolution applies in such cases. Before the position on that could be altered, approval from both Parliaments would be required. That remains the case for matters that are reserved or—as in the present case—matters that are devolved under an order in council. I will say more about that in a moment. I will complete my clarification on the position on power station consents. Power stations that do not reach the level of capacity that I outlined are subject to determination under our land use planning system. Land use planning powers are a devolved matter. As a former planning minister, I have every confidence that our planning system is adequate to cope with the responsibility for taking those decisions. There is no reason to anticipate any change on that. As Mike Rumbles pointed out, the motion would have the effect of committing us to accepting that only consents for nuclear power stations—as distinct from consents for other power stations, such as wind farms, wave power stations or coal-fired power stations—should be in the hands of the Scottish ministers. We do not accept that view. We take the clear view that all power station consents that are devolved under the existing provisions should remain devolved. We have lodged an amendment to clarify that position and to make clear our view that all those consents should remain in the hands of Scottish ministers. I do not expect Bruce Crawford to disagree with that. In the amendment, we also make clear that the basis for devolution of power on this matter is an order in council, which we refer to specifically. That helps to remove doubt about, and to clarify the nature of, devolution in relation to power station consents. I will set the discussion on consents for electricity power stations in the context of our wider energy policy. As Bruce Crawford mentioned, we stand at a critical point in the development of our energy industries. The Renewables Obligation (Scotland) Order 2002 will soon implement a new mechanism that will give Scotland's renewables their greatest fillip ever. Our policy is to look to the future. We welcome the recommendations of the energy review—in particular, the priority that it gives to renewables  and energy efficiency. We will also address some of the wider, related issues that face the people of Scotland. We have already proposed the stretching of targets on fuel poverty and practical steps to implement that.

We do not anticipate such circumstances. I regard that as a hypothetical question, just as I regarded Alex Neil's question as such. In my view, there is no prospect of Westminster seeking to reclaim competence from the Scottish Parliament without our agreement. Any order to that effect would have to be placed in draft form before the Scottish Parliament as well as the Westminster Parliament. The position on our competence is very clear. The point that George Foulkes was keen to make—and on which he was absolutely correct—is that legislative competence on power station consents remains at Westminster. As part of the Scotland Act 1998 and the devolution settlement, Westminster has chosen to devolve to Scottish ministers the executive power to grant consents under the Electricity Act 1989. That position is correct and it is not likely to change.

I am conscious that I am in my last minute, but with the Presiding Officer's indulgence—

Bruce Crawford is trying to create an imaginary constitutional conflict about an event that has not occurred. I will not encourage him to go down that line any further. There is no such question on the table. With our renewables obligation, we are looking towards the development of many other sources of electrical power. We are continuing to invest in that. Rather than dancing on the head of a pin and discussing obscure constitutional issues that are unlikely to arise, it is far more useful and important for the Parliament to give its attention to how we develop our energy policy in the future.  The opening of the Vestas Wind Systems factory in Campbeltown is a significant symbol of the opportunities in renewable energy that lie ahead for Scotland. We must recognise that our mix of energy sources will carry us forward. Bruce Crawford described nuclear energy's 50 per cent contribution to our overall output as a small part of the picture. If 50 per cent is a small part of the picture, I wonder what a large part might be. However, this is not the appropriate time to discuss the broad principles of nuclear energy policy. It is clear that we will consider developments in that area only once we are satisfied that an acceptable solution for nuclear waste has been found. At that stage, we will examine our long-term options. Whatever we do, the decision will be taken in the Scottish Parliament. The market will no doubt bring forward proposals for new power stations that use various forms of generation. It will be for the Parliament and for Scottish ministers to decide on such proposals. I move amendment S1M-2833.2, to leave out from "and believes" to "nuclear" and insert: "under the Transfer of Functions Order 1999 (SI 1999/1750), and believes that the final decision over consent under the Electricity Act 1989 for such".

I thank Colin Campbell for securing the debate and for framing it in terms that allowed us to debate some of the important regeneration issues across the country. As members have noted, the past 30 years have seen structural change in the Scottish economy including the dramatic decline of traditional heavy industries such as coalmining, steel-making and shipbuilding. Duncan McNeil mentioned that that had happened in his own locality. In the space of only three years between 1979 and 1981, Scottish manufacturing lost 11 per cent of its output and 20 per cent of its jobs. As a consequence of that, unemployment stood at over 10 per cent for most of the 1980s and much of the 1990s. Those were the inescapable consequences of the economic policies of the Government of that time—policies that were politically motivated and ideologically driven. They carried a high human cost, which blighted a generation. They also did untold damage to business confidence in Scotland and to our image in the wider world. That legacy has taken time to repair. We have a different economy from that of the 1960s. The service sector now accounts for some 60 per cent of Scottish output and 75 per cent of employment. Finance and business services now have almost the same weight in terms of gross domestic product as the whole of the manufacturing sector. In recent years, our high levels of skills and commitment have attracted new companies and new technologies to Scotland. The Executive has sought to build on the strengths of the new economy as well as to reinforce our existing manufacturing strengths. Regeneration is not about seeking to restore the old order; it is about looking forward to identify how we can build a successful future for Scotland's economy, based on increasing employment, increasing economic growth and improving our competitiveness in a global economy. Duncan McNeil spoke about how microchips have replaced ships as the chief product of his constituency. There are many new jobs across Scotland in many new industries—100,000 new employee jobs were created in Scotland between 1997 and 2001. We have the highest level of employment in Scotland and the lowest level of  unemployment for a generation. We recognise that there is a particular challenge in achieving the regeneration of those formerly heavy industrial areas, which lost out most in the course of the previous 20 years. We are achieving that through regeneration of the physical environment—Ravenscraig has been mentioned—and through regeneration of the economy by supporting the development of industries with growth potential. Above all, as a number of speakers have mentioned, we are doing that through regeneration of our human capital by providing the training to ensure that our work force has the skills to access the new jobs that are being created. Trish Godman, Duncan McNeil and Colin Campbell have mentioned Inverclyde. It is one of those areas where real regeneration has been required. It is important to be clear that the future for that area is not bleak. Unemployment has fallen in Inverclyde faster than for Scotland as a whole. It has fallen to less than the Scottish average. The Scottish Executive has provided the area with regional selective assistance grants of over £10 million, with planned investment of nearly £100 million and the creation or safeguarding of some 2000 jobs. Inverclyde has the highest manufacturing output in Scotland. As local members have described, the area is undergoing a renaissance. Annabel Goldie referred to an article in business a.m. that included a comment by the leader of Inverclyde Council about the success of his local area in making a significant contribution to the Scottish economy. What is true in Inverclyde is also true in Easter Ross, the north-east and elsewhere in Scotland. The approach of partnership for regeneration is right for the whole country. Richard Lochhead spoke about the need for diversification, even in relatively successful economies such as that in the north-east. That diversification, like regeneration in our older industrial areas, requires us to look forward and to work in partnership to stimulate new economic growth and to seek to protect the older industries.

Economic growth is our next challenge. The fundamental conditions for economic growth are good, but all members agree that there is a need to improve the rate of growth. To do that, we must consider the supply aspect of the economy. I mentioned regional selective assistance in relation to Inverclyde. That is one example of us  refocusing from a previous concentration on inward investment to seeking to expand the economy by stimulating indigenous companies. As Duncan McNeil said, we cannot hope to achieve sustainable economic growth by relying on our ability to produce simple products more cheaply than other places. We must seek to add value to our produce and to achieve the economic growth that will come from that. Members from all parties spoke about the importance of people. At the core of our economic strategy is the recognition that we must encourage and direct more investment toward science and skills. We are implementing Scotland's first ever science strategy. We are establishing an independent science committee and rebuilding public investment in that area. We plan to establish new specialist technology institutes to deepen our research and development capability, which we hope to translate into jobs in the energy, biotechnology and communication sectors. As Robin Harper said, some of the opportunities in the energy sector are in renewable energy. Regeneration requires not only science, it requires skills. The heart of our skills strategy is to ensure that every Scot is ready for tomorrow's jobs. That does not mean only those who are at school or university, but those who are in the work force and who must update their skills to allow them to access the new economy as it develops. At the heart of our regeneration strategy is a commitment to grow Scottish science and skills. Those priorities reflect our discussions with business, academics, trade unions, the enterprise networks, local authorities and all those with an interest in our economic future. To deliver the strategy, we must develop a national consensus in support of it. I welcome the positive aspects of the debate—there have been many—and the commitment that has been shown to achieving a consensus in support of economic regeneration for Scotland in the 21 st century.

The figure that is quoted is hypothetical. The Scottish Executive transport budget continues to increase year on year in real terms.

It is a great shame that Mr Stevenson has not read David Begg's report, to which he refers. Had he done so, he would be aware that Professor Begg does not suggest that there has been a decline in transport expenditure  in Scotland. Quite the contrary: Professor Begg recognises that the task of comparing transport spend per head across different parts of the country is difficult. [Interruption.] Mr Stevenson may be pointing to the piece of paper in his hand, but I am afraid that that is no substitute for actually reading the report.

One of the great mysteries that face all of us who are engaged with transport spend is finding out what the Scottish National Party's transport priorities actually are. If that is the party to which Bristow Muldoon referred, I am sure that there will be opportunities to explore the matter further in the future. At the time of the strategic roads review, the SNP's then transport spokesman, Kenny MacAskill—who has once again become the party's transport spokesman—said that all roads were a priority. That is clearly a bottomless-pit commitment, but the SNP will no doubt tell us how it intends to fund it in due course.

Scottish Enterprise Grampian works closely with companies in manufacturing and food processing, and is currently preparing reports on the north-east economy in general and the manufacturing sector in particular.

Mr Lochhead knows that I am aware of the difficulties that he is talking about. The Richards of Aberdeen manufacturing facility, which is one of the companies that is in difficulty, is in my constituency. It is the policy of the Executive and the enterprise network to work with those companies to try to reduce the risks that they run in the wider economy. We are aware of the need for diversification in the economy of the north-east. We are continuing to support the enterprise network's efforts in that regard. It is important to say that Scottish Enterprise Grampian and the local authority take seriously their responsibility to work with industry. The same situation pertains in Tayside. Workers in those industries are looking not for debates for and against the production of glossy documents, but for market opportunities that will allow those companies to thrive. That is what we are committed to achieving as well.

We have asked Scottish Enterprise Grampian to examine the position as it affects the companies that are involved. McIntosh of Dyce is the other company that is in receivership, and the MSP in whose constituency that company is, Elaine Thomson, has raised that matter with us. We have asked Scottish Enterprise Grampian to report back to us, but we have not made any prejudgments on what it will discover. Mr Davidson will know that the enterprise company's manufacturing strategy has been successful, in that employment in manufacturing is higher in the north-east than it is in the country as a whole. However, there are clearly points in that strategy that need to be revisited and that is what we have asked the enterprise company to do.

I met trustees of the Scottish Transport Group pension schemes yesterday and I am delighted to confirm that they have now begun the formal procedures required to complete the wind-up of the pension schemes.

If we had followed the policy line that Mr Canavan suggested and not issued indemnities to the trustees in the middle of last year, the pensioners would have had to wait a  good deal longer than I hope will be the case. By issuing the indemnities, we made it possible for the trustees to proceed with the wind-up. They have begun that process, which is an important step, for which pensioners and members have long waited. We should welcome that step and encourage the trustees to proceed with all possible speed. Rather than seeking to apportion blame for past delays, we should try to ensure that future delays are kept as short as possible.

I thank Sylvia Jackson for her interest in the issue and for pursuing that important point. The letter that she received should have answered the other questions that were raised at the meeting. The issue of tax is still outstanding with the Inland Revenue. We have put to the Inland Revenue the arguments that have been put to us and we have asked it to consider the matter. Last year, its advice was that the ex gratia payments were liable to income tax in the usual way. The figure of £30,000 that Sylvia Jackson mentioned and that the T and G brought to our attention was a figure relating specifically to redundancy payments and not to ex gratia payments. However, we have taken that point on board and we have asked the Inland Revenue to consult its lawyers formally. We will report back on the matter as soon as possible.

Part of Annabel Goldie's motion did, indeed, refer to a devolved matter. It also referred to the framework document, "A Toast to the Future: working together for Scotch whisky", that would allow the Scotch whisky industry and the Scottish Executive to map shared goals and a common direction for the whisky industry in Scotland. The launch of "A Toast to the Future: working together for Scotch whisky" represents acknowledgement by the Scottish Executive and the Scotch whisky industry that we need to work together to build on the success of such a unique product and to enhance opportunities for its expansion and progress for the benefit of the industry, the jobs it supports and the wider economy of Scotland. The document was sent to all MSPs, MPs and MEPs to make clear the Executive's commitment to, and support for, that generic and important Scottish manufacturing industry. The document deals not only with issues such as duty on spirits, but with issues for which Scottish ministers have direct responsibility, such as tourism, the environment, technical innovation and problems with alcohol use and community co-operation. We pledged to support Scottish manufacturers when EU and UK policies impacted on competitiveness and we have done that. We pledged to keep regulatory burdens to a sensible minimum and we have done that. We pledged to work with the UK Government on tax and international trade issues, where it has primary responsibility. It has been noted today that Gordon Brown has achieved real-terms reductions in duty on whisky and that Labour ministers at the Department of Trade and Industry have achieved improvement in relation to duty in countries such as India. On all those matters, there is still progress to be made; however, we work with our UK colleagues and support their efforts in making further improvements in those areas.

In a moment. The co-operation between Governments is continuous and wide-ranging. There is a formal tripartite agreement between the DTI, the  Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the Scottish Executive that deals with the subject of co-operation in support of the Scotch whisky industry. We will continue to do all that is in our power to ensure that the industry receives support.

What I did not hear in Fergus Ewing's speech—or indeed in any speech from the Opposition—was an alternative proposal. This is an area on which we need to focus: it is clear that if a case is to be made that duty stamps or tax stamps are not the way to go, fraud must be addressed and dealt with in other ways. Before I move on to deal with some of the specifics of that issue, I shall mention in passing that we in Scotland also have a growing white spirits industry. In a debate on whisky, it is important to acknowledge that vodka and gin production is also increasing and that Scotland is now responsible for 70 per cent of UK production of those spirits. However, it is clear that Scotch whisky has a special place. The part of Annabel Goldie's motion that refers to a reserved matter deals with the issue that Fergus Ewing has again asked about. I think it was Margaret Ewing who asked earlier whether we had considered the Scotch Whisky Association's proposals—she mentioned that such proposals existed. We have considered those proposals and acknowledge them as a significant contribution to the debate. "Tax stamping of spirits"—HM Customs and Excise's consultation document—includes proposals for new ways in which to trace the origin of diverted stock and for investigating tracking technologies for the same purpose. The industry has also made it clear that it acknowledges that the warehouse sector in the UK and elsewhere has a role to play in identifying and dealing with fraud. We welcome that and the responses of the Scotch Whisky Association.

I will take a brief intervention from Mr Hamilton.

If Mr Hamilton had listened, he would have realised that we have not only been working with the Scotch Whisky Association, but we have taken their proposals into account. As I said, I did not hear alternative proposals from Opposition speakers, although I listened closely to the speeches that were made from throughout the chamber. I noted the views of many speakers, including Labour and Liberal Democrat members, about the way in which the issue should be developed. It is clear to me that UK ministers are prepared to respond if alternative solutions are proposed—I share their view. It is for MPs from Scottish constituencies to express their views to the Scotland Office. For our part, we will express our view following the debate and I am grateful to members for their contributions to that process.

I congratulate Annabel Goldie on her interest in this matter and on some of her opening speech. I begin by responding to the member's comments. She is curious to know why we do not support the terms of her motion. Yesterday I made some informal inquiries with the aim of establishing whether this is the first occasion on which a member of the Conservative and Unionist Party has lodged a motion that focuses so largely on reserved matters—it appears that it is. Given the SNP's views, Mr Ewing may welcome that, but neither Opposition party will be surprised to learn that we do not.

Mr Hamilton knows the answer to the rhetorical question that he has posed before I give it—we take very seriously our duty to make representations in the appropriate fashion. However, we do not consider it appropriate for Scottish ministers to seek to make policy on matters that are reserved to Westminster. I am surprised that the Conservatives should suggest that we go down that road.

Far from regretting the publication of the document, I regard it as taking on board precisely the issues that are our responsibility. If I have the opportunity to explore those issues further, without immediate interruption, I will explain what we have done to fulfil that responsibility. The responsibility that I have for the alcoholic drinks industry is important to me. It gives me great pleasure to be involved in an industry that has such deep roots in Scottish soil and that is such a significant component of the Scottish and the United Kingdom economies. I intend to use the debate to reaffirm our support for and commitment to our foremost indigenous industry. Scotch whisky production continues to represent a vital part of Scotland's manufacturing base and its importance to the wider economy cannot be overstated. Not least significant are the annual export figure of more than £2 billion pounds and the provision of employment—directly and indirectly—to one in every 54 people employed in Scotland. As has been mentioned, the location of those jobs makes them particularly vital to the Scottish economy—whether they are in rural locations, where few alternative job opportunities exist, or in areas of the central belt that have other employment problems. The Scotch whisky industry is also an important customer for Scottish farmers, who produce the vast majority of the cereals used. I know that the links between Scottish farmers and the Scotch whisky industry are of importance to both parties. The close relationship that the industry has with suppliers such as farmers, transport operators and bottle and label producers and their interdependence make it a prime example of an industrial cluster. Therefore, it is precisely the type  of modern industry that both the United Kingdom Government and the Scottish Executive seek to foster. Although Scotch whisky makes a significant contribution to Scottish employment and is fighting hard to innovate and to develop its home and world markets, I am conscious that several issues of concern remain. Those issues have been raised today, and we have made and will continue to make representations in respect of them. The Executive is well aware that the Scotch whisky industry does not operate in a vacuum and that decisions made by Government can have an impact on the industry.

I will give way in a moment. Members will be aware that, in November last year, the House of Commons Scottish Affairs Select Committee reported on the drinks industry. We have responded to the aspects of the report that relate to devolved matters, rather than those that relate to reserved matters.

I will do so in a moment. The Executive's response to the select committee's report is an example of its engagement in the interests of the industry and in the future of Scotch whisky. Annabel Goldie referred at length to the document that we have produced. "A Toast to the Future: working together for Scotch whisky" was produced not out of the ether, but in collaboration with the Scotch Whisky Association, which represents the industry.

Mr Ewing's timing is perfect. I intend to move on to the very subject that he raises. Clearly, the possible introduction of tax stamps has caused the industry great concern. It is important to place the proposal in context. Spirits fraud costs HM Customs and Excise £450 million in lost duty each year, which is equivalent to 15 per cent of the UK whisky market. Spirits fraud is predominantly inward diversion fraud, by which I mean that goods entering the UK from a European Union tax warehouse do not reach the intended UK tax warehouse but are illegally diverted on to the home market.

Not at the moment. Despite HM Customs and Excise's recent successes, particularly in tackling beer and wine smuggling, inward diversion fraud of spirits remains a serious problem. The UK Government is obliged to consider a wide range of options for tackling the problem; clearly, the introduction of a UK tax stamp is one such option.

I am very aware of the content of the Roques report. The case that it makes for the advantages of a stamp tax is clear. However, such a tax would also have significant disadvantages.

I am aware of some of the international examples that Annabel Goldie cites. It is important to emphasise that the UK Government remains open-minded about the possibility of introducing tax stamps; in other words, as Brian Fitzpatrick pointed out, we are dealing with a consultation process. The UK Government and the Scottish Executive are encouraged that the industry has responded not only by highlighting the problems associated with the tax stamp proposal, but by suggesting other possible methods of dealing with the problem of spirits fraud.

We all understand that the introduction of tax stamps is being considered in the context of the removal by the European Union of duty free and other tax barriers, and of losses to  HM Customs and Excise through whisky and spirits fraud. The latter problem needs to be tackled. I very much welcome the commitment by the Scotch Whisky Association and the UK Government to find a way of dealing with spirits fraud. I know that HM Customs and Excise will give careful consideration to the detailed suggestions that the Scotch Whisky Association has made in response to the consultation opportunity. As members will know, the scheduled closing date for the consultation has passed. However, in the light of the debate today we have had discussions with HM Customs and Excise and will respond following the debate. I have been keen to take interventions as far as I can, because in making our response, it is important that we are aware of the views around the chamber. We will give a response that acknowledges the interests of the Scotch whisky industry and its vital importance to the Scottish economy. We will acknowledge also the importance to the Scotch whisky industry of finding ways to tackle alcohol import fraud. On that basis, I look forward to hearing the remainder of the debate. When I close, I will do so in a way that is designed to respond to the debate from the Executive's point of view. I move amendment S1M-2883.2, to leave out from first "notes" to end and insert: "welcomes the Scottish Executive's recognition of the importance of the Scotch whisky industry to the economy, the contribution that the industry makes to employment across Scotland and the Executive's commitment to work with the industry as set out in A Toast to the Future - working together for Scotch Whisky ."

Am I to take it from Annabel Goldie's comment that she is looking to extend the powers of a devolved Scottish Parliament in that respect?

I start by thanking Lord James Douglas-Hamilton for raising the issue in his usual constructive way. The debate has been useful. It is clear that there is broad agreement across the chamber, if not on the precise detail of everything in the motion, certainly on the essential objectives, which I think we share. Robin Harper spoke about setting a context. The context is clearly that the Executive is committed to developing an integrated transport strategy that includes rail. We want a railway network that is safe, accessible and larger—it should serve more people than it currently does. We want a railway system that supports economic development, meets social needs and meets the environmental objectives that we have set ourselves and those that we have agreed to under the Kyoto agreement and other international agreements. Developing rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports can be an important part of that. That is why we, along with other stakeholders, have commissioned a major study to look at what might be done at each airport. That is part of a much wider process that will address the continuing and anticipated growth in the demand for air transport across the UK over the next 30 years. Edinburgh airport is growing faster than any other UK airport, with the exception of Stansted, which has been mentioned a couple of times today. In 2001, Edinburgh handled more than 6 million passengers. If that growth is to be sustained, effective surface access links will be required. The study that we have commissioned is a central part of that process. Glasgow airport is growing as well. It handles more than 7 million passengers every year and remains Scotland's largest airport. It is also the main airport serving the North American and leisure markets. In relation to both airports, the case for the construction of rail links is not only about promoting public transport and tackling congestion, but part of the wider approach to air transport that the Scottish Executive and the  Department of Transport, Local Government and the Regions are taking in order to achieve an aviation strategy for the next 20 to 30 years. It is vital that access to our airports is improved to ensure better accessibility to and from airports not only for passengers but for employees, who can occasionally be overlooked in this debate. Improved access would also promote employment opportunities through the continued growth of airports, which would bring economic benefits for the airport and the wider community and would reduce road congestion, accidents and the environmental impacts of road traffic. Those objectives are all part of our wider transport priorities. That is why the consultants are undertaking a detailed economic and engineering study into rail links to both airports. They will examine options for linking Glasgow and Edinburgh airports to the Scottish rail network and to each other. The study will establish the likely demand for such links and the costs of putting rail links in place. It will also include recommendations about funding and procurement options. We are at a detailed and practical stage in the advancement of the potential projects. Sarah Boyack asked how the plans fitted in with the wider progress of study in these areas. The scoping study that was undertaken at the end of 2000 produced a set of proposals that have formed the basis of the current study. The consultants have identified a large number of options for each airport. They will consider light rail as well as heavy rail options. The consultants' final report is expected in the autumn. It will examine in detail the two best options for each airport, which we will measure against our five objectives for transport investment: the environment; safety; economy; integration; and accessibility. The report will also include the issue that was raised by Iain Smith, Sarah Boyack and a number of other members about the best stops on the line and the best links into local networks and the national network. I know that recent press reports have suggested that the Executive has already decided to express a preference for the construction of a link to Edinburgh airport rather than to Glasgow airport. I will take the opportunity that this debate offers me to say that that is not the case. Our consultants have been asked to identify preferred options for a rail link to each airport. It is too early to say what will emerge from the study. I stress that we have no preconceived view on what the outcome should be. The press have also speculated that we have funding in place for the Edinburgh link. That is premature speculation. We have yet to establish a  reliable and robust estimate of the likely costs of the projects. That part of the study will not be concluded until the middle of 2002. It is too early at this stage to say what the global costs are likely to be or to specify how those costs should be met. The reassurance on funding at this stage is to remind members that, as Bristow Muldoon said, the SRA is a key partner. It has identified three major priorities within the Scottish rail network; rail links to airports are one of those priorities. Indeed, last month Wendy Alexander met Richard Bowker, the chairman of the SRA, and agreed those priorities. As has been said, Glasgow and Edinburgh airports are the two largest airports in the United Kingdom that do not have such a dedicated link. The SRA recognised that matter as a priority and it is clearly also a priority for us. However, new rail schemes do not appear overnight, whether the ones that we are discussing or others to which reference has been made in the debate. A great deal of forethought and planning has to go into taking forward such projects. Our consultants have much to do before they can give us a final and informed view on the best way forward. In response to the points that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made, it is important to say that the Executive and the SRA will take a lead in the public funding aspects of the project. However, we will also look to private sector partners—BAA Scottish Airports clearly has an interest as the owner of the airports. There are also other potential private sector partners. Local government also has an interest and a role to play. The City of Edinburgh Council and Renfrewshire Council, as the planning authorities for the respective airports, will have a vital role in the delivery of the projects. There will be a requirement for parliamentary powers, for example; those will be sought by the sponsors of the project rather than necessarily by Scottish ministers. The railway companies, Strathclyde Passenger Transport in the west of Scotland and local government have a role. We have sought to engage all those stakeholders in a number of consultation workshops; indeed, a number of workshops are planned over the next three or four months to assess demand and to make the economic case. Although it is too early to say definitively which options will be taken forward or to be specific about the likely cost and sources of funding, we recognise that, as many members have said, it is important that we maintain our present momentum and the drive to take those projects to completion. I hope that local authorities will be in a position to respond positively to the outcome of the study with a view to seeking parliamentary powers from  the chamber at the earliest opportunity. Members will be aware that, over the next few months, we intend to complete the devolution settlement with regard to railways and to bring to this Parliament the power to initiate the construction and development of railways within Scotland. Assuming that local authorities will be in a position to respond to the study and to come to the Parliament to obtain the parliamentary powers, we could be in a position to move forward to design and construction as early as 2005. We recognise that that is an ambitious timetable, but it is achievable if all else falls into place, as we hope it will. We will certainly play our part in taking forward that timetable. I look forward to the contribution that those projects can make to achieving a bigger, better and safer transport network for Scotland and I look forward to the continuing support of all sides in achieving that objective.  Meeting closed at 17:33.

The Executive reviews annually injuries and accidents  on all trunk roads, including the A9. In addition, a detailed accident analysis has been carried out on the A9 and its recommendations will be considered.

We will use the evidence from the camera. We will also use the evidence from other studies that we have carried out at the junction. I am sure that Murdo Fraser is aware that we have announced our intention to hold an exhibition at Ballinluig in April this year to bring to the community's attention the favoured options and to elicit its comments on those. We recognise the need for action at that spot. That is clear from the report that was published today. Before making final decisions, we will consider carefully the evidence and the responses of the Ballinluig community and the public to the exhibition in April.

Keith Raffan knows well the state of the roads programme on the A9. As for other trunk roads, we do not anticipate further major projects emerging now, as was explained in the chamber recently in reference to the strategic roads programme. We are looking at a number of areas on the A9 where improvements can be made. We expect that, in addition to Ballinluig, there will be improvements to the junctions at Auchterarder and at Blackford in connection with developments in those areas. We expect the developers to bear a significant part of the cost of those improvements.  Road safety on the A9 remains one of our priorities. We will continue to examine the accident record and to consider the lessons to be learned from that in our attempts to target investments that will improve safety on the road.

My officials have been in touch with Transco, the energy regulator Ofgem and the Department of Trade and Industry, which has responsibility for policy in this reserved area. We have received assurances that no job losses will affect public safety. Transco has not indicated how many jobs will be lost in Scotland.

Mr Paterson will be aware that public safety, customer service and staff are among the considerations that must be taken into account. Of course we have been particularly keen to ensure that there is no question of the changes being made in Transco compromising or jeopardising public safety. We have had assurances that that is the case. We have also had assurances that the reduction in staff that the company makes will include only a small element of operational staff and no repair or pipeline replacement staff and will therefore not affect the services bearing most directly on safety.

rose—

In the spirit of debate, I ask Mr Wilson, who said that the Parliament should act, what he thinks we should do.

We are 10 months into the first year of the five-year contracts. Arguments about the awarding of those contracts lie in the past; the task now is to make them work. There are two key ways of doing that: first, through ensuring—by monitoring performance and acting to secure compliance—that the operating companies deliver on their contractual obligations; secondly, through promoting dialogue and partnership among all those with responsibilities for our road networks, including central Government, local government, contractors, subcontractors and the police. Local authorities are responsible for the maintenance of 94 per cent of Scotland's roads. There is a challenge for councils to deliver on that responsibility and no doubt some hard decisions will have to be made in setting priorities and allocating budgets. My meetings last week with local authority chairs of transport from throughout Scotland confirmed that authorities were up to meeting that challenge. I met council representatives from the north of Scotland in Perth and I agreed that my officials would work with them on issues that they have raised regarding BEAR Scotland and the maintenance of trunk and local roads. Councillor Jimmy Doig, leader of the administration in Perth and Kinross and host of that meeting, welcomed that and offered to write to other councils "recommending that we work in conjunction with the contractors to improve the situation as it stands". It is fair to say that Councillor Doig is not a fan of the operating companies, but he recognises that his priority is to obtain the best possible service for the people of his area. Other councils have taken a similarly pragmatic view. In the south of Scotland, Scottish Borders Council and Dumfries and Galloway Council are doing good business as subcontractors to Amey. In the north of Scotland, Tayside Contracts, Highland Council and Aberdeen City Council have taken on work as subcontractors to BEAR.

As I have made very clear, my priority is to ensure that the contracts work. That is our job. Local authorities have to make choices in deciding how to meet local priorities and it is for them to determine those priorities. Those councils that choose to remain involved in trunk road maintenance on a subcontracting basis, including Dumfries and Galloway, Aberdeen City and Highland, are the ones that are most likely still to be in the frame when the current contracts come to an end in four or five years' time. That also applies to companies such as Tayside Contracts. Highland Council has decided to work with BEAR in a different way, sharing depots and supplies. That partnership has the potential to address some of the particular and well-recognised problems of looking after a network that covers many hundreds of miles of roads. In North Lanarkshire, the position is different again: Amey maintains trunk and local roads there, as they do in several other areas south of the border. Those are different models of how to move forward, but they are all about making the contracts work. We recognise the case for close co-operation between councils and contractors. We do not agree with the Conservative proposition that the Executive should set up a system for monitoring the work of local councils on local roads, as we believe that that is a job for the councils. We will, however, continue to work with them and with the Society of Chief Officers of Transport. We will monitor performance and act to secure effective maintenance for the trunk roads, for which we are directly responsible. We will ensure that problems that have been raised today, such as that at Rest and be thankful, are speedily addressed, and we will continue to ensure that local elected representatives are able to meet representatives of BEAR and Amey. Many MSPs have already done so. We will ensure that the findings of the performance audit group are published in a report following the first year of the new contracts and we will not hesitate to highlight failings that are not effectively addressed by either of the operating companies. BEAR and Amey should not expect an easy ride from the monitoring process. They know that we will be vigilant and will act, that we will publish the report and ensure that public scrutiny continues, that we will issue default notices wherever a fault occurs and that we will withhold moneys—as we have done already to a substantial degree—where faults are not remedied. That is how we will ensure that  standards are met. Partnership working will also help in reaching that objective. On that basis, we will continue to seek the best possible value for money and the best possible service for those who depend on our road system.

indicated disagreement.

Will the member give way?

Does Margaret Ewing accept that, as a result of that, the winter maintenance plans for all four units are publicly available, available to elected members and available to all those working with the operating companies on the winter roads contracts?

I am glad that Kenny MacAskill has found time in his schedule of tireless campaigning to come and join us in Parliament and spend time doing what the taxpayers pay him for. It is a pity that, having begun with Shakespeare, he decided to play it for laughs and showed his complete ignorance of developments in trunk roads maintenance over the past 12 months. It is also a pity that he did not take a little more time to produce a clear and coherent motion for debate. However, with a little work, I have been able to disentangle the mesh of accusations and allegations and work out that Mr MacAskill is putting five basic propositions before us. Perhaps the most serious is his accusation, ventilated only at the end of his speech, that BEAR and Amey are somehow putting in jeopardy the safety of road users and causing danger to travellers. That is not an accusation that should be made lightly. Of course our roads can be dangerous places, and of course there are extra risks in travelling in severe winter weather—those are facts. However, Mr MacAskill's claim that those dangers have increased as a result of the award of the trunk road maintenance contracts is one that he ought to be able to measure against the evidence.  Let us be clear that the terms of those contracts are in all essential respects identical to those that went before. There is an overriding obligation on the trunk road operating companies—and on councils, which maintain local roads—to ensure the safety of travellers. We expect the operating companies to work with local councils and the police to ensure road safety and we will act vigorously on any evidence of failure to do that or to meet contractual standards.

I recall many things that have happened during the years that I have lived in the north-east of Scotland. I assure Mrs Ewing that every fault that is identified and that is brought to us is acted on, including the case of the sandbags to which she referred. Kenny MacAskill referred to Glasgow and accused BEAR and Amey of failing to ensure the movement of goods and of jeopardising the economy. It is fair to say that, even by his usual standards of doom and gloom, that represents a new depth of self-deluding despair. The trunk road contracts indeed oblige the operating companies to do all in their power to keep roads clear and open, but not at the expense of the safety of travellers or their own staff. We have yet to hear any substantial evidence of the alleged economic disruption, but I make it clear that, in any case, safety comes first. The fact is that, in the final year of the old contracts, trunk roads were closed for more than four hours because of weather conditions on 12 occasions. In the first 10 months of the new contracts, that has happened on four occasions. It may happen again before winter is over, but the evidence hardly suggests an economic crisis caused by the closure of roads. Mr MacAskill's third accusation is that the award of the contracts has increased the costs to councils of clearing local roads, lowered standards and sacrificed economies of scale. I do not dispute the claim that some councils have found it harder than others to adjust to the consequences of disaggregating local road and trunk road responsibilities. A council such as Highland Council, where the proportion of trunk roads in the road network is double the national average, faces greater challenges and difficulties than city and suburban authorities.

No, I do not. Councils may have concerns and complaints, but those—such as Aberdeen City Council and Highland Council—that see a future for themselves in road maintenance, and that recognise the importance of that task, are increasingly considering how they can work with the operating companies. I am greatly encouraged that Highland councillors decided last week to work more closely with BEAR and to share their resources and expertise. At the beginning of last week, I met chairs of transport from all Scotland's councils. I am keen to continue talking to councils to assess what they need to do to carry out their duties on local roads. We will continue actively to promote effective partnership working between councils and operating companies to maximise the rational use of resources, to secure the benefits of economies of scale and to ensure transparency and accountability in the use of public money.

Not at the moment. I am aware that I do not have much time left. I do not want to waste too much time on Mr MacAskill's claim that ministers ignored warnings about privatisation. A one-time enterprise spokesperson such as Mr MacAskill ought to know a privatisation when he sees one, but clearly, in this case, he does not. There was an open tendering process, with both private and public sector bidders. Private companies were involved in previous successful bids, along with local councils, and I fully expect there to be private and public sector bids again at the end of the contracts. Ministers did not, and could not, wilfully choose whichever bids they wanted. They followed European Union procurement rules, as they had to do, and awarded the contracts to the bidders who offered the best value for money. I come now to Mr MacAskill's claim that ministers are failing to address the current problems. Nothing could be further from the truth. BEAR and Amey are obliged to adopt quality management regimes. They are contracted to deliver the same level of service as was expected under the previous contracts. Their delivery is monitored day in, day out by the performance audit group, which is independent of both the contractors and the Executive, but which reports to us on the operating companies' performance.

No, I will not. I am in my last few moments. The performance audit group audits the companies' records and procedures, deploys its own field engineers to check performance on the ground and investigates any incident that gives cause for concern. Where an operator fails to comply with the contract, the performance audit group reports to us. We issue default notices, where that is necessary, to secure compliance, and we withhold payments if a default notice does not achieve its objective.

No. I am aware that I am in my final moments. We have imposed those penalties a number of times, and we will do so again whenever the terms of the contract are not met. The contracts are monitored as never before. That is a benefit, not a disadvantage. Many of the problems in the early months of the contract have been resolved and should not arise again. We will ensure that the same is true of any deficiencies in winter maintenance—they will be identified, assessed and put right, and they will be put right at the expense of the operating companies if they are at fault. We will be absolutely vigilant and will insist on effective delivery. Not only will we address problems, but we will resolve them and will work with the operating companies and with local councils to make the contracts work. I was struck by the fact that Kenny MacAskill did not say what his party would do, given the choice. We will make the contracts work and we will deliver them in the best interests of road users and taxpayers alike. I move amendment S1M-2703.1, to leave out from "with concern" to end and insert: "the actions taken by the Scottish Executive to ensure that the trunk road maintenance contracts deliver the prescribed level of service; calls upon the Executive to continue monitoring the performance of the operating companies to ensure compliance with their contractual obligations, and further invites the Executive to enter into dialogue with local authorities to assess the effects of the contracts on local roads maintenance."

My officials are in regular contact with the directors of the Scottish Transport Group, including contact on progress with the wind-up of the pension schemes. The most recent such meeting was yesterday.

I am disappointed, given Mr Canavan's long engagement with the campaign, that he appears not to be aware of one or two key points. One of those points is that the trustees of the pension schemes are not directly accountable to ministers. If they were, we would have instructed them to act before now. We have done everything we can to speed up the process and we will continue to do so. Mr Canavan asked about meetings. He will be aware that we met the trade unions, with which we have worked throughout the process, and we have met the pensioners action group and MSPs within the past five weeks and discussed questions that they raised. We have taken those questions seriously and will supply answers to them. In the meantime, we will continue to press the trustees to carry out their responsibility and wind up the schemes as quickly as possible.

The Executive shares the impatience of members and those who have been involved in the campaign, including Sylvia  Jackson, that matters should be drawn to a conclusion as quickly as possible. We will respond to the questions that were raised at that meeting as soon as we can and invite any further representations the member wishes to make in the light of the answers to those questions. I intend to impress upon the trustees of the pension scheme our eagerness for progress and to meet the chair of the Scottish Transport Group board of directors shortly. That will provide an opportunity to explain the view of the Parliament and the Executive that the matter should be concluded as quickly as possible.

Given that Fergus Ewing was in the chamber when we debated the subject in late November, it is very disappointing that he appears to have missed entirely the point that legal ownership of the fund lies entirely with HM Government. What the Scottish Executive achieved in negotiation was a substantial handover of funds, which belong in law to HM Treasury, to the Executive for dispersal to members of the pension schemes. If the member had listened on 28 November, he would have heard the Executive say that a further £18 million had been obtained and will also be dispersed to members of the pension schemes. I take the opportunity to correct a point that has been made by Mr Ewing and Mr Canavan, who overlooked the £33 million pension pay-out of about a decade ago, which was surplus in addition to the regular pension pay-outs made to members of the schemes. That means that, assuming that we are able to proceed in the next few weeks, the aggregate pay-out will be in excess of 60 per cent of the overall surplus in the scheme, and will be directly comparable with the pay-out in England and Wales.

The criteria for distribution have been discussed and agreed with the Transport and General Workers Union, which represented the vast majority of the pensioners when they were in employment. The criteria were also explained at the meeting on 17 December at New St Andrews House. The intention is to complete the process as quickly as possible. The moment that the trustees carry out their duty and wind up the schemes, we will take the necessary steps in Parliament to wind up the Scottish Transport Group. Once that is done and we have access to the records, to which we are not legally entitled to have access until the pension schemes have been wound up, we will proceed to distribute the money on the basis of the criteria that have been explained. We shall do that as quickly as possible.

The Scottish Executive gives high priority to a safer, bigger and better railway network. We have already started work on a detailed analysis of the case for rail links to both Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive is looking at options for Glasgow crossrail and we will consider any formal proposals when they are received.

It is important to recognise that the studies that have been done on the projects and the studies that are currently under way are essential in identifying which options offer the best value for money. We will pursue those options on the basis of well costed and well-argued cases. We will consider those cases when they are presented and take matters forward from there. It would not be appropriate for us to act without understanding the choices that are before us. We have made our priority clear, particularly in the strategic plan that was published last week by the Strategic Rail Authority. That plan identifies rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports as being of strategic importance from a UK perspective as well as from a Scottish perspective.

We will find the parliamentary time that is required to make progress on such schemes when they come in—I assume that that is the essence of Sandra White's question. We have said that they are strategic priorities. We are not prejudging the studies on rail links, which will consider several options in relation to both airports. It would not be right for us to prejudge that work.

I am sorry that Mr Aitken takes the view that no progress is being made. We are expecting the consultants' initial report on the rail links to airports in the next few weeks. We expect to receive their final report in the course of the year. We will make rational judgments that are based on the evidence before we make choices about which strategic priorities will deliver the best value for money for the Executive and the best services for passengers throughout Scotland.

I thank Robin Harper for framing the debate in terms of the link that sustainable development provides between the environment, and the economy and employment. As he points out, sustainable development must cut across government, which is why the Executive's response will address a range of issues under different ministerial portfolios. I shall focus on some of the issues that Robin Harper has raised in the areas of employment, enterprise and transport. There are two good reasons for having the debate. First, it is often forgotten that there is a strong link between employment and the environment and—worse—it is falsely assumed that better environmental standards inevitably mean constraints on business and fewer jobs. Secondly, the Scottish Executive has a good story to tell on employment in general, especially on employment related to environmental improvement. The first principle in ensuring high  and sustainable levels of employment is to create a strong economic environment. That has been a priority for the Scottish Executive working in partnership with the UK Government. As a result, the economic fundamentals in Scotland and the UK are good and we have seen the longest period of sustained low inflation since the 1960s. The base rate is at its lowest level for nearly 40 years and the claimant count for unemployment is at around its lowest level for 25 years. While striving to ensure high levels of economic activity and employment, we must protect the environment and take advantage of the employment opportunities that it offers. One of the key aims of the Executive's "The Way Forward: Framework for Economic Development in Scotland" is to promote social and regional development and sustainability. The environment business sector, worldwide, is potentially larger than that of aerospace and pharmaceuticals, and it continues to grow at a faster rate than the economy as a whole. It is therefore vital that we target some of our employment creation efforts at harnessing part of that growth to benefit Scotland. We have undertaken to do that. The Scottish welfare to work advisory task force has already established an energy and environment sub-group that is chaired by Raymond Young, one of the Scottish members of the Sustainable Development Commission. That group aims to increase the number of long-term unemployed people who are going into industries such as recycling and renewable energy by identifying skills gaps and appropriate opportunities.

Some of the comments that I have made point in that direction. The group that I described aims to develop employer-led routes into employment and to initiate local partnerships to deliver them. There are other aspects of that policy that I shall come to shortly. The delivery of the group's objectives will be supported by the "jobs in the environment" support unit to be established by Forward Scotland, which has obtained £250,000 in private funding from BP over three years. Forward Scotland is a charitable body, part-funded by the Executive through the sustainable action fund that is designed to promote sustainable development in Scotland by creating such opportunities.

I understand that regulations are in place, but that there are some issues relating to small businesses that Mr Finnie will address in his wind-up speech. He will give you a response then. The "jobs in the environment" support unit has prepared an initial report that identifies potential employment opportunities in the renewable energy industries—wind power, biomass, landfill gas, hydro and wave energy—and our enterprise initiatives will assist in pointing people in that direction and supporting the development of the industries that Sylvia Jackson described. Robin Harper also recognised the importance for the economy, as well as for the environment, of having an integrated transport policy. There are good opportunities in the expansion of rail and bus transport, which are primary tools in tackling the challenge posed by growing levels of urban and inter-urban traffic congestion. The motion mentions an imbalance between road and rail expenditure, which was the position that we inherited from the Conservatives. In 1996-97, motorways and trunk roads expenditure accounted for some 87.5 per cent of Scottish Office transport expenditure. By 2003-04—the end of this spending round—our spending plans will show that that figure has fallen to less than half of comparable spending, even though our roads expenditure will remain at the same level in real terms. In other words, we have corrected the imbalance, not by neglecting our trunk road network, but by massively increasing our spending on public transport and other initiatives to ensure that we strike the right balance. From this financial year onwards, we are also taking on responsibility for the Scottish rail passenger franchise Traffic congestion is an environmental issue, but it is also an economic issue because it has a major impact on competitiveness. Congestion costs Scottish businesses many millions of pounds every year. We are committed to tackling congestion for the sake of the environment and to protect businesses and jobs. For example, we are working towards the target of removing 18 million lorry miles of freight from Scottish roads by March, through the freight facilities grant. Before today, we had announced awards totalling some £27.6 million, removing 13.4 million lorry miles from Scotland's roads. We will continue to build on that. This morning, I have announced a further grant of  more than £250,000 to Thurso Business Supplies, which will allow expansion of its premises at Station Yard, Thurso. Although that award is modest in size, compared with some of the really large projects elsewhere, removing those lorry miles from the roads of Caithness will bring immediate benefits to a relatively remote area of ecological importance. There are many opportunities, through the freight facilities grant and other methods, to tackle congestion and remove some of the negative environmental effects of Scotland's traffic system. Renewable energy is key not only to the reduction of climate change gases, but to industrial opportunity. The same is true for energy efficiency. Through the warm deal and the central heating programme, many jobs have been created and many gains have been made in improving the energy efficiency of Scotland's homes. Those schemes demonstrate our commitment to sustainable development, to helping low-income households, and to benefiting the environment and creating jobs. Working in partnership with the UK Government, we have created the right economic environment to stimulate employment. We have identified the environment business sector as a key growth area and we are working to encourage job creation in that sector. The Executive has supported and stimulated key initiatives to address social inclusion, employment and the environment. I move amendment S1M-2635.3, to leave out from the first "recognises" to end and insert: "congratulates the Executive on the progress made in integrating sustainable development at the heart of its policy-making and supports the Executive in stimulating environmentally sustainable employment."

I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing the debate. I am grateful for the opportunity to address some of the ways in which we can secure a continuing, prominent role for Aberdeen and its people in global energy industries, now and for a long time to come. A number of members have reminded us of the importance of that role over the past 30 years. Aberdeen is the acknowledged oil and gas capital of Europe. About 40,000 people are directly employed in the oil and gas industry in the north-east. As has been made clear this week, there is still as much oil and gas under the North sea as has been exploited already. There is no doubt that the industry will continue to make a major contribution to the economy of Scotland and the UK for many years to come. A number of members dwelt at length on their views on the devolution settlement and made some suggestions on that. They are entitled to those views, which are well known, but I want to focus on the issues that arise in areas for which Scottish ministers are responsible. I agree that modern transport and  telecommunications are of great importance to the future of Aberdeen and the oil and gas industry. I have no doubt that many of those in the chamber will gather again to debate those issues at more length in future—I will be happy to respond to such a debate. Suffice it to say that ministers will continue to work with NESTRANS—the north-east Scotland transport partnership, which comprises the north-east's local councils and businesses—as the partnership takes forward its proposals for a modern transport system. The Executive will continue to recognise the importance of the link between energy and transport. Focusing on energy issues, there is no doubt that there are challenges ahead—in particular the challenge of skills shortages—as the technology of the industry develops. That has been mentioned by a number of members. The role of OPITO—the Offshore Petroleum Industry Training Organisation—has been mentioned and I am sure that members will be aware that proposals are being developed for a new sector skills council for the oil and gas sector to address some of those issues. The council, worked out jointly by the Executive and the UK Government, is trailblazing the new provision of training organisations throughout the UK. The point of that is to attract the new recruits that are required in an industry that has a long-term future and is in transition, but not in decline. Everyone who spoke tonight recognised the fact that this is an industry with a long future.

I had moved on from that point, but no doubt there will be many opportunities to address precisely those points in future.

Absolutely. I will move on to that point, but I do not want to diminish any of the other issues that are important. Aberdeen companies, large and small, have demonstrated that they are capable of rising to the challenges of developing the oil and gas industry and developing some of the technologies into other areas of opportunity. They are well placed and highly capable of diversifying into the exciting new opportunities that are offered by those renewable energy technologies. Companies such as Shell and BP have been  clear about their commitment to such diversification as a way forward. Many other Scottish-based companies are also showing a strong interest in investing in, and diversifying into, renewable energy. Several Aberdeen-based companies are on board for those things and renewable energy developments are already in the planning process in the north-east, both onshore and offshore. That augurs well for the future. The Executive is pursuing a number of distinct strategies. Responsibility for oil and gas is reserved to Westminster, but we work closely with the Department of Trade and Industry on a range of issues. As Alasdair Morrison said, he used to sit—as I now sit—as vice-chair of Pilot, the joint Government-industry working group that is helping the industry to maintain momentum.

I will say more on both those points in a moment. It is worth noting at this stage that the north-east's fiscal stability, to which a number of members have referred, has been one of the main achievements of Pilot. That is a product of the strategy that was worked out by the UK Government in association with the Scottish Executive.

If Mr Harper does not mind, I want to make a little progress with my speech and respond to some of the points that have been made. It is also worth noting that, in the past two or three years, there has been a significant shift in jobs in the industry to Aberdeen from elsewhere in the United Kingdom, in both the public and the private sector. I have no doubt that that trend will continue. Let me turn to the opportunities that are presented by renewable energy. Under the Scottish climate change programme, we plan a big increase in renewable energy to help meet the UK goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. We will introduce the renewables obligation Scotland, which we expect to come into force in April, to implement that big increase. The prospect of the renewables obligation is creating a strong demand for renewable energy, which is good for the environment and good for business. It is creating demand for new goods and services in what will  be an industry of the future. Aberdeen and Scotland are well placed to exploit that demand. A good example of that is the potential to convert end-of-life oil fields to offshore wind farms. That may be what Mr Harper had in mind when he intervened. My officials have been in discussion with oil company executives who are considering ways of exploring that possibility. Some of those plans are already at a well-developed stage and there is good expectation that they will become a commercial reality in the not-too-distant future. It is the prospect of the renewables obligation Scotland that is making those plans so commercially attractive.

It is not often that the Green party responds to points from the SNP, but I welcome Robin Harper's important comment, which exemplifies the fact that the areas for which we are responsible are the areas in which we are seeking growth and development. We work through the Scottish Enterprise energy group in Aberdeen to ensure that our companies can compete for the resulting manufacturing opportunities.

I want to use the remainder of my time to address that important issue, which a number of members have raised. We must take the opportunities that exist in renewable energy and diversification. Energy research and development are critical to that. It has been said that Scottish companies and universities already lead in research on, and development of, subsea technology and in maintaining structures that are able to withstand the worst offshore weather. The successful exploitation of offshore renewable energy potential will depend on developing such ideas. The Executive is determined that those ideas are commercialised here and generate prosperity for Scotland—that is why we support the marine energy test centre in Orkney and why are exploring new mechanisms to maximise the return on research and development investment. Scottish Enterprise is considering intermediary bodies around the world that assist with  technology transfer to enable research to be commercialised locally. It is also considering how we can learn from them to develop schemes here. Scottish Enterprise's aim is to quantify the benefit of such institutes and focus on key market areas, such as energy, in which Scotland has a strong research and commercial base. The proposals are still at an early stage, but if they proceed, an energy intermediary technology institute could be established as an invaluable resource for energy companies throughout Scotland as they seek to maximise the remaining North sea reserves and diversify into the renewables sector. We are considering such proposals closely. Should they go ahead, they will send out a clear message to manufacturers and suppliers about the long-term prospects for the energy economy of Aberdeen and Scotland and will lead to continued financial benefits for the communities involved. There will be continued business opportunities for energy companies and a more sustainable future energy supply for all of us. Without the Executive's intervention, there would not be such diversification. In partnership with energy companies and the UK Government, our efforts will be directed to continuing to diversify and develop potential. There is great potential in Scotland for the renewable energy sector and we can build on the strengths of oil and gas. Aberdeen and Scotland are well placed to exploit that potential and will continue to do so. In that way, Aberdeen's position as the recognised energy capital of Europe will be continued.  Meeting closed at 18:12.

The maintenance of local roads is a matter for local authorities, but we welcome the closer co-operation that was recently agreed between the Highland Council and BEAR Scotland Ltd.

Lessons are being learned on all sides from the winter conditions that occurred. I am pleased that the Highland Council met BEAR Scotland Ltd and that it has agreed to shared use of strategic depots, equipment and facilities. That is the right way to go. I will meet councils from throughout Scotland later this month and talk to them about the relationship between trunk road and non-trunk road maintenance. I am sure that we will pursue some of those ideas further then.

Maureen Macmillan should take that matter up with the local authority. The way in which it chooses to fund such works is a matter for the local authority. Short of trunking the pavements around Scotland, I have little to offer on that question. However, clearing footpaths is one of the issues that have been addressed of late by local authorities and the trunk road operators in dealing with their responsibilities.

I regard it as sensible for those who are responsible for trunk roads and those who are responsible for local roads to co-operate. That is beginning to happen in the Highland Council area and I expect that other councils will see fit to follow that route in due course. We all have an interest in ensuring that we have unhindered means of travel and communication during winter weather. The best way to achieve that is through partnership between those who are responsible for the two different types of road.

The A890 is a local road and is therefore a matter for the Highland Council, which is the local roads authority for the area.

I noted John Farquhar Munro's suggestion during yesterday evening's members' business debate on Alasdair Morrison's motion on renewable energy. I welcome the member's support of the principle that integrated transport and energy schemes should be developed where possible. Mr Munro will probably be aware that the Highland Council has already met Railtrack to discuss possible options for long-term joint solutions to the problem, which affects both road and rail travel on that route. I understand that there are technical difficulties in pursuing a joint solution, but I know that all the options are being considered. My officials will certainly stand ready with practical advice for both parties if that can be of assistance in taking the matter forward.

Will Mr Russell give way?

rose—

Members will recall that Kenny MacAskill's party previously chose to debate the subject of Scotland's railways last October. Of course, at that time, Mr MacAskill was not his party's transport spokesperson. I believe that he has held the position before and has recently been recycled. I welcome him back to his role. I also welcome the Tory party's latest manifestation of a front-bench transport spokesperson and look forward to the continuing debates around the issues and points that both members have raised today. It is striking that the SNP previously raised the matter in the week when the previous round of public transport funding announcements were made, which formed the largest-ever single investment in transport in Scotland. For this debate, the SNP has chosen the week of the publication of the SRA's strategic plan. Again, I welcome the timing. That document sets out exactly the kind of vision and strategy that will be required to develop our railway system over the next few years.  In contrast to the SNP's approach to the matter, the meetings that Wendy Alexander had this week with the UK Government and the chief executives of Railtrack and the SRA are evidence of our partnership approach to the GB rail network. By engaging with our partners in such a way, we can secure the outcomes that we desire regarding ownership and management of the whole rail network. That protect the interests of Scottish rail users.

As the Conservatives pointed out, the key question is what input we have. Unlike the SNP, we choose to have input. The discussions yesterday were designed to secure the outcomes that we require in the disposal of Railtrack when it comes out of administration. Let us be clear: the strategic plan of the SRA reflects the rising priority that is being given to transport which, as Des McNulty said, is common to the UK Government and the Scottish Executive.

On behalf of Scottish rail users, we have been contributing to the development of the plan throughout its drafting. The plan is the first long-term plan for the expansion of the railway network in Scotland for more than 40 years. It makes clear the priority that is given by the SRA to major strategic projects—not just projects such as Waverley station and rail links to airports, important though those are, but other major strategic projects. Several members have highlighted the importance of rail in the central Scotland corridor between Glasgow and Edinburgh. It is important to acknowledge that the multimodal studies that we have commissioned, which will report later in the year, are also referred to and taken into account in the plan. Those studies will influence the decisions that remain to be made about the Glasgow to Edinburgh lines.

I am conscious of the time and I want to respond to some other points that were made. Several members, including Mr MacAskill, raised the question of the Aberdeen to Inverness main line and the question of the passing loop on that line. That is also mentioned in the strategic plan as  a project and its completion is expected in 2006-07. The upgrading of the Forth rail bridge has been mentioned, and diverting freight traffic by provision of the Alloa to Stirling line has benefits for rail travellers to Edinburgh from the north of Scotland. Today's GNER announcement also contains a commitment to multimillion pound investment in rolling stock and increased train length from Edinburgh to Inverness and Aberdeen.

I am conscious of the need to talk to the railway companies about the best and most appropriate locomotives to use on all the franchises for which we have responsibility. I do not agree with Mr Adam that Turbostar diesels do not work on the east coast and Inverness lines; they have been responsible for significant journey-time savings and offer the possibility of further such savings. Technology moves on and the requirements that we place on the companies must move with it. Robin Harper asked a question about lines other than that from Larkhall to Milngavie. All the projects continue to be pursued by ministers. Three of them are referred to specifically in the Strategic Rail Authority's plan and the fourth is being developed with support from the public transport fund. The Borders rail link and the Waverley line have also been mentioned. Members who have an interest in that project will be aware that the ball is firmly in the court of the project managers who were appointed by the Scottish Borders Council on the basis of support from the Executive. Members will also be aware that our officials will meet those project managers later this month. We will address a series of further enhancements in the directions and guidance on the ScotRail franchise and on crossrail franchises as those are rolled out.

Mr Tosh will know that a series of projects is being developed which will feed into Waverley station and that the announcement that we have made today, about Waverley is important. If Mr Tosh writes to me on  that matter, I shall be happy to address it in detail. We have a clear vision for Scotland's rail network as a safer, better and bigger railway. That will be achieved through our working in partnership with the Strategic Rail Authority and the other stakeholders. The strategic plan that was published on Monday charts a way forward in addressing decades of underinvestment in railways. It focuses on delivering sustained change over time by means of short-term, medium-term and long-term improvements. More locally, we will continue to work closely with ScotRail, Railtrack and the transport authorities to ensure the delivery of key projects that will bring benefits throughout Scotland. When the Scottish Parliament last debated railways, in October, I said that we needed to give Scottish passengers the rail service that they deserve. With the SRA's new plan and our commitment to the delivery of it and local schemes, we are seeing the start of that process.

Will Mr Wilson tell us his policy on the ownership of the infrastructure in Scotland? He has talked about his trust. Does he intend to take the infrastructure of the railway industry in Scotland into public ownership? That was not at all clear from his comments.

Perhaps Ms White can tell us what Kenny MacAskill was unable to: what level of investment would her party promise?

The Scottish Executive is responsible for the maintenance and improvement of the trunk road network and places great importance on protecting communities in Midlothian from the effects of heavy traffic.

I agree with Rhona Brankin that there are a number of areas in which public expenditure and support can help to tackle traffic congestion in the way that she described. She will be aware of the substantial support from the Scottish Executive for the reintroduction of the Waverley line. We recognise its importance for Midlothian as well as for communities that are further south. The Dalkeith bypass proposal emerged at the time of the strategic roads review in 1999 and was deferred at that time. It stands to be considered with other identified schemes in due course. Representatives of Pathhead community council met my officials to discuss pedestrian crossings and were invited to return with specific proposals. When they do so, the proposals will be considered sympathetically and timeously.

I am well aware of that issue. As Christine Grahame said, there was a parliamentary debate yesterday evening on buses in Edinburgh. It was striking that neither Kenny MacAskill nor his SNP colleagues were able to propose an alternative to the propositions that were introduced in the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001, which are bus partnerships, quality partnerships and quality contracts for bus services. I was able to recommend that local authorities in Lothian should consider carefully how they should use those measures to improve services for passengers.

I will be more specific. As Mr Tosh will be aware, our roads programme is fully committed until 2004. Then, the Dalkeith proposal and other deferred proposals will be considered along with other emerging priorities in the road transport system. I appreciate the impact on Midlothian of economic development in the Borders. That is why we have given the support that we have to the Waverley line project. We will consider that further when the promoters reach the next stage.

I am glad to have the opportunity to address the issues  that Kenny MacAskill raised in his motion. I will start by outlining where responsibilities lie with regard to the current situation in the Edinburgh bus market. Members will understand that responsibility for competition policy does not lie with the Scottish Parliament or with Scottish ministers but, as has been said, with the Office of Fair Trading. Following a complaint of predatory practice, the OFT launched a formal investigation. That investigation is expected to conclude in the spring of this year. It will be for the OFT to come to informed conclusions on the competition aspects of the situation in Edinburgh.

Certainly.

It is important to say that the competition aspects are the responsibility of the OFT. It is entirely appropriate that the OFT should investigate the complaints. I hope that it will do so as quickly as it can. I would also expect it do so thoroughly and to take into account the evidence before it. That responsibility lies with the OFT. Responsibility for the rules and regulations governing the registration of local bus services lies with the traffic commissioner, who works within a legal framework set by Scottish ministers. Under regulations made in July 2001, Scottish ministers require bus operators to notify local councils of changes in services. I can verify that neither the traffic commissioner nor the City of Edinburgh Council has reported any instance where those regulations have been breached. If that should happen, the commissioner has powers to block any proposed changes in service provision. We would expect him to use those powers, were those regulations to be breached. As has been said, Edinburgh is a jewel in the crown of the Scottish bus industry. The city has a large network of services that are well used and one of the highest per capita levels of bus service use among the towns and cities of the United Kingdom. It continues to be a centre of buoyant economic growth, creating the possibility of further  growth in bus use. The benefit of improved bus service provision was being demonstrated to great effect in Edinburgh even before the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 with the completion of many greenways and plans for more. The Executive has made more than £15 million available to the city to pursue bus priority initiatives. The greenways have proved that a combination of high-quality buses and bus priority measures to move buses quickly through traffic congestion will help to get people out of their cars, reducing congestion and improving air quality. A number of speakers have referred to the need for an integrated transport network for the 21 st century. That is a high priority in Edinburgh and throughout Scotland. Margaret Smith mentioned an earlier through-ticketing initiative that did not reach fruition, but it is important that we acknowledge the fact that Lothian Buses and FirstGroup work together on a number of initiatives to promote bus use in the city. In spite of the competition between them, the two operators are currently discussing a new joint ticketing initiative under the auspices of the regional transport partnership, SESTRANS. If those discussions are successful, they will allow passengers with a ticket for either company to access services provided by the other and bring about a significant step forward in public transport integration in the SESTRANS area. I hope that those discussions are successful and that joint ticketing can be introduced in the near future.

I noted the member's earlier remarks. The discussions to which she refers and those that have recently got under way are separate, although they are aimed at the same outcome. The reason for developing joint ticketing initiatives, which are being considered further even as we speak, is to encourage the necessary modal shift from car to public transport. I agree with Sarah Boyack that we need to keep concerns about congestion and the pollution caused by buses in perspective. They have to be put in the context of the car congestion and pollution that can be avoided if more people catch the bus. Traffic commissioners have long had power to apply traffic regulation conditions to cover the routes of bus services and stopping places on the basis of criteria such as road safety and traffic  congestion. The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 amended those powers to add a further criterion for making a traffic regulation condition to include the reduction or limitation of noise or air pollution. I hope that that will go some way to address that issue generally. In the Executive's view, adequate powers exist to limit the congestion and pollution effects of increased bus provision. The areas in which ministers have acted to improve local bus services are far wider than that. I am glad that Susan Deacon and others have paid tribute to the work of Sarah Boyack in introducing those provisions under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. The act contains powers on road user charging, which City of Edinburgh Council is pursuing, and a whole raft of new powers in relation to local bus services. Those powers allow local councils to make quality partnership schemes, ensuring that only high-quality buses are used, and to make quality contract schemes, effectively allowing councils to undertake wholesale contracting of local bus services, subject to ministerial approval. Councils can also decide what information should be made available and can charge bus operators for the cost of doing so if they do not deliver what is required. The act also requires bus operators to establish joint ticketing schemes.

The objective of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 is to preserve and improve services for passengers. Quality contracts are designed to do precisely that and to give local authorities the powers to effectively and substantially reregulate certain services, if they so wish, to achieve that objective. In addition, we tightened up the registration requirements that bus operators must observe. As I said, we updated those in July. Operators must now inform local authorities 10 weeks in advance of any proposed service changes, and must also give 21 days' notice to the public of any such changes. In addition, the 2001 act requires new or amended services to operate for a minimum of 90 days from commencement, except in exceptional circumstances. Our bus policy is based on a partnership approach. We want to encourage councils and bus operators to work together to deliver high-quality services to bus users. Quality partnerships and quality contracts represent a step change in policy in comparison to what went before. It is for local authorities to determine how best to meet their local transport  strategy objectives for buses through use of the new powers. The 2001 act gives City of Edinburgh Council, and every other council in the country, a greater say in how to deliver those services, and it assists in promoting a bus-friendly environment. However, there are also circumstances where bus operators are not willing or able to deliver a suitable and satisfactory level of service within the framework of the partnership approach. That is where quality contracts come in. We have consistently said that our first preference is for a partnership approach, but we have made it clear that if that approach does not deliver the required improvements, quality contracts are there to be used. I listened closely to members' speeches to discover what alternative to quality contracts the SNP had in mind. Regulation with competition was what one member suggested. I believe that that is precisely what quality contracts can provide. A quality contract allows a local authority to specify either the whole or part of a bus network in its area, including what local bus services should be provided, what fares should be charged and the standard of buses to be used. That would allow bus operators to bid for exclusive rights to provide those services in that context. The Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 enables councils to take control of the bus market through the use of quality contracts, providing that approval is sought from and given by Scottish ministers. As Susan Deacon requested, we are on record as having said that we would do that timeously. We do so because we believe that it is an appropriate way to progress. We believe that we have increased the role of local authorities in the provision of services to facilitate better and more reliable services. We have provided a framework whereby local authorities and bus operators can work to achieve that, either through partnership or through quality contracts. I look to the City of Edinburgh Council, and to every other council in the country, to make full use of those powers as appropriate to improve bus services for all.  Meeting closed at 18:09.

Mr MacAskill did not spell out for us the difference between the re-regulation that Fiona Hyslop described and the quality contracts that have been introduced under the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001. I would be interested to hear whether Fiona Hyslop could spell out the difference.

Steps have already been taken by Caledonian MacBrayne to limit the impact of strike action on those communities. The company has increased its Claonaig-Lochranza service from the normal one service per day at this time of the year to a schedule of 14 return services per day. The regular shuttle service between Colintraive and Rhubodach on Bute continues to operate. On both routes, there has been spare capacity on the great majority of sailings so far. We stand ready, of course, to implement plans for connecting bus services should that prove necessary. We understand that, contrary to some reports, supermarket shelves in Arran and Bute remain well stocked and that there are no problems in carrying food and other essential supplies to both islands. We recognise that the strike is damaging to local economies and communities. CalMac has, throughout the dispute, made itself available for talks with the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers. I understand that further talks are taking place this afternoon on the company's initiative. I hope that a sensible and affordable solution that is acceptable to the company and RMT can be agreed. The negotiations are a matter for CalMac and RMT. Our role on CalMac is clear: we provide a pay remit, which has allowed the company to offer increases of up to 3.5 per cent for this year and next year. Other pay groups in the company, including a number that are represented by the same union, have accepted those offers. I urge an early resolution to this dispute to put the interests of islanders first.

Of course I understand the impact on the communities that are involved. George Lyon, Allan Wilson and Duncan McNeil, who all have constituency interests, have not hesitated to draw them to my attention. I am as aware of them as the company and others involved are. If Mr Hamilton had listened to my initial answer for its full length, he would have understood that a meeting is taking place this afternoon between the company and the union. That is as it should be. Yes, Caledonian MacBrayne is wholly owned by Scottish ministers. Nonetheless, it would not be appropriate for ministers to interfere in operational matters such as industrial relations. It is not necessary. As employers, they have the responsibility to negotiate with their employees. The union has the same responsibility to negotiate on behalf of their members.

I acknowledge the force of that point and I know that, over the past couple of days, a number of buses have been provided by operators of their own volition. That is welcome. We are monitoring the situation closely and, at this stage, we are not aware of any foot passengers being stranded at any of the terminals. Clearly, we would act if that was the case. Because talks are continuing, we are keeping an eye on developments and the demand. We will act. We are talking with the relevant transport authorities. Contingency plans have been drawn  up, are in place and will be put into action should the need arise.

On Monday 10 December 2001.

I hesitate to answer the question, because it is clear that Mr Morgan already knows the answer. I met him to discuss the matter last week and he will be aware that Executive officials are meeting the north channel partnership and other interested parties to discuss possible variation in the proposed schemes. We expect further schemes to be proposed for our consideration, which will allow better overtaking opportunities on the roads closer to the port. That will begin to address some of the issues that Mr Morgan raised. The proposals must be within the budget that we have set for schemes on those roads. We recognise the importance of such schemes and we want the schemes that we develop to be those that are best suited to reducing journey times and improving safety on routes.

We are setting a theme for this week. Mr Fergusson raised that point with me when we met last week to discuss Stranraer's position. The Executive has made it clear that its priorities will be set by that area's transport needs. We will make maximum use of our resources and continue to examine the options for overtaking opportunities on the routes in question.

No. We will set out our preferred options for future fares policy on the Clyde and Western Isles ferry services when we consult on the draft service specification for those routes early in 2002.

The best service that we can offer to people in Scotland's islands, particularly those that are served by Caledonian MacBrayne, is to turn our attention to focusing the efforts that are being made by that company on achieving continuity of the existing services and securing those services within the framework that has been set by the recent European Commission regulation. It is quite clear that the road equivalent tariff, which the member described, would require substantial alteration in the fare structure of the company just at a time when it and the people whom it serves most require stability and security of service. I would welcome the support of Mr Hamilton's party and of everyone else in the Parliament for efforts to secure continuity of service under the CalMac franchise.

I am aware of the developments on the Clyde involving CalMac crews; I have been kept fully informed of those developments. We have set in train preparations for the organisation of contingency services, for which we are responsible. Those arrangements are well advanced. I share Mr Lyon's hope that matters will be resolved before Monday—I hope that common sense will prevail and that people will get on and deliver the quality of service that customers are entitled to expect.

Certainly, I could not disagree that schemes that substantially increase subsidy to island services would be welcomed in the islands. The job of Government is to strike the right balance between providing such support for lifeline services and achieving value for money for the taxpayer. CalMac's current turnover is in the region of £60 million. Thanks to the efforts made by the Executive, CalMac services are supported to the tune of more than £20 million. I believe that that strikes the right balance between subsidy and the needs of the taxpayer.

The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with Railtrack on a wide range of issues, including those four projects. We are keen to see the projects taken forward.

We are in discussion with Railtrack and others on these matters. As Mr McNeil said, there is concern regarding the availability of signalling resources. That concern is not confined to the Gourock project, or even to Scottish projects, but is more widespread. We are asking Railtrack and the other interested parties to consider how best they can ensure that the projects are dealt with. We recognise the importance of safety considerations and of ensuring that signalling engineering resources are put first where they are most urgently needed. We do not think that any of the four projects in Scotland should be set to one side and we will continue to work with Railtrack and the other interested parties on that basis. With regard to Gourock, we recognise that the gap between what is needed and what is available is quite small and we will work hard with the developers and the other interested parties to ensure that that gap is filled.

That is another example of a questioner knowing the answer before asking the question. No, I do not agree with Andrew Wilson. The important thing that we have to attend to is ensuring that Scottish interests and the interests of Scottish stakeholders are fully represented, whatever the outcome of the discussions on the future of Railtrack. That is not a matter of starting off with one fixed ideological position and sticking to it regardless; it is a matter of discussing and negotiating to ensure that we get the best possible outcome for Scottish passengers and rail users.

I am aware of that project and the Scottish Executive wants progress to be made on it, as well as on the other projects that have been mentioned. We have pursued the matter with colleagues at Westminster and with the Strategic Rail Authority. In the case of the Aberdeen crossrail project, an input into the feasibility study stage is required. The Executive has already made a financial investment in realising an outcome to the project. We want that project to succeed and that money to provide the right return. We will continue to talk with all relevant parties, at Westminster and elsewhere, to achieve that end.

We have laid out our priorities for rail investment. We will pursue those priorities, but we are of course open to suggestions on other priorities further down the track.

We will continue to discuss the whole range of issues on which we have given commitments in the past. The member's question is of particular relevance to the proposal to reopen the Stirling-Alloa-Clackmannan line, which has particular relevance to the Forth rail bridge and to rail traffic on that route. That is among the priorities that I have described and which we will continue to pursue.

Our consultants are continuing their appraisal of potential crossings upstream of the existing Kincardine bridge, and expect to submit their report next spring.

We have made a commitment on the construction of the new bridge at a value, as Mr Raffan knows, of £50 million. We are therefore keen to ensure that we get the design and route right. The data have been collected and are now being processed by consultants. We expect further steps forward in that process in the course of the coming year.

Rather than increasing the number of options, we have narrowed it down to two. Those two are the options that our consultants are considering at the moment. We wish to begin construction as soon as we are in a position to do so, but we will not rush the design  stage. We know from previous transport projects that it is important to get things right at the beginning. We will seek to do that.

I am aware that one of the two options that we are considering involves the village of Airth. We will consider carefully the views from that area that have already been expressed to us. If Mrs Peattie is reflecting a sense that people in that community have not had full access to the process, I will certainly address that matter.

A draft surveillance report has been prepared by BEAR Scotland, and my officials are awaiting comments from interested parties before it is finalised. We aim to place a copy of the finalised report in the Scottish Parliament information centre by mid-January 2002.

The member will be aware that Sarah Boyack, the former Minister for Transport and Planning, recently met the constituency member, John Swinney, representatives of the local community council and other interested parties. We will continue to keep in touch with all those with an interest in the matter. I await BEAR's report with interest, and will then decide whether a further visit to the site is required. In any case, we will be guided by that report on the actions that we feel to be necessary.

We will consider critically the evidence given by all parties that are commenting on the results of the surveillance, but I stress that the surveillance is being carried out for a purpose, which we are broadly satisfied has been achieved—measuring the traffic movement at the junction to find ways to improve safety. We have installed a new camera, as the members who have an interest in the matter will know, and we have again moved the location of the camera facing the southbound carriageway in order to increase its effectiveness. I believe that the surveillance report will be comprehensive and will give us a good indication of the options. I await it with interest and will act upon it.

Mr Munro has broadened the question, but I am happy to answer that we are considering a number of options for the A9, and that a review of the A9 route action plan is under way. Another proposal that we are considering is the establishment of an A9 road safety group, to participate in which we would invite persons and parties with an interest in road safety matters concerning the route. We have commissioned a detailed accident analysis for the road, and expect that report very shortly.

The Scottish Executive is supporting a number of multimodal interchange projects across Scotland through the Public Transport Fund.

I am aware of the proposal and of the application, which, I understand, has passed the prequalification stage for support from the Strategic Rail Authority. However, the SRA is seeking clarification from Strathclyde Passenger Transport on several points. I expect to meet the chief executive of the SRA shortly and I will encourage him to seek early progress on that project and several others.

It is worth pointing out to Andrew Wilson that the proposal—as Karen Whitefield has described—is for a bus link between railway stations. That recognises the fact that we need effective integration of different modes of public transport. We will encourage that to go ahead by promoting partnerships among the public authorities involved.

Mr Canavan asks a perfectly reasonable question about the delay over indemnity. The delay prior to 4 September arose partly from the death of one of the trustees. The indemnity was to named trustees, so clearly that caused some delay. The delay since 4 September does indeed relate to trustees' concerns about their legal position. I am not in a position to speak for them, but it is clearly a responsibility of all trustees of pension funds to ensure that they have proper legal cover before they take any action. I am keen that they should take action quickly and that their legal advice should lead them to that conclusion without any further delay.

Mr Canavan is absolutely right in his arithmetic. I can confirm that achieving that degree of equity for individuals was the basis of the calculation. Had the rules in Scotland been the same as the rules in England, the position would have been quite different and that surplus would have belonged to the members. According to our best legal judgment on the matter, it did not belong to the members. As Mr Canavan has said, that is yet to be tested. Given the comments made by other colleagues, I do not believe that testing that at this stage would be in the interests of the pensioners.

I will start by addressing the question of ministerial discretion and Government rules, which a number of members have raised during the debate. The Scottish ministers took a decision, on the ground of equity, to seek ex gratia payments and thereby to make pay-outs to members of the pension scheme. Taking that initiative lay within our discretion and, in so doing, we secured the agreement of the Treasury—the legal owners of the fund—after long and complicated negotiations. That action secured the £100 million that was agreed and announced a year ago. We have repeated that process over the past few days and have secured further ex gratia payments of £18 million.

Given the shortness of the debate, I must press on and answer the points that have been made. It has been said that the payments amount to 40  per cent of the total surplus. Let me remind members that one third of the surplus was already paid out some years ago. Therefore, as soon as we have the opportunity to do so, and as soon as the trustees complete their role, we intend to pay out an amount that will be equal to or greater than the share of the surplus that was paid out south of the border. The amount will also be more per head than is available to English pensioners. We intervened directly with the UK Government to secure an outcome for Scottish Transport Group pensioners that would be as least as good as that which was secured by their English counterparts. The £100 million was calculated on that basis. That amount was agreed on the basis that the average sum for each pensioner in Scotland would be at least equivalent to the average sum for pensioners in England. In addition, as members know from today's announcement, £18 million has been negotiated, which is on top of the entitlements and enhancements that were secured in previous years. The Executive has recognised the arguments for equity. On the basis of those arguments, we have taken a political initiative to secure the funding. To do that, we have carried out each stage of the process that was within our power as quickly as it was possible to do so. Following the recent approval to receive the surplus from the Scottish Transport Group, as provided by the Budget (Scotland) Act 2001 (Amendment) Order 2001, we now require the trustees to wind up the business and the pension schemes.

I indicated in my opening remarks that the pension scheme surplus is expected to increase by £18 million by the end of the financial year. That £18 million is the additional sum that we intend to disburse to pensioners. We are currently waiting for the trustees to wind up the pension schemes. Until they do that, nothing more can be done in terms of paying the money out. Although it would be nice to make interim payments at the earliest possible date, we clearly cannot pay out the money until we have received it. We do not control the process of winding up the schemes, but we continue to maintain pressure on the trustees to carry out their responsibility by bringing the schemes to an end so that the money can be transferred to us and distributed to the pensioners. We have finalised our proposed criteria, which will be published shortly. The criteria have been discussed in detail with the Transport and General  Workers Union. The TGWU, which represents more than 90 per cent of those involved, has expressed its support for the criteria. On that basis, we believe that the criteria are sound, but we await one or two further comments before making them public. When we do so, I think that the pensioners will see that the process that has been put in place is appropriate and suitable. An opportunity to follow and understand that process will be made available to members of the trade unions involved, members of the action committees and others. That briefing will be arranged shortly. I give Sylvia Jackson my assurance that Wendy Alexander and I will keep a close eye on how the matter proceeds. We will ensure that there is no further delay in the process. Today, I call on the trustees to complete their process so that we can carry out ours.

I am glad to have the opportunity to address the issues around the STG pension schemes; to respond to concerns expressed by members of all parties; and to set out the progress that has been made and what must happen next. In passing, I refer to Mr Ewing's ungallant comments about my colleague Wendy Alexander. Members from the Falkirk and Stirling areas who are interested in this debate will be well aware of potential job losses at Grangemouth and of the meetings in which Wendy Alexander has been participating with the staff, the work force, the local MSP Cathy Peattie and Alex Neil, the convener of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee. I am disappointed that Fergus Ewing was not aware of them. In addressing the substance of the matter, I start with the ways in which the Scottish schemes differ from those south of the border. The differences are important, although the reasons for them are certainly obscure. When the pension schemes were set up many years ago, there was no expectation that the companies concerned would be privatised and that the schemes would require to be wound up. Because of that, when the schemes were established, their focus was on benefits to members, not on the procedures to be followed if the schemes came to an end. Although there were rules for winding up, they did not attract the degree of scrutiny that their consequences are receiving today. The rules for the English schemes quite clearly stipulated that any remaining surplus should go to employees, while the rules for the Scottish schemes stipulated just as clearly that any remaining surplus should go to the employers. That is why the legal position in Scotland is quite different from that in England.

I will set out the process by  which Scottish ministers have secured, from the trusts, funds that go beyond the strict legal entitlement of the pensioners. [MEMBERS: "What about equity?"] I hear Opposition members mentioning equity. Equity is precisely the reason why we took such steps. I want to explain the English position a little further. When the English trustees set aside the rules at the time of privatisation, the case was referred to the pensions ombudsman on the grounds of the legal entitlement of members of the schemes. The ombudsman ordered that the winding-up should be reversed. He found that the National Bus Company had threatened the English trustees in a way that he described as quite improper and as intended to alter the pension schemes in the company's favour. After several subsequent court judgments, it became clear that members of the English schemes would, as a result of their legal entitlement, receive benefits approaching an average of £7,000 each. In that case, the law found that the rules that applied to the English schemes gave pensioners those entitlements. The position in Scotland is not the same. Because the rules were different in the first place, former members of the Scottish schemes have not been deprived of any benefit to which they are legally entitled. Indeed, the National Audit Office report makes it perfectly clear that all their entitlements were fully secured. Furthermore, after privatisation and in anticipation of wind-up, enhanced payments amounting to £33 million out of the then surplus of £105 million were made to members of the Scottish schemes in March 1991. Again the National Audit Office took the view that the enhancements were generous, as they amounted to nearly one third of the surplus, which was roughly in line with the one third of the total fund that had derived from members rather than from employers' contributions.

The one thing that is perfectly clear to me is that taking interventions from Mr Ewing on this matter adds nothing to the debate, but only gives him the opportunity for further grandstanding. Having heard his repetitive,  lengthy and irrelevant contribution, I will address the relevant issues. Members are aware that Scottish ministers were keen to go beyond the legal position. Without our intervention, the entire remaining surplus would have gone to the UK Exchequer. Our position is quite clear: we took that action to achieve equity and parity between Scottish and English pensioners. Through last year's direct intervention with the UK Government and through negotiations with the Treasury, Scottish ministers achieved their objective by securing agreement to an additional pay-out to former members of the STG pension scheme that provided an average pay-out that was either the same or slightly better than the average pay-out to English pension scheme members. Members received £7,000 each, which makes a total of £100 million. The agreement has been described as "Jack's deal". Although I am sure that the First Minister is happy to be associated with the deal, the credit must also go to Sarah Boyack and the other ministers who were involved in obtaining the additional £100 million payment to Scottish pensioners. As has been described, since then, the surplus has continued to be invested and has increased over time. In April, Gordon Brown reduced the relevant tax rate from 40 to 35 per cent. As a result, the forthcoming STG accounts for the year ending March 2001 are likely to show that the net surplus after tax has risen by approximately £18 million to around £168 million. Therefore, I am delighted to announce today that, in addition to the £100m pay-out that we have already secured, Scottish ministers have this week agreed with the Treasury that an additional £18 million should be paid to members of the scheme.

Although it obviously fell on deaf ears, I have tried to explain that the legal position is clear. The political position is that the money belongs to the Treasury. What we, as Scottish ministers, have done is to persuade our colleagues to return a very substantial part of that money to Scottish pensioners. I hope that all MSPs are interested in the welfare of the potential beneficiaries; if so, there should be as little delay as possible in proceeding with the pay-outs. Beneficiaries have already waited too long.

No—I need to make progress.  It is also worth bearing in mind the likely effects of any legal challenge, as the English experience has shown that such challenges can cause further delays for many years. As Scottish ministers, we have carried out our functions speedily. The next step that is required is for the trustees of the STG to wind up their pension schemes. Although ministers do not control that process, we are as impatient as anyone in the chamber to see progress to ensure that payments can be made. We have issued the necessary indemnities to the trustees and we have sought and received Budget Act approval to receive and pay out the surplus. As soon as the schemes are dissolved, we will begin to process ex gratia payments. Indeed, we have finalised the proposed criteria for distributing the money. We have discussed the criteria with the Transport and General Workers Union, which represented the majority of the workers concerned, and will publish them shortly. I invite members to endorse the proposals when they are made public; they are intended to be inclusive rather than exclusive. I hope that members agree that, despite the absence of any legal entitlement, we have secured a substantial pay-out of £118 million. Although our role in the issue is currently limited, we have taken every available step as swiftly as possible. It is now for others, specifically the trustees, to make progress with their responsibilities and to wind up the pension scheme. We are impatient for that to happen and will continue to press the trustees to ensure that it does. I mentioned the criteria by which the money will be distributed. We are aware that many people outside the unions who are already involved are keen to understand what lies ahead and the process that will be followed. Therefore, I intend that my officials will meet and brief representatives of the affected trade unions, groups such as the Scottish Bus Group pensioners action committee, other groups that represent pensioners across Scotland and any MSPs who wish to attend, to clarify the process of distributing the funds. That meeting will be held as quickly as possible; indeed, we intend to make arrangements before Christmas. We are now ready to progress the distribution. All that we require, and have required for several months, is the winding up of the schemes by the trustees. The moment that we achieve that, we will begin making the payments that I have described. I move amendment S1M-2486.1, to leave out from "both" to end and insert: "Scottish Ministers have secured from HM Treasury a substantial pay out for Scottish Transport Group Pension Scheme former members despite the absence of any legal entitlement; further notes that any change to the amount to be distributed to former members is a matter for HM Treasury, and finally notes that the key remaining step is  the winding up of the pension scheme, which is a matter for the scheme's trustees."

I congratulate John Home Robertson on securing this evening's debate and for giving me the opportunity to explain the matters that he has raised and perhaps develop some discussion around them. There is no doubt about the depth of feeling on opencast mining in his and other constituencies. I reassure members that I share the view that has been expressed that opencast coal developments should not be allowed to proceed if they will cause unacceptable damage to local communities or to the environment. That is the policy of my party and it is, and will continue to be, the policy of Scottish ministers. My party's view, when we came to power in the United Kingdom in 1997, was that for too long communities and the environment had not been adequately protected from the adverse effects of opencasting. That is why we made a clear commitment to replace the guidance that we inherited with new and much tougher planning policies. In March 1999, Scottish Office ministers introduced national planning policy guideline 16 as a statement of national planning policy and as a guide to local authorities on implementation of the policy. It is not the job of the planning system, planning policy or planners to manage or predict demand for coal. There is no plan for them to take on that role. The planning policy guideline sets a robust  framework that puts the protection of communities and the environment at the heart of the decision-making process. It states clearly that "proposals which pose a potential risk to the amenity of communities or to the local environment generally will not be acceptable" and sets clear tests against which proposals must be considered. First, it asks whether a proposal is environmentally acceptable. Secondly, if a proposal is not environmentally acceptable, it asks whether there are local or community benefits that sufficiently outweigh any material risk of disturbance or damage. Only proposals that pass one or other of those tests should be approved by a planning authority. The only exceptions that can be considered are those in which opencasting can repair existing degradation or environmental damage, or can help in the recovery of derelict land.

Yes. The guideline says clearly that environmental damage will not be accepted unless it is outweighed by benefits to the communities that are involved. That is a measurable test of what is in the public interest. That policy position is understood.

Those things cannot readily be separated. The fact that the two tests are set together is a significant barrier to overcome for any proposal. One of the local authority's duties in judging the policy and in seeking to implement it is to require an environmental impact assessment and judge for itself what the balance of consideration should be. Even if operators come up with proposals that pass the tests, they will still require to go to the planning authority to obtain planning permission. They must then abide by the environmental standards that the planning authority sets. I look forward to meeting the Lothian authorities collectively, as Bristow Muldoon suggested I should. When I do that, I will be happy to discuss the contents of the policy. However, my starting point for that discussion will be that a policy that has been in place for only two years requires more time to test its effectiveness before we consider revising it.

I am conscious of that matter and will address it. I will respond to the point about trends. Since the policy was introduced, the trend has significantly changed. Of the 18 applications that were the subject of a study over the first two years of the policy, 10 were refused, which represented two thirds of the tonnage of coal in question. There is a clear change in the trend. As has been said, the structural plan alteration that was carried through on 19 July is now operative. The reasons for the modifications have been explained to the authorities in question and I shall return to them. However, it is important that everyone is clear that legislation requires that decisions on planning cases should be final, and that they should be subject to challenge only in the courts. That long-standing principle must be upheld.

I wish now to turn to the reasons for the modifications—I will be happy to take an intervention should members require any further clarification. When NPPG 16 was published, we issued a direction requiring planning authorities to review their development plans and to bring them into line with the revised guidance. The first part of that process was to identify in structure plans the broad areas of search where future work might be acceptable. As has been described, it is the usual practice at that stage to begin with the areas of accessible coal that have been identified by the British Geological Survey. That is the starting point. Those areas should then be considered in two stages by two sets of criteria and conclusions should be reached about where individual applications will be considered. Stage 1 is the structure plan, where the appropriate criteria are strategic, for example those concerning national land designation, green belt designation and areas of future housing growth. That stage should not define precisely where opencast mining proposals might be considered, but should identify only broad areas of search that do not have specific boundaries and where coal-bearing land is not constrained by strategic considerations.

I am saying that the process of defining the boundaries of the areas of search is for the next stage in the process. That stage is the responsibility of local authorities, which must at that point define the appropriate areas of search with specific reference to local settlements and green belt. The answer is broadly yes, but in the terms that I have outlined. Our difficulty with the structure plan alteration that was put forward was that it appeared to compress the structure plan stage and the local plan stage into a single process and to take into account specific local considerations, which we did not feel was appropriate at that stage. In some areas, that included defining specific sites rather than broad areas of search. Members who have taken an interest in the review of strategic planning will know that I believe that we need to streamline and improve the system. Future strategic plans should identify specific sites and should work on that basis. However, we are obliged to work with the planning system that we have, not the planning system that we want. It is a statutory planning requirement that there be a two-stage process, with strategic and local stages. It is important to make that point. The next stage of the process is for the relevant planning authority to define the broad areas in more detail in local plans that deal with local issues. It is not appropriate for me to get into a debate about which sites in the Lothians are suitable for opencasting. Indeed, as a decision maker in the planning system, it would be quite inappropriate for me to do that. It is a matter for the relevant planning authority. However, we expect planning authorities to take a tough line on implementing NPPG 16. They should reflect that planning policy in their local plans. As Murray Tosh suggested, the nature of the business will lead to smaller areas of search. I apologise for the fact that I do not have enough time to respond to all the points that have been made. Mary Mulligan, Robin Harper and others asked about public participation. We are consulting on that and I encourage all interested members to respond in that consultation. The onus is on councils to bring forward local plan alteration proposals as soon as possible. They can do so in a way that allows public consultation. There can be public inquiries as part of that process, although there were no public inquiries as part of the structure plan alterations process. A public local inquiry must be held if there are unresolved objections to finalised planning proposals. John Home Robertson asked what we could do to fast-track the process. We will deal with that as a priority. A local inquiry would need to be chaired by a reporter. I can also give an assurance that  the Scottish Executive's inquiry reporters unit will treat Lothian local plan alterations as a high priority. That will help greatly to move matters forward. The law requires councils to set out appropriate reasons if they wish to expedite the process and reduce the number of weeks for consultation from 70 to 26. Again, I cannot prejudge a decision, but I encourage councils to think hard about taking that course. Once the local plan alterations are in place, NPPG 16 can be given full effect in the context of the development plan structure. At that stage and for the first time, its impact as a material consideration can be fully taken into account and fully assessed.  That will demonstrate that there has been the right balance of policy to prevent unacceptable damage to local communities or the environment. Planning authorities should act on the basis of that national planning policy, as Scottish ministers will continue to do.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

Robin Harper quoted figures from 1997. Does he accept that that was before the introduction of our present planning policy?

I want to follow on from that point. John Home Robertson will recognise that the parliamentary answer that he quoted made explicit the distinction—he might well wish to develop that point. There is a clear distinction between the officials involved in advising on the alteration and those officials involved in the review of strategic planning, which is a quite different matter.

HIAL offers substantial discounts to support the introduction of services at Inverness airport and elsewhere.

HIAL offers discounts over the first three years of a new service: in the first year, it offers a 75 per cent discount; in the second, 50 per cent; and in the third, 25 per cent. In comparison, British Airports Authority airports such as Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh offer 50 per cent, 30 per cent and 10 per cent discounts over three years. It is clear that HIAL offers generous discounts, which have helped to attract low-cost operators such as Easyjet and ScotAirways to Inverness. The same discounts would be available to any other operator that wished to provide a service from that airport.

As I explained, Inverness airport's discounts compare well with those that are offered at lowland airports. That said, the fact that it takes three years to establish a commercial service is precisely the reason why HIAL offers a three-year discount programme. We are  encouraging any operator that believes that it can start a service from Inverness airport to put its money where its mouth is and submit a proposal, which will then be discussed with HIAL.

No. If Jamie McGrigor had taken on board the points that I made when we debated the subject the other day in Parliament, he would understand that our case for a public service obligation to protect slots at Gatwick rests on the presumption and argument that we need the Inverness to Gatwick route to sustain the economy of and tourism in the Highlands and Islands. Arguments about slots that do not exist and that do not currently provide a service would be a complete distraction from the case that the Scottish Executive, Highland Council and Highlands and Islands Enterprise are making jointly to the Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions.

I congratulate Bruce Crawford and I welcome the opportunity that his motion provides to debate plans for a ferry service from Rosyth to Zeebrugge. From the contributions to the debate, it is clear that the initiative has widespread support. We in the Executive have vigorously promoted the service. We believe that it will offer great environmental gains and economic opportunities. I know that Bruce Crawford lodged his motion immediately before the October recess and that Scott Barrie had lodged a parliamentary question that was due for answer at much the same time. I am grateful to all members for their patience in awaiting the developments that have taken place this week and for the positive approach that has been taken in both the motion and this afternoon's debate. That patience and perseverance paid off yesterday with the announcement by Stephen Byers that he is minded to offer £12 million in freight facilities grant to make the ferry service happen. I will explain a little about the process. If the first requirement was the Scottish Executive's commitment to promote the service, the second requirement was that the Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions be prepared to endorse the proposal and to make the formal offer of public money. We have reached that critical stage; the offer has been made. Several members referred to the great economic potential of the direct ferry connection.

Mr Crawford may rest assured that those questions will be answered. I want to lay out the process and explain how we came to this point. It is important to note that, above all, public funding support is based on the environmental benefits of transferring freight from road to sea. Those benefits apply to freight traffic in Scotland and England. That is part of the argument that lies behind the DTLR's consideration of the matter and its decision to endorse the award of freight facilities grant to a project that will have benefits for both sides of the border. The scheme is also about the development of Rosyth and the regeneration of the area. As Scott Barrie said, local government has played a key role in that, working in partnership with private and public bodies to secure regeneration. The parties that are involved identified early the importance to that regeneration strategy of a direct ferry connection. We have worked as partners to bring that idea to the stage at which it is today. We must now move to the third stage, which is European Commission approval for the extension of the inland waterways component of the freight facilities grant to include coastal and short-sea shipping routes. Freight facilities grant is a state aid and—as members know—state aids require EC approval. Therefore, Stephen Byers's award of FFG was conditional on European clearance. His officials and ours will go to Brussels later this week jointly to press the Commission for early clearance so that a decision is made and the scheme can proceed as soon as possible.

Mr Crawford must take my word for it when I say that I understand why the points have been made, and that I intend to answer them. Members will be aware that the submission that was worked up was passed on to us in May 2001. Then, the European Commission was approached in order to seek support for our proposals. Because those proposals involve an extension of FFG, they therefore require EC clearance. Clearance is being sought by the DTLR and the UK Government—as the representative of the member state—in partnership with the Scottish Executive.

Indeed. If members will forgive me, I will seek to make progress in order to answer all those points. We believe that the DTLR's support will be critical in demonstrating that the Rosyth route is entirely compatible with fair competition. As the department of the member state, it is for the DTLR to pursue that application. To return to one of Bruce Crawford's points, which was also made by Marilyn Livingstone, I fear that I will not be doing my Christmas shopping in the Baltic this year. It is more likely that it will be done, as usual, in Aberdeen. However, I assure Mr Crawford that efforts already are under way. Scottish Enterprise and organisations throughout Government are gearing up for the marketing effort that will be required as soon as EU clearance is given. However, we are not simply awaiting that clearance—tomorrow there will be a meeting between Scottish Enterprise Fife and the Kingdom of Fife Tourist Board, which has the support of VisitScotland, to begin to address those issues. I say to Mr Raffan that we are joined in the gallery by Alexander Panugopulos and Yannis Criticos of Superfast Ferries, as well as by representatives of Fife Council. It is clear that the decisions that they must make about ships are matters for them, but they have committed vessels to the route and they have a schedule for work that we believe can be completed on time. In response to Murray Tosh's queries about the mechanics of payment, FFG will be paid by the DTLR. Funding is in place to meet those costs, and it will be marked against the current financial year and the forthcoming financial year—that is, 2001-02 and 2002-03. We recognise that time is short and we recognise the need for quick and urgent action. That is why senior officials from the Scottish Executive and the UK Government will meet Commission officials in Brussels on Friday to seek clearance. The Commission must move quickly. We need to convince the Commission that if the project is to be put in place in time—given the tight timetable that we face—it must make a decision quickly. We do not regard that decision as a mere formality. We recognise that because state aid is involved, the project is rightly subject to consideration at each level of government.  However, we are confident—on the basis of the case that we have made to the DTLR and to Europe—that the project will go ahead. We need the applicants to accept the offer that was made to them yesterday and we need approval to be issued by the European Commission as soon as possible. We will continue to press for that positive decision. If Tuesday was one important step, Friday will lead us to the next important step, and to completion of the work that has gone into the project.  Meeting closed at 17:52.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will take your warning to heart. I welcome this debate on Margaret Ewing's motion, which has provided further evidence of the breadth and strength of support for the approach that the Executive has taken to protect existing access from Inverness to Gatwick as the strategic route that links the Highlands and Islands to London and the wider world. I welcome the constructive speeches that have been made by colleagues on all sides of the chamber. Maureen Macmillan mentioned the key role played by David Stewart MP, who has championed this issue for many years in another Parliament. I acknowledge the key role that Westminster colleagues will continue to play, given that the next stage in the process lies with the House of Commons. Perhaps Mary Scanlon would have been better to take a further hour to write her speech. I was disappointed by the way in which she allowed herself to digress into a different topic. Likewise, Duncan Hamilton appeared to show little appreciation of the difference between Prestwick and Inverness, which I found somewhat surprising. That is a different debate for a different day.  We all recognise that, since the withdrawal of Inverness's link to Heathrow in 1997, it has been important for ministers in the Scottish Office and, latterly, in the Scottish Executive, to keep a watching brief on that route. At that time, assurances were given on the operator's commitment to the Gatwick route, which replaced the link to Heathrow. However, those assurances related to the first three years of that operation and they have now expired. In addition, the operator—British Regional Airlines—has been acquired by British Airways. For those reasons, we have focused our attention on the security and long-term future of the service. At the same time, we clearly recognise that, whatever the short-term downturns may have been in recent weeks, the long-term pressures on the London hub airports will continue to increase. Members from all sides of the chamber recognise the great concern that was felt in the Highlands when the Heathrow link came to an end in 1997. Peter Peacock and many others in the chamber were involved in expressing that concern. I understand the temptation to seek to reopen that issue at this stage, but I believe that we should resist that temptation, for reasons that I will explain in a moment. The focus today is on how the links operate at present and how we should protect them. For obvious commercial reasons, airlines seek to maximise their returns from the slots that are available to them. They use those slots for the highest yield services that they can obtain, whether continental or further afield. In general, domestic services struggle to compete on yield. Given those circumstances, we recognised that the Gatwick service was in danger of becoming dependent on what was in the best interests of the operator rather than on what was best for the wider community. We recognise that the Gatwick route is still not up to the level of passenger usage that was achieved by the Heathrow service at its peak. The point has been made that BA has not indicated any intention to discontinue the Gatwick route. On the contrary, and as was said in the House of Commons yesterday, BA has said that it has no such plans. However, in the absence of long-term guarantees, there is a clear need for us to examine what action can be taken to secure the future of the link.

I will address the Heathrow question in a moment—I realise that that question has been brought into the debate. In the first instance I want to explain what we have done to  protect the Gatwick slot. My officials have worked closely with the local authority and the local enterprise company on the mechanisms that are available to us to do that. We agreed with them that the best way forward is the development of a PSO on the Gatwick route, recognising that that route is of vital importance to the economic development of the area and offering it a degree of protection and security. We focused on the economic benefits that derive from having access to Gatwick airport, which is a London hub that provides the Highlands with a gateway to the world, a useful platform for the promotion of the area and a link that is good for business, good for the local economy, good for inward investment and good for tourism. The Highlands is an area that is heavily dependent on exports and on access to the wider world. In recent years, the area has made great strides in improving its economic base. We are committed to the view that the benefits of the area should not be diminished through the loss of the vital link with London.

My eye is on the deputy presiding officer's clock and I am keen to make progress so that I can address Margaret Ewing's point later. To address other questions that can reasonably be raised, it is important to spell out the nature of the case. The peripherality of Inverness and the dependence of the Highlands on air transport are unusual in UK terms. A point was raised about what other countries do, but it is critical to our case that Inverness and the Highlands and Islands are unique in a UK context and must be considered separately from the wider issues. Other transport links from the north of Scotland cannot provide an adequate substitute for the established air links. The absence of a fast alternative adds weight to the PSO case, which is strong. The imposition of a PSO would allow, as a secondary but critical effect, the ring-fencing of the Gatwick slots, which is necessary for the continued operation of the service. The case is not about the acquisition of new slots, but about ensuring that vital existing slots can be guaranteed for the existing service. That brings me back to the question of Heathrow, which a couple of members raised. We are vigorously pursuing the case for the PSO on the Gatwick route. Part of that case is that that specific route is of vital importance to the Highland economy. We must be able to demonstrate that  the maintenance of that route is critical. I urge all who support that PSO case and who want it to succeed not to dilute the strength of the case by broadening it too far. The legal powers that might exist to reacquire slots at Heathrow, for example, are debatable at best. The clear route forward is to impose a PSO at Gatwick. That is the route that we should follow, to protect what we have. Members have acknowledged the initiative that we have taken and have asked where we should go from here. In response to Fergus Ewing's earlier question: we want a PSO implemented now. He asked whether we will await the outcome of the aviation policy review and the debates over terminal 5. It is because we do not want to wait for those matters that Sarah Boyack wrote to the Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions at the beginning of October to make the case for a PSO being implemented now. We recognise that, in the light of recent events and the changes at Inverness, early implementation is critical. The message that I am sure David Stewart and his colleagues will have conveyed to David Jamieson this morning is the same as that which we convey on a regular basis—the sooner the better. Talks are on-going—even as we speak. I will reverse the usual order of proceedings by using the closing speech to welcome officials from the Department for Transport, Local Government and the Regions, who have joined us during the debate and who are in Scotland to talk to my officials about the case that we are making. Today's debate will have strengthened our case. The vast majority of speeches focused on the critical questions that sustain and underline our case for a PSO on the Gatwick route. We will continue to pursue those negotiations and we welcome the continuing support of members of all parties. I look forward to an early and successful conclusion to the matter.  Meeting closed at 16:58.

We are committed to maintaining lifeline ferry services to the northern isles. Transitional arrangements are primarily a matter for P&O Scottish Ferries and NorthLink Orkney and Shetland Ferries, but we are in discussions with both companies about a range of issues, and we are doing all that we can to ensure a smooth transition to the new contract.

Yes. On the first point, we are in detailed discussions with P&O Scottish Ferries about the transition period and about extending the current contract. That company has accepted in principle that it is prepared to do that, and we are carrying forward the discussions. On the second point, I am aware that NorthLink rejected the bid by those who proposed a buy-out of the shore-based facilities, which lie outwith the public subsidy contract, and that NorthLink will be putting those services out to tender. However, although the Executive has no locus to intervene—clearly, it is a commercial matter for NorthLink—it is open to the staff in Aberdeen, Shetland and elsewhere to put forward their own bid as part of the competitive tendering process. I suspect strongly that they will do so.

Mr Davidson knows, even if others do not, that that matter is not related in any way to Orkney and Shetland ferries.

I, too, will be sorry to see Murray Tosh leave the Conservative front bench, particularly given his rational approach today. He is wise not to bind the rest of his party to that line for the future. We can only hope that some of them will choose it. On the wider issue, it is clear from today's speeches that the past 12 months have been a period of great difficulty and uncertainty for the rail industry and its users throughout Britain. However, the next few months will be a period of opportunity that must not be lost. The past year has been dominated by the consequences of the tragic accident at Hatfield, but the past five years have been dominated by the consequences of a disastrous privatisation—as was expressed so eloquently by Mr Muldoon, from his own experience. Hatfield might have marked the beginning of the end for Railtrack, but the seeds of failure surely lay in the structure of the company from its creation. It has taken those five years for that structure to unravel. It will take time to create the right structure to put in its place. We welcome debate on what that structure should be, but we do not believe that the right response is to repeat the mistake of the Tory years and further fragment the railway industry into smaller pieces. Andrew Wilson asked us to debate his proposal on its merits. I read the document that he circulated and recognised some merits. When I read about an infrastructure owner working in partnership with all the stakeholders and operating outside the public sector on a non-profit basis I thought, "Good idea." It is just a shame for Andrew Wilson that Stephen Byers thought of that first and on a larger scale. There are other differences, but in the final analysis the most distinctive feature of the SNP's proposal is the least original. Whatever the problem, the solution always appears to be the same: to break up Britain or British institutions. In this case that means splitting Scotland's rail network from that of England and Wales.

If Mr Wilson does not like predictable responses, he should not produce such predictable policies.

Mr Wilson has made it clear that he will not deviate from the fundamental objective of his party. My party is committed to the devolution settlement and will continue to develop that, but I do not believe that revisiting the devolution settlement will bring comfort to rail users or operators. However, I believe that there is room for positive and constructive debate, which we welcome. The Rail Freight Group is one of the bodies in the industry that has made it clear how important it is to have a single British network, with a single operator and common standards from the north of Scotland to the channel ports. If that integration is put at risk, it is not the economy of the south of England that stands to suffer, but the interests of Scottish exporters. As Iain Smith said, when priorities are being set for rail investment in England, we have to be at the discussion table to make the case for investment in the east and west-coast main lines, both of which are vital to Scotland's interests.

I was sorry to hear Sandra White's speech, which did not seem to take a constructive approach to the Scottish rail industry. She was right to mention rail links to central Scotland's airports. Next week, we will begin a study of possible rail links to Glasgow and Edinburgh airports. The SNP front bench should recognise our significant investments and initiatives. However, leaving decisions on the wider British network to others and leaving the table of the UK railway network company to have our own railway network company would not best protect the interests of Scottish rail users. This is a time of opportunity for working out new structures. We should build on the good partnerships that exist among the various players in the Scottish rail industry. As members from different parties have said, there may be advantages in developing the  relationships between operating companies and the network provider not only throughout Scotland, but throughout Britain. We should explore that. We should be clear about our fundamental objectives of protecting the standards of the national network, allowing the Scottish passenger rail company to concentrate on passenger services, having significant Scottish input into strategic decisions on cross-border mainline services and promoting rail freight. As Sarah Boyack said, we have worked closely with the UK Government and the Strategic Rail Authority to ensure that our investment priorities gain their support. Those are priorities not only in Scotland, but elsewhere for Scotland. We will continue with that partnership approach. When decisions about the future of the rail network are made, we will not look for a quick fix or a separate solution. We will look for a new structure that will last and give Scottish passengers and Scottish exporters the rail service that they deserve.

I am grateful to David Mundell and other members for the constructive way in which they have addressed this important issue. Elaine Murray, who is the constituency member for Lockerbie, has spoken to me before about the specific problems there, but I am pleased that the debate has been extended to recognise that similar problems exist elsewhere in Scotland. I am especially familiar with some of the stations in Aberdeenshire to which Nora Radcliffe referred. The Executive is committed to the development of an integrated transport policy to achieve a fairer and more inclusive society. Where we have powers to do so—which is an important factor to bear in mind—we will continue to make the improvement of access to public transport for people with disabilities one of our priorities in the tackling of social exclusion. In the forthcoming transport delivery plan, we will set out and update our prior commitments. I know that members will look forward to that with interest. It is important to remember that questions of disabled access to public transport go wider than physical infrastructure. Robin Harper and others have pointed out that, as well as those questions, there are issues of customer service that the rail industry will have to address. For the services that are currently provided by ScotRail, some of those issues will be addressed through the directions and guidance that we will issue to the Strategic Rail Authority. In setting out our strategic priorities for Scotland's passenger railways last year, we emphasised, as Adam Ingram said, the importance of the railways' being more affordable, more accessible and more user friendly. Within the wider agenda, we have taken an important step in setting up the mobility and access committee for Scotland—MACS—which will be a channel through which disabled people will be able to express their views, and an advisory body that will be able to accumulate significant expertise on issues of access. The committee will work alongside the Rail Passengers Committee Scotland and advise ministers on the transport needs of disabled travellers. We want to ensure that MACS influences the development of future transport policy on the priorities that we set. Alasdair Morgan suggested the importance of setting priorities on the range of policies in this area. We are consulting on the regulations to establish MACS and we expect it to be in place early next year. So far, so good. However, it is essential to recognise that the role of Scottish ministers is limited by the nature of the devolution settlement. That may be a disappointment to David Mundell  and others, but the powers that MACS will have on our behalf, and the advice that it will be able to give us, will benefit the cause of social inclusion in the context of a disability discrimination regime that is set at a UK level—not, I am afraid, by the National Assembly for Wales, but by the UK Government. I am grateful to Elaine Murray for drawing attention to some of the characteristics of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995—particularly the test of reasonableness and the inhibition and uncertainty that that may bring in the application of the act. As we have heard, the act requires providers of public transport to ensure that their services are accessible to disabled people by October 2004, but only as far as they are reasonably able to do so. I need not remind members that the minister who was responsible for introducing that bill in the House of Commons was William Hague. No doubt he will have reflected on its contents since then. It is clearly not for this Parliament to debate the strengths and weaknesses of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995—that is a reserved matter—but we will have its provisions in mind during our discussions with the providers of public transport services in Scotland. As has been said, the problem at Lockerbie is particularly thorny. As many members will know, the bid that was submitted earlier this year had the support of Dumfries and Galloway Council as the local authority, Railtrack as the infrastructure provider, ScotRail as the facilities operator at Lockerbie and Virgin Trains as the main user of the station. The bid involved the construction of a level crossing across the goods loop behind the main southbound line. Elaine Murray implied that even the bid's supporters recognised its weaknesses. It provided access to the southbound platform from outwith the station premises, but not from one platform to the other or from the southbound platform to the ticket office. Such limitations led to its rejection by the Strategic Rail Authority, the UK body with responsibility for partnership funding. The bid was also rejected on the basis of the view of the railway inspectorate, which is a UK body with responsibility for rail safety. It believed that creating such a level crossing would be contrary to the general trend of its policy. The great attraction of the solution offered by the bid was its affordability; the other solutions will inevitably cost more. Two figures have been mentioned this evening. Suffice it to say that replacing or upgrading a footbridge anywhere will be an expensive business, but there are particular difficulties in Lockerbie because of the nature of the existing structure.  In spite of the difficulties, there is a recognition that a solution to the Lockerbie problem has to be found. Tackling it was on the list of proposed infrastructure enhancements that were due to be discussed by Scottish ministers and Railtrack before such plans were overtaken by the company's recent financial difficulties. As Elaine Murray mentioned, a couple of months ago, as a result of those difficulties, Railtrack backed out of undertaking infrastructure enhancements in Scotland. Since then, of course, Railtrack has been placed in administration. I may disappoint David Mundell, but tomorrow's debate on railways will allow some of the issues around the future structure of the infrastructure provider to be brought out. Suffice it to say that we do not expect Railtrack to undertake any new enhancement work while it remains in administration but that we expect the new body that emerges to take on the commitments that were under discussion. Sarah Boyack met the chairman of Railtrack, John Robinson, last week and has written to the administrators to re-emphasise some of the priorities that were discussed previously. One of those priorities is, of course, disabled rail users at Lockerbie station. I must stress once more that responsibility for many of the decisions on these matters lie with UK bodies such as the Strategic Rail Authority, the railway inspectorate and the Disability Rights Commission.  We will continue to carry out our responsibilities and make the case for our policies of social inclusion. On the Scottish rail franchise, we have produced the paper that has been referred to in the debate. The Strategic Rail Authority will ensure that the franchise includes features that are common to the UK, including measures to ensure compliance with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. Much still needs to be done to take full account of disabled people's needs. We recognise that we have a responsibility to work with partners to arrive at solutions to problems in general and the Lockerbie case in particular. The next step must be the resolution of the situation that affects Railtrack. The sooner UK ministers, in partnership with the Executive, can solve those problems, the sooner we will be able to respond to the specific problems that have been raised today.  Meeting closed at 17:44.

New regulations were laid in Parliament on 24 September. They will considerably improve the thermal insulation standards for new buildings and require more efficient heating and lighting systems.

I can confirm that implementing the new technical standards will improve Scotland's position on building insulation in absolute terms and relative to the rest of Europe. On the latest figures that are available, and if we make the necessary technical adjustments for external temperatures, our position in the European insulation league will move from mid-table to the top three. In fact, with the adjustments, only Denmark and Sweden will have tougher standards for energy efficiency in buildings.

Yes. That is a good example of what can be done with regeneration to advance energy efficiency standards throughout our housing stock. That has needed to be done for some time and it is now being achieved.

I agree with the principle that we need to co-ordinate the work that is being done. Indeed, a number of initiatives are under way to address standards in existing buildings, including the central heating programme, the warm deal and the duty that the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995 places on local authorities to take a lead and bring together policies in a number of areas. From my experience in my constituency, I can confirm that the energy efficiency agency there provides a high standard of training and has given many of the young people who trained with it skills that they have successfully taken into the wider work place.

The interpretation of statute is a matter for the courts, not for the Executive. However, I have written to the convener of the Transport and the Environment Committee on the issue and committee members had my letter before them when they debated the matter yesterday.

I am suggesting that most members in the chamber understand that complete means complete; if a party in a dispute says that a mast is not complete, perhaps it is choosing not to recognise the fact. I would suggest  to a telecommunications company or a planning authority that is failing to take a commonsense approach to the question that it ought to do so, and that if issues remain to be resolved, it should sit down with the other party and try to reach a conclusion.

It is precisely to provide that certainty that we introduced the planning controls that have been in force in Scotland since 23 July. As far as Kirkintilloch and other places are concerned, the fact that future telecommunications developments will be subject to the planning system should act as a significant incentive for telecommunications companies to sit down with planning authorities and discuss the most appropriate development for a particular locality.

We have spent some time today discussing one specific transport issue and the consequences of one specific error. It is important at this stage in the bill's proceedings to step back and consider how those issues fit into the wider picture. First, of course, we all regret that we have had to introduce this legislation. The mistake that led to it was serious, costly and unnecessary. However, it was just a mistake. Fiona McLeod gave new meaning to the concept of conspiracy theory this morning when she suggested that the failure to lay an order in time was in some way a cunning ministerial plot. I am not clear what she imagined we stood to gain from that—perhaps she will shed some light on that during the debate. Let me assure Fiona McLeod and the rest of the chamber that it was indeed a mistake. Clearly, we need to learn lessons from it and to disseminate those lessons as widely as possible throughout the Executive. I hope that, in many respects, we can draw a line under the issue for the moment and for the next five years by passing the bill and restoring the tolling powers that were in place before the end of June. Secondly, I record my thanks to the parliamentary officials and the Presiding Officers, who have worked very hard to make today work procedurally. An invocation of rule 9.21 is not something to be done lightly—we did not do it lightly—and we appreciate the efforts that the staff of the Parliament have made both in preparing for today and in their work on the day itself. We have had some useful debates, both about the narrow but important issue of tolls on the Erskine bridge and more generally about issues—to which I suspect members will return—to do with tolling and charging. I doubt whether today will be  the last time that we debate those issues.

We will move the bill forward as fast as we can in terms of the remaining stages before it can be enacted. That includes the granting of royal assent, which we will seek as early as possible. However, that is a matter for the Presiding Officer. In response to the point that I assume Lloyd Quinan has in mind, the bill makes it clear that, on receipt of royal assent, the tolls will come back into force. Our intention is that that should be at the earliest practicable time. We retain a clear view that the use of tolling on major estuaries is justifiable. It is entirely reasonable that those who gain from the benefits of such crossings should contribute to the cost of building, maintaining and operating them. In a case such as the Erskine bridge the principle that is applied is that the user pays; that was well understood when national Government and local authorities agreed to support the construction of a toll bridge in 1968.

That is a very interesting point and it is perhaps a matter of regret to Mr Canavan that he is no longer in a position to put that point directly to the individual in question. However, we are quite clear about our view on the matter and about the decision that ministers have taken in the light of the balance of argument—including arguments made by Labour members of the Parliament—to continue tolling on the Erskine bridge during the next five years. That decision is put into force, albeit a little belatedly, by today's bill. It has been said that the error that was made raises wider questions. We certainly recognise the need to investigate fully the circumstances of the case and to report to Parliament on the lessons learned. However, the proper test for the effectiveness of a transport department and a transport policy is what they deliver. We believe that our wider transport strategy, with the resources that have been invested in it, will deliver  better transport facilities not only in the lower Clyde area, but throughout Scotland. Traditional spending areas are being supplemented by more innovative schemes to develop the strategy. Taken together, our transport policies and the economic development policies that were discussed this morning will be of significant benefit to the areas that are served by the Erskine bridge. Tolls from that bridge make a small but nonetheless significant contribution to the overall transport budget. In the longer term, they will meet the lifetime costs of the bridge for many years to come. Our priorities are to get the best value in transport and administrative terms for the money that we spend. I therefore commend the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill to the Parliament as a relatively small but certainly important contribution to our wider transport agenda, and as a necessary step toward putting tolling on the bridge back on a sound legal footing. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Erskine Bridge Tolls Bill be passed.

rose—

The Executive conducts a continuing review of planning policies. The specific issues currently under consideration include a review of the arrangements for strategic planning in Scotland, on which I published a consultation paper on 15 June.

Like us, our colleagues responsible for the environment are aware of the issues around planning controls in inshore waters. We are actively discussing those with ministerial colleagues and will come to conclusions on that before the bill goes forward.

I recognise that point. Our recently updated planning policy guideline on transport and planning takes that on board. Part of the purpose of our combined brief of transport and planning is precisely to recognise the need for  transport considerations to be built into development planning at every stage.

Our discussion this morning has ranged across the Erskine bridge, general tolling issues and further afield. In the context, that is not a surprise. As the policy memorandum makes clear, and as Sarah Boyack said at the beginning of the stage 1 debate, the objective of the bill is straightforward, simply "to restore tolling on the Erskine Bridge". Tolls have been levied on the bridge ever since it opened 30 years ago. They have been levied under the Executive and through previous Labour and Conservative Administrations. They were levied, it must be said, in agreement with the local authorities at the time. They were levied on the clear understanding that such major estuarial crossings offer substantial benefits to users, in terms of reduced journey times and easier  access—the Erskine ferry was mentioned in the debate. It is right and proper that those who benefit from the bridge should contribute directly to the cost of building, maintaining and operating it. Revenues from the bridge raise, as has been said, £100,000 a week or £5 million a year. That is sufficient to cover the current costs and more than sufficient in the last financial year, but to look at any one year in isolation would be misleading. It is important that we consider the whole-life costs of the bridge, including the major costs of renewal and upgrading over time. That is clearly what the architects of the 1968 act had in mind.

That is a solid point. I mentioned the £5 million that is raised by tolls on the Erskine bridge. The total amount raised by tolls on bridges in Scotland is over £20 million. Perhaps the SNP needs to answer even bigger questions in the future. The amendment, which has been lodged by the SNP, seeks to prevent the restoration of tolling on the bridge until there has been a committee inquiry into bridge tolling and the way in which the £20 million that I mentioned is raised. As a number of members of the Transport and the Environment Committee have said, the SNP could have proposed that during passage of the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 last year. They chose not to do so. They choose now to propose it in the most opportunist way. They cannot bear to let the bandwagon roll by unboarded. We do not think that the error that has been made on the toll order for the Erskine bridge is the basis for an inquiry into tolls everywhere. Such an inquiry would find what we already know: that the pattern of bridge tolls across Scotland is inconsistent, and that what is true of one major estuary is not always true of another. That fact is not confined to Scotland: it is true in the rest of Britain and in the rest of Europe. If the SNP has now decided that it is against bridge tolls everywhere—as one or two of its members seem to be saying—that will be a notable U-turn. This time last year, it was not against bridge tolls. This time last week, it was not against bridge tolls. Suddenly it has discovered that there may be an easy gesture to be made that had escaped its attention. Mr Ingram claimed—and Mr Morgan made the same claim—that the Erskine bridge toll amounted to a tax. He talked about the annual surpluses from the Erskine bridge tolls. As with the New  Roads and Street Works Act 1991, to which Mr Ingram referred earlier, he has failed to understand the nature of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968. It was explained by another member that the level of tolls could not simply be varied to reflect the annual maintenance costs of the Erskine bridge. The bridge is built to last 120 years. The tolls must cover not only maintenance but capital costs, not only the 30 years of its life so far, but also the 90 years of its future. We can anticipate far greater capital costs in future than those of the last 30 years.

In years in which there is a surplus from the tolls, it indeed goes into the general transport budget. It is equally true that in years in which there is a deficit, that deficit is met from the general transport budget. What sets the Erskine bridge apart—and the reason that we believe that the present system will work—is that the fact that the tolling regime is in place provides users of the bridge with a guarantee for the capital and revenue requirements of the bridge over the next 90 years. That is not true in every case.

On the contrary. I will clarify again a point that has clearly been misunderstood. The figures that SPICe produced on revenue expenditure show £19 million. Nobody challenges the accuracy of those figures. A further £21 million or so has been spent on the capital budget for the Erskine bridge. The gap is a good deal narrower than it looks at first sight. We anticipate that, over the 120-year life of the bridge, that gap may narrow and disappear. The main point is that the bill that we have introduced today allows Parliament to revisit the tolls in five years' time and will continue to allow that. We are therefore making a decision for now and for the next five years. We are not removing Parliament's scrutiny of future plans for the bridge. We have, of course, considered carefully the arguments against tolls on Erskine bridge. Those arguments have been put by Des McNulty, Hugh Henry and Trish Godman as local MSPs. West  Dunbartonshire Council and Renfrewshire Council also held those views. The Executive acknowledges the force of those arguments but, as the minister responsible, Sarah Boyack made a judgment in August last year to continue the tolls for the next five years. We believe that it is right to do so. We acknowledge the force of the arguments around the transport infrastructure and public transport provision around and across the Erskine bridge. We encourage the local authorities in the area to make bids to the public transport fund in order to improve the provision of public transport. We do not accept the view that the level of congestion does not impact on economic development. Many members know that congestion can be a bind on economic development. The increase in traffic on Erskine bridge over the past five years shows that the growth of public transport provision in that area would be of great assistance. I hope that the local authorities in the area will consider that.

It is not a choice between tolling the Erskine bridge and promoting economic development. The purpose of Executive policy in such areas is to generate income in both directions. The Erskine bridge tolls are there for the reasons that have already been described. The development of the local economy is a matter that the Executive will continue to consider in other unrelated ways. Finally, the point about whether the legislation should be retrospective has already been raised in the debate. The Executive has always been clear that tolls should continue to be paid. That decision was taken in principle last summer. Motorists and others would not have had any reasonable expectation that tolls would end. Until last Thursday evening, we had not done anything, intentionally or unintentionally, to raise such expectation. If we failed to make the legislation retrospective, we would open the Executive to claims for repayment of tolls—not least from Fiona McLeod. Those claims could not be justified by the claimants, nor could they be checked adequately by the Executive. That would compound the confusion and we would end up by imposing greater burdens on the public purse. We have therefore acted quickly and decisively to plug the gap retrospectively. The Executive has taken sensible action to  recover from an unfortunate administrative mistake that we regret. Our action also avoids legal and administrative uncertainty. The Executive's policy is straightforward, as are the general principles of the bill. I commend the motion to the chamber.

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that during 1994-95—to take another year at random as he has done—there was a deficit on bridge tolls and that the amount that was spent on maintenance was more than £1 million in excess of the amount raised from tolls?

As has been said, today's parliamentary business is about correcting an administrative error. It is not about rewriting history or about a Government seeking to act outwith the law and then covering its back. What the Executive is doing—and it makes no apology for this—is acting quickly and decisively to provide a secure legal basis for actions to be carried out in  good faith, and to bring those matters to Parliament at the earliest opportunity to ensure transparency in what we do, and to recognise that ultimate authority for the actions of ministers lies with the will of the chamber. It is for Parliament to consider and debate the sequence of events, as we have already begun to do. It is Parliament that will expect to see the outcome of the inquiry into what went wrong—that will happen. It is also for Parliament to address the urgent issues arising from those events. We believe that it is essential to act without delay. Every week during which tolls are not collected on the Erskine bridge costs the public purse about £100,000. We do not enjoy the luxury, as an Executive or as a Parliament, of writing off such sums as if they do not count. That is why we have introduced this emergency bill, under rule 9.21 of the standing orders. We do not lightly seek Parliament's approval for the procedure, but it is our firm view that it is the most appropriate course of action to take. As was said just before I rose to speak, it is for ministers to make the case that this is indeed emergency legislation, and it is for Parliament to decide whether it is. It has been said that we are somehow rushing Parliament and reducing its legitimate right of scrutiny. In fact, if Parliament passes the emergency bill today, there will be more debating time in the chamber than would have been the case had an order been laid before the summer recess, as it ought to have been. Debate on the toll order would have been limited to perhaps an hour and a half in the Transport and the Environment Committee, and perhaps nine minutes' consideration of an affirmative resolution in the Parliament. Members should contrast that with the level of scrutiny that is on offer today.

I am happy to address precisely those concerns. Mr Ingram said that the affirmative resolution procedure invokes a parliamentary inquiry, and one of his colleagues also made the same case. There has clearly been confusion in the SNP between section 2 of the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 1968 and section 4 of that act. Section 4, which ought to have been invoked in May or June, allows the extension of the toll period. Section 2 allows an increase in tolls. It is in the event of an increase in tolls that the parliamentary rules and procedures may lead to an inquiry, but that will not happen in the event of an extension of the toll period.

That is a good try, but it is not a convincing argument. Frankly, if that is the best that Fiona Hyslop can do in understanding the bill that we are dealing with today, we may not have the most interesting of debates. I tried a number of times during his speech to make a point to Mr Ingram about the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991. It is worth pointing out that that act applies to new roads and streets built after 1991, but not to the Erskine bridge. The case that Mr Ingram made is therefore entirely false. Perhaps that was another administrative error on the SNP's part in approaching the debate.

I would like to make progress with my speech. The bill that we propose raises no new issues. It does not seek to increase the level of tolls, or to alter the length of toll period that would otherwise have applied, nor does it seek to alter the form of future consideration of tolls by Parliament. It simply puts collecting tolls on the Erskine bridge back on the same sound statutory footing that existed before 2 July this year. The details remain unchanged. I hope that three facts stand out from this whole episode. First, there was a mistake in the failure to renew the toll order. It was a serious mistake, but a simple administrative mistake. Secondly, ministers acted decisively once the facts became known and as soon as definitive legal advice was available. We suspended the tolls without delay, and we will restore the tolls on a sound legal basis as soon as possible. Thirdly, we are determined to learn the lessons. The inquiry that Sarah Boyack has set in train will report in a matter of days. It will look at how the error occurred, what action should be taken and—reflecting Annabel Goldie's point—how the Executive can improve its systems, using IT and other methods to monitor the completion of scheduled work to ensure that such errors will in future be picked up in good time. The inquiry's conclusions and recommendations will be made public. Murray Tosh asked about the conduct of the inquiry; that was a legitimate question. As Sarah Boyack mentioned, Nicola Munro was appointed as head of the development department only in the past few weeks, after the error that we are asking her to investigate took place. She came not from elsewhere in the department but from a different department. She will report her findings to the Scottish Executive board, which includes two  external non-executive members, and to the permanent secretary of the overall Administration. The conclusions and recommendations of that report will be made available to Parliament. We shall honour our contractual obligations. Our toll collection company is continuing to receive its monthly management fee, even though it is not currently collecting tolls. Thanks to our speed in bringing the matter before Parliament—if Parliament approves our proposal—there will be no need for that company to consider laying off any of its staff. Likewise, if we act as quickly as the Executive wishes Parliament to do, the shortfall from the loss of toll income will be limited enough to be met from in-year savings in the motorway and trunk roads budget, without the need for cuts to programmes. That would not be the case for long if Parliament did not choose to act promptly on the matter, nor would the job security of staff working on the bridge be as firmly secured as it will be through early action. It has been claimed that the methods chosen to introduce the bill do not appear to be well considered, fully consulted upon or fit for purpose. We acknowledge that any emergency legislation cannot enjoy the same consultation as would usually be available for primary legislation. However, ministers are clear that the bill is a well-considered proposition. We did not chose to use this route lightly but, given the considerable and growing cost to the public purse, it was essential that we acted swiftly and decisively. We have done so on the basis of careful consideration of all the options that are available. Today's proceedings will allow a degree of debate in Parliament that would not have happened with a straightforward toll order, as had originally been planned. We contend that the bill is indeed fit for purpose, and will restore the status quo that existed before 1 July 2001. Nothing will have changed apart from the loss of a few days' revenue, and some important lessons will have been learned. On that basis, I urge Parliament to endorse our plans for swift and decisive action, to recognise that full consideration today will minimise the disruption to the business of Parliament, minimise the uncertainty for those who are employed at the Erskine bridge, and minimise the loss of public funds. I ask members to support the motion.

Will the member give way?

rose—

Our transport research programme includes a project on assessing the effectiveness of roadworks. The results of the project will help measure the impact of roadworks by utility companies on urban congestion, and on other road users.

We recognise the concerns that Robert Brown mentions. They are among the matters that the research that I mentioned will investigate. Sarah Boyack also gave a commitment some time ago to the Transport and the Environment Committee, to consult on precisely the matters that Robert Brown raises and how best they should be tackled. We will carry out that commitment in the summer.

The research that we have commissioned will certainly build on the findings of the report to which Shona Robison refers. We will seek to measure the impact of roadworks that are carried out by utilities companies, and will consider reinstatement time, which Robert Brown mentioned. A number of options will be open to us once we have completed that study, and we will consult on those options. Powers exist under the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 for local authorities to introduce charges for delays in the completion of roadworks. We will consult on that and consider whether it would be appropriate for us to follow the same course here.

The Scottish Executive employs a performance audit group to audit and report on compliance with the quality plan, which the operating companies have agreed with us as part of their responsibility under the terms of their contracts. The companies are also required to provide information in relation to 30 key performance indicators.

We are aware of certain areas in which grass cutting and other roadside issues have not been addressed as quickly as they should have been. We are also aware of other areas in which contract compliance has not been as quick as it should have been. We are in constant communication with the contractors on those issues. We follow the usual, best-value regime: if the work is not done, the money will not be paid.

Litter is an area for which some of the responsibilities between local authorities and those who maintained trunk roads were blurred when trunk road maintenance was carried out by local authorities. I have no doubt that councils and the trunk road maintenance operating companies will be in communication about that matter. Members should be aware that responsibility for removing litter on trunk roads is not universally that of the trunk road maintenance operating companies. On streets that are neither motorways nor special roads, litter remains the responsibility of the local authority.

We are keeping a watchful eye on the clearance and maintenance of roads, both those that are the responsibility of local authorities and those that are the responsibility of the trunk road operating companies.

I am aware of those issues. Only last week, Cathy Jamieson raised a similar issue with Sarah Boyack, as a result of which Sarah Boyack has been in contact with the contractor for that area and with South Ayrshire Council. In that case, interim measures are in place that will result in work being done by the contractor.

The Executive recently commissioned a research study that will inform the development of a strategic view about priorities for rail, inland waterway and sea freight movements around Scotland. An integral part of the work will be to assess the rail projects now up and running with the aid of freight facilities grants from the Scottish Executive.

I am indeed aware of the issue that the member raises. It is a condition of the freight facilities grant that the money is spent in the way that the member describes. Systems are in place and we will conduct further research to ensure that money is spent in that way. We do not want to divert from the policy directive of encouraging the shift from road to rail, but we will investigate any significant complaints of breaches.

I think that Mr Gallie said "from rail to road" but I am sure that he meant "from road to rail".

Our policy objective is to encourage the shift from road to rail. People will clearly want to raise any impact on neighbourhoods with their local authorities. However, let us be clear that there is an overall strategic purpose behind the encouragement of that modal shift—we want environmental gains and we want benefit to people for whom road usage is essential and to communities that are affected by lorry movements. We will not be deflected from our objective of transferring 18 million lorry miles from road to rail. As the member may know, we have upped that target in the past few months. I advise communities that have concerns to take them up with their local authorities. Clearly, the planning provision that exists for rail transport should take the levels of freight movement into account.

Michael McMahon is right to draw our attention to one of the problems with the freight facilities grant, which is that it is in many ways a victim of its own success. Applications have been outstanding for too long precisely because of the freight industry's level of interest in obtaining public support for the transfer from road to rail. We are urgently addressing those issues. Mr Stirling, of the company that Mr McMahon mentioned, spoke to me at the rail freight conference that I addressed a few weeks ago. I am familiar with his case, as is Sarah Boyack. Individual applications on commercial issues should be treated in confidence—I am sure that neither Mr McMahon nor Mr Stirling would expect them to be treated otherwise. We are trying to ensure that applications are processed. We advise all applicants to base their applications on secured custom—in other words, on commercial agreements with customers to move freight. That is an appropriate basis on which to proceed.

We have now completed consideration of the responses to our consultation paper, and we aim to lay regulations before the recess.

The member will be aware that mobile phone companies have made a commitment to improve consultation, and to work with communities to achieve that. I believe that they are genuinely committed to doing so, but the case that Sylvia Jackson cites is only one of several that have demonstrated that there is a gap between the mobile phone companies' intention and their achievement, and between the companies doing the consulting and those making the decisions. That is why, when we introduce the regulations, we will meet our commitment to extend planning controls, and why I intend, over the summer, to meet senior figures in the main operating companies and to press them to abide by the spirit as well as the letter of their commitment to consultation.

We have reviewed the range of regulations that apply to telecom developments. When the new regulations appear, members will see that we have achieved a correct balance between the interests of communities affected by the developments that Lloyd Quinan describes and the interests of the wider economy in the continuing development of mobile phone technology.

In response to Sylvia Jackson's question, I mentioned a number of commitments that the companies have already given. One of those is to promote the sensible sharing of sites and masts where that is feasible and where companies can reach agreement on doing that. Both the Scottish Executive and the UK Government take the view that operators should be encouraged to share sites and masts. We will discuss these matters with colleagues, to ensure that nothing that has been said at a European level interferes with our meeting that objective.

We have made excellent progress and I am pleased to announce that, tomorrow, I will publish a consultation paper outlining proposals for the revised arrangements for strategic planning.

I hope so. One of the purposes of the review is to increase communities' sense of ownership of the strategic planning process. The consultation that will begin tomorrow will run until the end of October and will give community groups a chance to make an input. On the Laid question, the member will be aware that there are currently no proposals on the table for a superquarry development in the Highlands. The Highland structure plan confirms that Highland Council will continue to identify possible sites for a superquarry. That plan was modified by the Executive to reflect some of the concerns that have been expressed and to make it clear that the status of the situation is investigatory. If the council presents a proposal, there is no assumption that development will go ahead.

I do not think that the role of the trunk roads authority is specifically a matter for the strategic planning review. We are familiar with the issue that the member raises. We believe that  the trunk roads authority receives adequate information and will conduct visits where that is appropriate and necessary.

I am aware of the widespread interest in this issue. It is worth reminding members that, in 1999, new and tougher planning controls on opencast mining were introduced. Those controls made it clear that any opencast mining proposals had to satisfy environmental and social criteria.

In opening the debate, Allan Wilson emphasised the fact that matters to do with architecture and the built environment cross-cut with many other policy areas in the Executive and touch on the portfolios of a number of ministers. He set out the ways in which he intends to promote and implement policy objectives on architecture: first, by the continuing advocacy of the benefits of good building design and, secondly, by working with others to develop conditions in which good architecture can flourish. There is one further way in which we can deliver on our policy commitment in that area; through the statutory framework that regulates development. The two principal components of that framework are the planning and building control systems, for both of which I have ministerial responsibility. This debate gives me an opportunity to say something about the place of design in the statutory framework and about what we intend to do to improve its effectiveness with regard to design quality.

I am sorry that Bruce Crawford again shows an unwillingness to participate in a proper debate on those matters. In response to the point—

Members who were in the chamber during Mr Russell's speech will recall that he spent 14 minutes asking us to make a policy announcement. Now, without having heard a policy announcement, he leaps to his feet to raise a point of order. Gosh, we cannot have Executive ministers making policy announcements in Parliament. That would never do. Bruce Crawford said—

I will give Bruce Crawford an opportunity to come in again in a moment. Bruce Crawford said that members' criticising Mike Russell's speech was a credit to Mr Russell, as if he had made some penetrating points to which we felt the need to respond. Members of all parties felt the need to respond to Mike Russell's speech because, of all the speeches in a two and a half hour debate, it was the only one that struck the wrong note, missed the mood of the chamber and struck a completely negative theme. Mr Russell spent two minutes complaining that ministers had not said enough about policy and the following 12 minutes carping about what Allan Wilson had said, without suggesting one policy. One of the advantages of a full debate, which we have had this afternoon, is that it has given us a good deal of time—two and a half hours—to see whether we can find any published statement on architectural policy from the SNP. I am sorry to report to the chamber that, in two and a half hours, we have found no evidence of the SNP having produced a policy on architecture or the built environment.

In a moment, Mr Crawford. As Mr Crawford wants to come in, he must have the opportunity to respond to one of the facts that we have discovered in the past two and a half hours. It is that typing in the word "architecture" on the SNP website produces the result, "No match found." I will give way to Mr Crawford. [ Interruption. ] Mr Crawford has missed his opportunity to intervene. I am sorry about that.

Since Mr Russell clearly has little experience of making policy, let me describe for him the process that we have followed.  We have approached architecture policy and policy on the built environment in a most inclusive way. The hundreds of responses to our consultation, which for him were a matter to be scoffed at and talked down, included many responses from organisations representing their communities. They included amenity groups, civic groups, heritage groups and representatives of the public who, unlike Mr Russell, welcomed the fact that the first ever national architecture policy would be brought forward by this Executive in this Parliament. It was welcomed by almost everyone, but sadly not by Mr Russell. I am also sorry that Bruce Crawford could not welcome the consultation and that he felt that the opportunity to debate issues in advance of our policy being proposed and published is to be regretted. I am sorry that he could not take a more positive view. This debate was an opportunity for the SNP to respond to the consultation, as it failed to do so, but the opportunity was again missed. I should make another point in response to Mr Russell's extraordinary comments. He is concerned that the launch of our architecture policy has been delayed. He is right; it has been delayed as a consequence of the UK general election. That may be of marginal interest to Mr Russell's party, but for those of us with responsibility for government, it is clearly a matter that we must take into account. It is important to say, in response to the debate, that the policy will be published next month. I hope that the majority of members welcome the opportunity, which they have taken, to comment on the policy. When he prepares the final policy for publication, Allan Wilson will be able to reflect on what they have had to say.

Yes.

The majority of members in the chamber will have little difficulty deciding whether Ms Hyslop or Ms Curran knows the Executive's position and the decisions that were taken yesterday. The fundamental issue for policy on both architecture and building development is that they should reflect and respond to the quality of the environment and built heritage in this country. The key principles underlying that aim were restated by Sam Galbraith last November when he updated and republished the fundamental national policy planning guideline 1, which will provide the framework to develop matters. We of course acknowledge that, in the responses to the architectural consultation, there was criticism of the performance of the planning system with respect to design; that there is too great a gap between the system's intentions with regard to design and their implementation in practice; and that the planning system is not  succeeding in establishing an effective framework for supporting and encouraging good design. Those criticisms have foundation and we need to address them. Murray Tosh was quite right to highlight the importance of improving public participation in the planning system; the Executive will continue to work on that area and seek wider views on it in very short course. It is precisely to elicit and to respond to such views that we have consulted so carefully in the development of our policy. In regulating development, the planning system is not just concerned with individual buildings or projects, but with the wider picture—the spaces between buildings and the organisation and pattern of urban and rural settlements. A great challenge for the planning system is to deliver buildings of quality and high-quality wider environments. I am aware that time presses, but I must respond to one or two points that have been raised. Like Des McNulty and Robin Harper—but unlike Mike Russell and possibly Bill Aitken—the Executive's role on the professional side of architecture and design is precisely to stimulate discussion through debates of this kind, not to lay down the law. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made much the same point. It is important to be clear about the role of government in this process. The issues of accessibility and energy efficiency that have been raised are indeed key for the building standards review and for our work on architectural policy. As Robin Harper will know, we are already examining sustainability aspects of building regulations, particularly thermal requirements and flooding and draining issues. That work will be pulled together later this year and a broad range of views will be sought on how to develop it. Linda Fabiani mentioned accessibility. As I am sure she will know, that matter is already subject to the requirements of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, which requires designers to take access into account. Andy Kerr has already brought the specific issue of Hairmyres hospital to our attention and it is being investigated even as we speak. We should all reflect from time to time on the fundamental purpose of building and architecture. It is to meet human needs; to create places in which individuals can flourish; to revive hope and realise potential in our communities; and to help create and sustain a decent and inclusive society. If we lose sight of those aims, we are in danger of losing sight of the real and lasting benefits that good architecture and design can bring. It is too important a matter for us to neglect. I commend the motion to the Parliament.

Will the member give way?

The completion of funding packages for those links is the responsibility of the promoters of the links, which are Clackmannanshire Council in the case of the passenger link and Railtrack in the case of the freight link. I understand that Clackmannanshire Council is meeting Railtrack again this week to discuss the cost of the project. We expect to be kept fully in touch with the result of those talks.

The reports that we have received from Clackmannanshire Council and Railtrack show the gap between the funding estimates that the council initially submitted and those that Railtrack later submitted. That is why we are calling for both parties to meet urgently to discuss those costs, close the gap and show that a viable, value-for-money project remains for us to support.

I will not make commitments before the parties that proposed the project produce firm, agreed and costed proposals for the project. Members will be aware of our commitment from the public transport fund to support the project as it was initially designed and proposed to us. There is a serious difference between the figures that were approved at that time and attracted our support and the figures that Railtrack has produced. It is for those bodies to get together and sort out the difference. When they have done so, we will study closely the viability of the project. If the project remains viable, it will receive our support.

We are not in a position to clarify that. That is why we asked those bodies to talk to each other and examine—together—the basis of their figures. They are to produce a clear and agreed package with which we can proceed. We expect both parties to recognise the difficulties that their failure to agree on figures at the outset has caused. Sarah Boyack will meet the director of Railtrack in Scotland shortly. We expect Railtrack to give us assurances about the basis on which it will assess and respond to future bids from third parties such as Clackmannanshire Council.

A total of 269 representations have been received.

Mr Canavan has been around long enough to know that ministers—who have a statutory involvement in the structure plan process—cannot appear to show favour by meeting one party without undertaking to meet all the others. Although I recognise the plan's importance not only to the matters that he has raised but to many others, meeting all 269 of those who have expressed an interest would not allow me to expedite the decision in the way that he would like.

Of the representations I mentioned, a great majority—237, or 88 per cent—related to one particular part of Cathy Peattie's constituency; the Bo'ness area. Some representations were for and others against the green belt proposals for that area; all will be considered as part of the process, along with the representations relating to the football club and any others that have been received. It is obvious that the quicker we can reach a conclusion on this matter, the better it is for all concerned, but members would not expect us to miss out the whole process of considering representations on all these matters.

I assure the member that every effort will be made to expedite the process and we will certainly aim to equal or better the 40-week target that we set. We should recall that Sarah Boyack reduced the target from 52 weeks early last year, and we are trying to achieve that. As I said in response to Cathy Peattie, we must recognise our duty to consider all the representations that we have received and not to act unfairly to any of those who have made them. I am sure that Mr Matheson and others will acknowledge that obligation upon us. We will make every effort to expedite the structure plan process within those constraints.

It is a pleasure to respond to the debate. I begin by noting that rural transport in Scotland is bouncing back from past neglect. Investment by the Executive is beginning to make a real difference to individuals and communities throughout rural Scotland. We are getting people moving. The debate has been an important demonstration of the value of the Scottish Parliament and of the Scottish Executive's strategy of providing, as I think was cited by Mr Welsh, Scottish solutions to Scottish problems and an opportunity for our transport policies to make a difference. The debate has also been notable for allowing many members to raise issues of local or regional importance. I am sorry that Murray Tosh felt that there was a deficit in interventions in the debate, but in fact that deficit allowed many concerns to be aired. If anyone is in any doubt about the difference that the Executive's policies are making, they should remember that, for example, support for lifeline air and ferry services is at record levels. Without that support, the charges for air services to HIAL's 10 airports would treble. Without that support, CalMac's ferries would be running without passengers. Without that support, whole communities would wither and die. It is worth while reminding members that one quarter of the users of rural community transport schemes for individuals would be housebound  without those schemes; that Ardnamurchan might not have a single petrol station without the rural petrol stations grant scheme—a scheme that matters a great deal to all the communities in which the money is spent; and that more than 350 new and improved bus services would simply not be running without the rural transport fund. We have invested in rural transport across Scotland. The public transport fund is improving transport interchanges—for example, at Inverness and at Aviemore on the A95—to improve access to surrounding communities and to integrate bus and rail services. The PTF is also assisting Scottish Borders Council with development costs so that it can do the work that it needs to do to achieve, or to make the case for, the reinstatement of a rail link between Edinburgh and the central Borders. A great deal has been done.

What the Borders need—as does every other area in Scotland—is a partnership to achieve the kind of transport developments that we want for the 21 st century.

I wondered whether Fiona McLeod was right that buying the road bridge to Skye was her party's top priority, or whether her party intended to appropriate it without further delay. John Farquhar Munro raised the issue of the freight facilities grant. It is important to note the point that he makes. We have doubled expenditure on that grant, and have secured some notable successes in a modal shift from road to rail. Yes, there are delays in processing the applications, but this is a complex business, because of the need to avoid falling foul of state aid guidelines. It is important to recognise that. All applications are being processed as fast as is possible. We will consider any constructive suggestions for changes to the scheme that would help to speed things up. A number of members—Irene McGugan and David Mundell among them—talked about the importance of the loss of scheduled bus services in rural areas. It is important to recognise that the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 has given ministers new powers to amend the grounds for offering public funding support to operators of rural bus services. Ministers intend to use those powers. We are spending £50 million a year on bus fuel  duty rebates across Scotland for that type of service. Irene McGugan mentioned Aberdeenshire Council. That council is reviewing the services that are supported by tender. It will use the new flexibility in the rural transport fund to provide the money that Irene talked about to support some of those services. Aberdeenshire Council is one of the councils that have received significant upratings in its bus grants from central Government. We recognise that issues exist that go beyond the commercial interests of operating companies. I do not think that the Executive will make a commitment—as I think Irene was implying that we should—to bail out every single commercial operation and every single service. Andrew Welsh raised some interesting European examples of flexible and responsive transport schemes. We would certainly support such examples. Andrew commented that, if we did not do it, his party would. I am pleased to tell him that his party will not have to, because we are already considering whether the regulatory requirements that limit the ability to provide responsive services in rural areas can be amended. Cathy Jamieson highlighted the importance of Community Transport Association funding, which is very much part of the overall picture. Extra grant support of £300,000 for that has been announced today. We are taking important steps in making transport responsive. I will move on to discuss CalMac—as I suspect Duncan Hamilton would like me to. He spoke about accountability and openness in that company. His point is recognised by ministers. As Duncan Hamilton and other members will know, the company has recently undertaken a thorough review of its fares policy. It has done so at the request of ministers, in order to establish the degree to which the general public and its customers are aware of the basis of the fares structure. There are some issues connected with that fares structure that the company has taken on board as a result of consultation. That consultation is a step in the right direction, in terms of accountability. The status of VesCo was mentioned. Let me make it clear that VesCo would act as a procurer of last resort—that is the distinction which needs to be made. In those unlikely circumstances, VesCo would be in a position to use its specialist expertise as the owner of the vessels to bring in an established operator to provide the services.

VesCo is a public agency and would operate on that basis. It is important to address the other issue that Duncan Hamilton raised—road equivalent tariff. RET is part of the on-going consultation on the fares basis. The first findings from that consultation clearly demonstrate that RET is not compatible with a revenue-neutral outcome, as we described. In fact, the deficit grant that the Executive provides to CalMac is running at a record level of £19 million.

I will have to move on. I am sure that Mr Hamilton will have an opportunity to raise those matters again. Maureen Macmillan raised the important matter of today's announcement about the Kirkwall to Invergordon sea freight route. She will know that some days ago, Ross Finnie and Sarah Boyack met Orkney Islands Council to discuss the potential closure of Streamline. It is important to recognise that the service that the company provides will be continued because of support from the Scottish Executive. I know that that does not take on board all the issues that Maureen Macmillan raised today, but I can confirm the Scottish Executive's continued support through the tariff rebate subsidy scheme. It may be that even with an alternative operator or route, the required services will be resumed on the Invergordon route in due course. Over the past four years, we have seen a fundamental change in the importance attached to rural Scotland. In the Scottish Parliament, a much greater number of members represent rural areas than could be the case in Westminster. It is not about promoting rural areas at the expense of urban areas—as Fiona McLeod seemed to imply—but about recognising that the future success of the whole of Scotland depends on the success of all its parts. The Executive is taking the lead in turning that fundamental change in attitude into a fundamental change in policy to support rural areas—transport is playing its full part in that change. We are supporting communities and individuals through  investment in our lifeline air and ferry services, bus services, community transport and infrastructure. Working together, we can continue to make a difference and promote sustainable rural communities across Scotland.

I take the point that Mr Crawford is making. Does he accept that the A95 and A96 were included in the list of investments that were announced only a few weeks ago and that the Orton loop, which he describes as an important rail improvement, is one of the projects that is under consideration in the incremental output statement?

The debate has been rather predictable, but it has been good to have the occasional moment of entertainment. Sadly, the Opposition parties have mainly made the usual array of uncosted promises, as if we could have swingeing tax cuts today and no loss of public services tomorrow. That relates to elections to another place. Many members have listened to the Opposition parties simply to find out who can make the rashest promises. Opposition members are no doubt secure in the confidence that they will never have to deliver on them. The opportunity to invent a crisis was not going to be passed by. Only last week, Simon Hinde warned in the Scottish Daily Express that according to the gloomiest forecasts, the price of petrol could rise to more than £3.60 a gallon. He reckoned without the gloominess of Kenny MacAskill. If there is a chance that the cost might rise to £4 a gallon, Kenny will want to be the first to say so. The Labour party recognises the seriousness and significance of the matter, so we are introducing constructive measures to tackle the issues that face us. Those measures add up to a  strategy for tackling disadvantage in areas that suffer from a low throughput of petrol at the pump or as a result of rural disadvantage. We also want to protect the wider public spending needs of the country as a whole. Kenny MacAskill told us that his pledges were fully costed. He also said that he recognised that tax cuts might threaten public spending, yet he did not offer a single figure to substantiate his costings. The SNP is an Opposition that promises to do everything and promises that doing everything will cost nothing. To help the SNP out, Sarah Boyack brought forward an estimate of the cost of the SNP's proposals. If 10p off a gallon means roughly 2.5p per litre in the language of 2001, we estimate that that could cost Scottish public services in the region of £65 million. It would be interesting to know where that money would come from.

Motorists in Stornoway would take exception to Richard Lochhead's statement. The Office of Fair Trading continues to investigate the price of oil and petrol in Stornoway. However, that said, I will respond to Richard Lochhead's intervention. In his motion, Kenny MacAskill proposes "a harmonisation of fuel prices with our European competitors". Does Kenny MacAskill mean harmonisation with Norway? That country produces more oil than we do, yet it pays more for petrol than we do.

Norway is one of our European competitors, even if Margaret Ewing chooses not to accept that. The SNP often models its policy prescriptions on Norway. Does Scotland want harmonisation with Norway where, although more oil is produced, petrol costs more and the gross domestic product is higher? Or does it want harmonisation with Greece, where petrol is cheap but people are poor? Kenny MacAskill may want to answer that.

I have indeed—

I have also seen—

rose  —

I will certainly take your guidance on that, Presiding Officer. No doubt I will have another opportunity to allow Kenny MacAskill to propose his petrol prices. The fundamental paradox that lies at the heart of SNP policy in this area is that everything about Scotland's economy will be all right in the end because of the infinite value of North Sea oil. SNP members appear not to understand that the main driver for the ups and downs of petrol prices is not the level of taxation but the price of crude oil in global markets. That is what drives the price of petrol at the pump. Today, the price of a barrel of Brent crude is $26.50; six months ago, it was $35. Perhaps Mr MacAskill noticed how much higher our petrol prices were then. Two years ago, the price was barely $10—so low, incidentally, that it put thousands of Scottish jobs at risk. If setting the level of fuel duty on the assumption that prices will be stable or rising would be a mistake, setting the whole of Scotland's revenue and spending plans on the same assumption would be folly. That is the kind of folly which Mr MacAskill's party would have us accept.

I will refer to the Tories. As has been pointed out, they introduced the fuel duty escalator. On the one hand, they wish to compete with the SNP in promising tax cuts that they will never have to make. However, to their credit, their amendment mentions one of the reasonable proposals that the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee report asked the Executive to consider. Sarah Boyack has made it clear that ministers will address those proposals when they respond to the committee's report. Vehicle excise duty is a reserved matter. It is for the Executive to raise such matters with colleagues in the UK Parliament. We will continue to do so and to take up the matters on which we believe that a real impact can be achieved.  The same is true of extending the availability of liquefied petroleum gas, which is already receiving significant funding support. Stations are opening all over Scotland. For those who are concerned about the tourism industry in the Highlands and Islands, it is worth noting how widely spread LPG is in many of the countries that send tourists to the Highlands and Islands. In fact, one of the reasons why LPG is such a success in Highland Scotland is that it is cheap and available to tourists from Italy, the Netherlands and elsewhere. The Executive will operate in the real world and will consider the real choices that face it. We will not pretend that we can have lower tax and better services. Instead, we will invest the money that we have in improved infrastructure and transport throughout Scotland, investing record sums in our lifeline services to remote island and mainland communities and making the case for Scotland's transport needs in our dealings with the UK Government. The Executive is determined to use the Parliament's powers to improve the lot of our people, whether they live in rural communities or in urban Scotland.

Will Mr MacAskill give way?

I am grateful for the opportunity to take part in this debate from the back benches. I do so simply to represent the views of the victim in the case. I thank Johann Lamont for an early opportunity to put those views across. The young woman in question is a student in my constituency. She came to see me to tell me what she felt about Lord Abernethy's judgment and the circumstances of the case. Understandably, she did not dwell on the trauma of the event itself, but instead talked about the impact on her life: the 18 months waiting for the case to go to trial; the ordeal of the court case; and the bitter twist of the charge of rape being dropped, apparently only because she had borne her terror in silence. She is a mature and compassionate woman, who did not seek out her MSP to rail against the injustice to herself, no matter how she may have felt. Instead, she wanted to know what could be done to ensure that the same situation does not arise again. She wanted to address whether there is a gap in the law and, if there is no gap and the judgment was a misinterpretation, to ensure that it does not worsen the already low conviction rate for rape. My constituent highlighted two matters. She could not understand how the act of which she was a victim could be considered anything other than a rape, an offence and a crime. Further, because the act was considered to be none of those things, she faced the anomaly of being  unable to respond to the debate that arose from the case without losing the anonymity that she rightly wanted to protect and maintain. I have written to ministerial colleagues on both those matters on my constituent's behalf, and I look forward to their replies. I know that she will look beyond her own experience and agree with all the members who have said that what is important is the wider implications of the case. I speak for her directly in saying that if there is a gap in the law, it must be closed without delay.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing today's debate and on the clear and constructive way in which she, among other members, has made the case for the line. I am especially pleased to make my maiden speech as a minister in response to a motion on rail, as I—along with many members who are here this evening—have been, for the past two years, a member of the cross-party group on strategic rail services. Rail is a key part of Scotland's transport infrastructure and we must build on what has been achieved through partnership with industry and the local authorities. The job of the Executive will be to set the priorities to ensure that our most pressing transport challenges are addressed first. As Karen Whitefield said, the A8/M8 corridor is recognised as being of great importance to the economy of central Scotland and to the country as a whole. Multimodal studies, which have been mentioned, are currently under way to find solutions to the transport challenges in the A8/M8 corridor and in central Scotland around the A80 and M74 northern extension. The consultants were appointed last December and their studies will be completed by April 2002. The significance  of the Glasgow to Edinburgh corridor for transport and economic development was highlighted from the beginning, in the first scoping study. As Murray Tosh said, rail capacity is recognised as a problem on the main Edinburgh to Glasgow route, as is capacity on the roads. Mary Mulligan suggested that travel to work would be a key consideration and I assure her that that is being taken into account in the multimodal studies that are being carried out. We must address rail capacity, encourage a switch from road to rail and achieve social justice through the creation of job opportunities. One of the options that the studies will consider is the reopening of the route between Bathgate and Airdrie. However, the assessment that will be carried out as part of the transport corridor studies will inevitably be fairly broad, at least in the first instance. It will contribute to the possibility of further, more detailed work if the scheme can meet the necessary appraisal criteria, either by itself or as part of a package of complementary measures. No doubt all members who are present this evening will await the results of those studies with interest. Members know that both the Parliament and ministers have new competencies and powers in respect of railways, one of which is to issue directions and guidance to the Strategic Rail Authority on the Scottish passenger rail franchise.

Some of the appraisal criteria are already in the public domain. I imagine that those that are not will be released as the studies are completed. The process that is under way at the moment is to get the central Scotland transport model in place. The other schemes will be based on the results of that process. Members will know that a consultation paper has been issued on strategic priorities for the Scottish passenger rail franchise. More than 200 responses have been received and the results of the exercise will inform our direction and guidance to the SRA later this year. Those strategic priorities and the direction and guidance that we issue will be the context in which we will set priorities for all proposals for enhancing the passenger rail system. Bristow Muldoon and Mary Mulligan talked about the Edinburgh to Bathgate line. While it is impossible to prejudge the consideration of the strategic priorities, the points that have been made in relation to the line have been made by others and will be taken into account when we come to make conclusions about what the priorities should be.  I wondered whether Fiona Hyslop was going to lead us into a dispute between a Bathgate to Airdrie line and an Airdrie to Bathgate line. I thought that it would be better to avoid that. The advantages of reinstating the line are obvious. As has been said, it would open up new opportunities for people in West Lothian to access Glasgow and for people in North Lanarkshire to access Edinburgh and Livingston. It would also ease capacity problems on both road and rail in the central belt. While I was listening to members, particularly when they mentioned the Harthill gap, it struck me that something less tangible has changed. When the line closed 40 years ago—or even when the line was lifted 20 years ago—there was a tendency for people in the west to look west and for people in the east to look east. That attitude has now gone, which is why projects of the kind that we are talking about, and others that are being dealt with in the transport studies, attract a good deal of interest. It has to be said that ScotRail and Railtrack have examined the commercial viability of the line and have concluded that it would not be able to operate without subsidy. That is not a bar to the project; it is something that is true of most lines of the same size. The councils have approached the Executive to explore the potential for developing more detailed project proposals and have suggested that they might apply to the public transport fund. The project would not be cheap. A figure of £30 million was mentioned today and a figure of £19 million appeared in the original report that was commissioned by West Lothian Council. Members will accept that both those figures are rough and that even the larger of them might rise substantially. We are talking about a substantial financial commitment and we need to address the possible sources of funding for such projects. Members will know that the Scottish Executive has committed £150 million to the public transport fund between 2001 and 2004. I can announce that the arrangements for next year's round under the fund will allow authorities to make bids to a preparation pool. That means that they will be able to bid for the sums of money required to carry out the feasibility studies that will allow projects that are not yet fully worked up to be progressed. That will be particularly relevant to projects such as the one that we are discussing. The Airdrie to Bathgate line will have to compete with other projects and, while I would dearly love to make my first ministerial speech as the minister who likes to say yes, I will instead be the minister who likes to say, "Bring forward proposals, work them up and, in the context that we have set—the growth that we seek to encourage in rail transport  and the recognition of the particular needs of the central corridor—we will await with interest the proposal that is brought forward." Supporters of the Airdrie to Bathgate line will be in competition with supporters of other projects at the feasibility stage, as well as at the full project stage. However, the creation of that preparation pool within the public transport fund offers real encouragement to everyone with projects at that stage. I remind members that there are other sources of funding, such as the integrated transport fund, the rail modernisation fund and the rail passenger partnership—the last two are, of course, UK funds. I welcome the constructive and realistic approach of the members who have spoken in this evening's debate. We all recognise that it is not possible to meet every aspiration and expectation in transport. With a project of this kind, we need to be able to demonstrate real benefits and value for money. Projects that can do that will receive support. The promoters of the Airdrie to Bathgate project have argued clearly for the major benefits that it would generate. It is now up to them to take the opportunity to make a bid for funds that will allow them to carry out the kind of robust appraisal that will demonstrate the potential of the line. I look forward to seeing the results of that.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the fish processing industry and what matters were discussed. (S1O-3121)

Is the minister aware that 100 fish processors from Aberdeen and Buchan met on Tuesday this week and unanimously called for an end to short-term tie-ups, to protect the jobs of thousands of factory workers in the fish processing industry? Does she accept that, in welcoming last week's announcement of £1 million in Executive support, those processors will continue to look to the Parliament for a positive response to their willingness to restructure their sector of the fisheries industry?

Will the member give way?

Does Mr Salmond agree with commentators who took the view that the vote on that motion last week was a rejection of the decommissioning scheme that was offered by the minister, or not?

The Scottish fishing industry has reached a moment of truth and must choose now which course it wants to follow. The Parliament must also make a decisive choice. Those who believe that that choice was made last week fail to understand or acknowledge the nature of the choices that are before us. The choice between tie-up and decommissioning is not just between the long term and the short term, important though that is, but between two different points of view: how the fishing industry got to where it is now and where it should go from here. I have talked to those involved in the protests in recent weeks and it is quite clear that some still do not accept that decommissioning is the way forward. Some reject decommissioning as merely a redundancy package for the fishing fleet. That rejection is based on the false hope that the fish can never really run out and that all the shortages, quotas and closures are the fault of meddling scientists and Brussels bureaucrats. If that was the case, there would be no need to cut capacity and fishermen could carry on fishing without change until kingdom come. There is another view, however, within the industry. Back in 1990, Danny Couper of the Scottish Fish Merchants Federation told an industry conference in Glasgow that if fishermen did not change the way they fished, they would end up wiping out fish stocks, which would deny future generations a livelihood. That warning rings only too true today. The simple truth, which is recognised by many fishermen and processors alike, is that there are too few fish being chased by too many boats, because fishermen over the years have taken too many fish out of the sea. It is always tempting to blame someone else, but an industry that does not recognise that reality can have no long-term  future.

That is an interesting proposition, and Mr Swinney was clear that he knew what the will of Parliament was. Reading about what was decided last week, I believe that it is not clear whether we were talking about a tie-up instead of decommissioning, a tie-up paid for out of decommissioning or a tie-up as well as decommissioning. Let me say that fishermen on both sides of the argument agree on one thing: they are fed up with the minority of skippers who cheat on technical conservation measures. Those are people who place a small-mesh net inside a large one and who wedge a car tyre in the cod end. Those are the tricks of the trade of a minority that does not believe in conservation or which does not care about conservation.

No, I will not. The message from Parliament must be as clear today as the message last week was confused and contradictory. That message must be: yes, to the fleet taking responsibility for its own actions; yes, to decommissioning and a cut in capacity; yes, to new and effective technical measures; and yes, to proper enforcement, so that every penny of public money that is spent on the industry is spent as it should be, to secure a sustainable future for Scottish fishing.

Does Mr Salmond agree that it is the fishing industry that has pressed for a long-term decommissioning scheme and long-term restructuring? Will he take this opportunity to welcome that and the fact that it is a Scottish scheme that has been introduced by the Scottish Executive?

It is a matter of some satisfaction to those of us who have worked with the fisheries industry over the years that it continues to attract the attention of Scotland's Parliament and of members of all parties. Today's announcement of support from Scotland's ministers is welcome, particularly as it was made in the Scottish Parliament. Queries were raised earlier about whether the announcement was made by means of a novel procedure, but I do not think that that was the case. Statements of such importance certainly ought to made in the chamber, and we should all welcome that procedure.

I like to discuss matters closely with ministers, when I get the opportunity to do so, but I did not announce last week that a decommissioning scheme would be set up. There has been a campaign for a decommissioning scheme for the Scottish fisheries industry for many years. Rhona Brankin made history today when she announced that scheme to the chamber. Had I been able to stand up last Thursday at the Hub and announce a £25 million decommissioning scheme to 300 or 400 Scottish fishermen, I would have received a positive response. I look forward to the industry's response to Rhona Brankin's positive message. The decommissioning initiative creates the possibility of a sustainable, long-term future for Scotland's fisheries industry and Scotland's fishing communities. Surely, above all, that is what we are here to debate and to achieve. There has been a sea change over recent years in the Scottish fisheries industry: a growing recognition of the need to match capacity to available stocks of the fish that are there to be caught. That recognition means that it is Scottish fishermen and their organisations that have campaigned for a decommissioning scheme that would allow a planned and funded reduction in the capacity, in particular, of the white fish sector. That restructuring is essential.

I absolutely accept Mrs Ewing's point. I support and applaud the fact that the Scottish fisheries industry, and Scottish ministers, have taken the lead together in working up technical measures to promote conservation that the rest of Europe would do well to follow. I urge ministers to continue to press that point. We all recognise that restructuring is essential, not just in the long term but as early as possible. The fact that ministers have identified £25 million to make that happen is something, I believe, that all those who are committed to the future of the industry should welcome.

What fishermen need is a  sustainable future for their industry: the scheme will make that happen. Before I finish, I want to put on record my welcome for the minister's announcement that £1 million will be found to implement the recommendations of the action group on fish processing. That group has produced a coherent and sensible set of proposals that are based on the processing sector's recognition that, in the long term, only restructuring can secure a future for fish processing businesses and the many thousands of people who work in them. I urge the minister to ensure that that funding, which is modest in comparison with the funding found for the catching sector— [Interruption.]

To ensure that the industry has a sustainable long-term future, I urge the minister to ensure that funding for the processing sector includes support for restructuring. What we need for both sectors of the fishing industry are long-term solutions for long-term problems. I welcome today's announcements.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps can be taken to improve the competitive position of the Scottish water industry. (S1O-2991)

The minister will be aware of the evidence on that subject that is being taken by the Transport and the Environment Committee of the Parliament. Does he agree with witnesses from all over Scotland who have highlighted the competitive advantages of having a single Scottish water authority? That would lead to increased purchasing power, improved opportunities to supply customers with outlets all over Scotland and better standards of customer service. Does he agree that the best way to improve the industry's competitiveness is to unite Scottish water in a single high quality, publicly owned public service provider?

Does the First Minister agree that, beside curbing the liability of those in receipt of council tax benefits, another good way of protecting the interests of low-income consumers is to have an equitable scheme of water charges—charges that are the same throughout Scotland? Does he agree that one way of pursuing that would be to consider seriously the proposal for a single Scottish water authority?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are in place to prevent trespassing and vandalism on rail embankments and lines. (S1O-2900)

I welcome the minister's partnership approach. Is she aware that it is all too easy in several places in the city of Aberdeen for children and adults to obtain access to the railway line, particularly where it runs between the communities of Tillydrone and Fersands in my constituency? Will she give a commitment to visit that rail embankment when she next comes to Aberdeen, to see for herself the work that needs to be done to make that area safe for the people who live there and for those who travel and work on the trains?

To ask the Scottish Executive, further to the answer to question S1W-11988 by Ms Wendy Alexander on 27 December 2000, what recent discussions it has had with representatives of the Scottish paper industry. (S1O-2848)

The minister will be aware of the situation at Donside paper mill in my constituency. Does she recognise that the paper industry has long-term needs for investment, skills and equipment to remain competitive? Does she agree that effective co-operation between unions and management at Donside has been essential in efforts to identify a new operator for the mill? Will she make a point of meeting the Graphical, Paper and Media Union? Will she ensure that the local enterprise network continues to support Donside paper mill and the Scottish paper industry as a whole?

To ask the Scottish Executive what recent discussions it has had with representatives of North of Scotland Water Authority regarding the future structure of the water industry. (S1O-2779)

I thank the minister. Does he recognise the growing competitive pressures on Scotland's publicly owned water industry? Does he accept that the large-scale new investment that the industry will require runs the risk of creating a gap between charges to customers in the north of Scotland and to those elsewhere? Will he consider carefully the case for a single, Scotland-wide, publicly owned water authority, with the benefits that that would bring, especially to customers in the north and to the competitive position of the Scottish water industry as a whole?

I listened with interest to Jamie McGrigor's explanation of the thinking behind bringing today's debate to the chamber. It is unfortunate that he seemed to be unaware of the fact that Scottish fishermen's representatives are—even as we speak—working together with representatives of the Scottish Executive and the UK Government in Brussels to achieve an emergency cod recovery programme that is compatible with a sustainable future for the Scottish fisheries industry.

Scottish fishermen will be bemused at the suggestion that the important question about cod recovery plans is who gets in first instead of who gets it right with the support of the industry. Ministers have worked to achieve the latter—we should welcome that. Having heard Jamie McGrigor last week denounce the principle of salmon conservation in a debate on legislation that was before the chamber, I expected the worst this morning. However, at least he did not go as far as to say that cod conservation was unnecessary. Perhaps we should welcome small mercies. I also listened closely to Richard Lochhead's speech in support of his amendment. Although the speech started with the usual ritual glorification of civil service minutes, I should be fair and say that it largely supported the Scottish Executive's current negotiating position in Brussels. That position supports the limited-area proposition and seasonal closures to protect spawning, but it opposes the suggested requirement for 160mm mesh nets. It ensures that the map of key areas of the North sea reflects conservation needs instead of placing all the burdens of conservation on one member state. Those sensible propositions attract widespread cross-party and cross-industry support. As has been said, it is important that the common position that has been taken by the Government and the industry in the negotiations is sustained and that ministers are able to act with the support of the whole industry. I welcome Alex Johnstone's acknowledgement of the minister's explanation of the need for a two-stage cod recovery programme. This week's negotiations centre on essential emergency measures for the short term and do not in themselves form an adequate future for the industry or a base on which we can build in the longer term. After this week's emergency measures have been agreed, it will be important to continue such a partnership approach to develop a long-term strategy. I agree with members who said that any strategy should contain a radical reduction in industrial fishing and I welcome the minister's clear recognition of that. However, members should be aware that a closure order that covers the east coast of Scotland has already been put in place by the Executive, which has recognised the fact that industrial fishing affects white fishing and that there is a need to limit industrial fisheries to protect North sea cod. As has been said—and as was said in the debate in December—our negotiating position in the EU in the argument with Denmark over the catch of industrial fisheries has been much assisted by the fact that we have 10 votes to Denmark's three. We must protect that position.  Margaret Ewing—who has, unfortunately, left the chamber—had some wise words about the importance of not treating the issue as a political football. We must recognise that fishermen are, like some of the fish they catch—as the SFF has pointed out—an endangered species.

That is not the case. There has been a reduction in the industrial fisheries quota. As I said, a closure order on industrial fishing is in place on the east coast of Scotland. From where I sit, the jobs of fish factory workers in Aberdeen are no more and no less important than the jobs of car workers in the north-east of England. All parties must recognise that Government has a responsibility towards people in that kind of industrial employment, which is why ministers are working actively on long-term strategies for both the fishing and fish processing industries. We must welcome such strategic approaches and the building of a strategic partnership. They deserve the chamber's support.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase the number of primary school teachers. (S1O-2763)

I thank the minister for that answer. Given the speculation that the McCrone negotiations may lead to a reduction in class contact hours for primary teachers of as much as 10 per cent, can he guarantee that new teachers will be trained and recruited in sufficient numbers to ensure that there is no reduction in teacher contact hours for primary school pupils?

The minister will be aware of the work of the action group on fish processing and the role of Scottish Enterprise. Does she recognise that the fish processing industry, like the catching sector, accepts the need for restructuring? Will she continue to give a high priority to securing the future of the processing industry in the city of Aberdeen as well as in rural areas and to protecting the jobs of the thousands of people who work in that industry?

Will the First Minister discuss with the Prime Minister the implications for the Scottish budget of the stated fiscal plans of Mr McLetchie's party, which are to cut Government revenue and expenditure across the UK by £8 billion a year?

Will the member take a point of information?

I welcome the Deputy Minister for Rural Development. As she said, the issues that are being addressed today are of great importance to rural Scotland, but I contend that they are important not only to rural Scotland. My concern is about an urban fish processing industry in Scotland's third city. It employs several thousand manual workers, some in highly skilled and highly demanding jobs, and others in less skilled jobs. Some are full-time jobs and others are part time. Some people are working in large, modern factories for multinational firms, others are in small, family-owned fish houses. They are all threatened by the potential impact of falling fish stocks on the fish processing industry. These issues are not of concern only to fishermen and their communities, important though those concerns are, nor are they significant only to owners and managers in the fish processing sector. In my constituency, and across Aberdeen, as Elaine Thomson said, fish processing jobs are concentrated in the communities that need them most. For example, the community of Tillydrone in my constituency has one of the highest proportions of working single parents anywhere in the United Kingdom, which is due in no small part to the availability of flexible and part-time employment in the fish processing sector. Securing the future of Scottish fisheries, therefore, is not only a matter of conserving stocks, or even business survival; it is also, in urban and rural Scotland, close to the heart of the social inclusion and social justice agendas.  I welcome the steps that have been taken by the ministers in bringing together the expertise of Scottish Enterprise Grampian and the interests of the fish processing industry to plan how best to protect businesses and jobs, whatever the outcome of the fisheries council. I urge the Deputy Minister for Rural Development, in her on-going discussions with that working party, to pay particular attention to the social priorities: to protecting jobs in the long term and short term; to enabling employers to keep jobs in being in the event of a downturn in the early part of next year; and to ensuring that the Scottish industry is in a position to take advantage of a future recovery in supply, particularly in cod and haddock. Protecting those jobs depends on successful negotiation at the fisheries council. The opportunity exists to build on the achievements of recent weeks at the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission and at the talks between the EU and Norway. In both sets of talks, Scottish interests were advanced because our ministers successfully argued their case to fisheries ministers from elsewhere in the UK and because UK ministers succeeded collectively in arguing that case and winning the support of the EU as a whole when conducting negotiations with other fishery countries outside the EU. I know that ministers will not be too distracted by some of the SNP's byzantine obsessions with who leads on what. Most bizarrely, SNP members are unable to recognise that the status of Irish bilateral talks with Scottish fisheries ministers is equal to that of Irish bilateral talks with English fisheries ministers. It is sad that SNP members do not recognise that. I agree with all members who said that a drastic cut in sand eel fisheries would be greatly in the interest of the Scottish white fish industry. That point was made by Jamie Stone, as well as SNP members. I hope that the UK delegation will press that case. If it is resisted by Denmark—which has three votes on the fisheries council—I hope that our representatives will not hesitate to use Britain's 10 votes to vote that country down. The freedom to promote Scotland's interests and the political clout to achieve them is what Scotland's fishermen, fish processors and fish factory workers expect from the Parliament. That is what the Executive continues to deliver.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this matter and the constructive approach of Mike Rumbles's motion. He is primarily concerned with access to dentistry in rural areas; my main focus is on similar issues in the city of Aberdeen and the position of NHS dentistry as a whole. In the bad old days of internal competition in the NHS, general medical practitioners in the Grampian Health Board area led the way in opting out of mainstream funding arrangements in favour of fundholding practices. Happily, because of local health care co-operatives, those medical general practices have come back into NHS structures based on consistently high standards of  care across the city and region. In general dental practice, NHS patients in and around Aberdeen have been losing out more than most, in much the same way as was the case with GPs, as more and more dentists have opted out of providing mainstream NHS services. It is a matter of record that the number of NHS dentists is 31 per 100,000 population compared with an average of 37 per 100,000 in Scotland as a whole. The situation is even more serious than those figures suggest because general dental practitioners continue to appear in the figures until they have removed the very last NHS patient from their list. So, for example, although the list of a dental practice in Aberdeen Central has dropped from 1,800 NHS adult patients five years ago to only 35 today and it has stopped accepting new NHS child patients, it continues to have an NHS number and to count as a provider of NHS services. That is typical of the situation in and around Aberdeen. When a dentist ceases to provide NHS services, typically he or she also cuts the total number on the list, seeing perhaps 60 patients on a private basis for every 100 seen on the NHS. I support what Mike Rumbles said about how we address the issue. It is not that doctors and dentists in Aberdeen are greedy or less socially aware than those elsewhere, but that they face cost and other pressures to an exceptional extent. Because dental practices operate as self-contracted, self-employed, commercial enterprises, those cost pressures exacerbate the differences between levels of provision in one region and another. For the minister to find ways to increase NHS dental services, we need to address the status of general dental practitioners and how they relate to the NHS as a whole.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission regarding the future of the Rockall fisheries. (S1O-2641)

Will the minister confirm that progress in those talks would not have been possible without the active support for Scottish fisheries interests of both the British Government and the European Union? Does she accept that the Rockall fisheries are of vital interest to the fish processing, as well as fish catching, sectors? Will she indicate the steps that she will take to secure future supply and job security in fish processing factories in my constituency and elsewhere?

Will the member give way?

Will Andrew Wilson acknowledge that at one point his party managed to muster only three members in the chamber, which is fewer than any other party at any point during the debate?

On Monday, I addressed a conference in my constituency on fuel poverty and sustainability, organised by the excellent local energy efficiency agency SCARF. There were perhaps 100 people at the conference. The fuel poverty that they are concerned with is not to do with the price of diesel or the level of road tax on a truck, important though those issues are; their concern is the hundreds of thousands of Scottish households who cannot afford to heat their homes to a decent level of comfort or who have to pay out more than 10 per cent of their disposable income in order to do so. Many of those households are pensioner households. Their concerns need to be addressed in two ways: by improving the energy efficiency of their homes and by increasing the cash incomes at their disposal. Gordon Brown's autumn statement was good news on both counts. First, it gave increases in real terms in pensioner incomes, targeting in particular those on lower and middle incomes and adding £50 to the winter fuel allowance. Secondly, it offered continuing support for energy efficiency initiatives to cut the cost of heating homes. Thanks to Gordon Brown's sound economic management, there is a Scottish Executive programme to secure investment of £350 million over five years to ensure a central heating system in every pensioner's house and every council house in Scotland. He has had other things to say about fuel and energy costs. I welcome measures such as the reduction in the cost of ultra-low-sulphur petrol and diesel. Unlike the pessimists in the Opposition, I look forward to a rapid reaction from the oil industry to ensure that those fuels are made available on every forecourt in Scotland by  the time of the spring budget. I want to give a particular welcome to the chancellor's decision not to impose a windfall tax on the production of North sea oil. Although some seem to think so, oil revenues do not grow on trees—

The issue that we have to face, which the chancellor has faced fairly and squarely, is not the past 20 years but how we sustain the oil industry for the next 20 years. Gordon Brown is right to focus on that. When Brent crude sold at only $11 a barrel a year ago, hundreds of Scottish jobs were lost and thousands were put at risk. It is now selling at $33 a barrel and there are oil industry investment plans worth billions to the Scottish economy. The chancellor was right. The autumn statement told the oil companies—just as he told the fuel protestors—that what goes up on the global oil market can come down just as quickly. Fiscal plans must be based on that recognition. The job of prudent government is to provide the fiscal stability to secure the future of our oil industry and to secure industry investment in competition with other oil provinces all over the world—

No, thank you. Scotland cannot live by oil alone. I welcome the chancellor's and the Executive's clear commitment to the development of renewable energy. Robert Gordon University in my constituency and many of the oil and oil-related companies based in Aberdeen are desperate to invest their offshore expertise and skills in putting Scotland at the forefront of wave-power technology. On the day the first commercial wave-power generation venture gets under way on Islay, I ask the Executive and the Westminster Government to work together to ensure that the national grid is strengthened to carry power generated by wind and wave from every part of Scotland—not just from the central belt, but from the north, the north-east, Aberdeen and the Highlands and Islands, so that all those areas can play a full part in the next generation of energy industries in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the economic costs of recent transport disruptions. (S1O-2552)

I look forward to that further information being made available. Does the minister agree that recent events have highlighted the need for increased investment and increased choice, especially for those people who travel in and out of cities such as Aberdeen daily? Will she confirm that the funding bid for Aberdeen commuter rail services, which was considered last week, is still very much a live bid that is on track for next year?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has for working relationships with local access panels, which promote access to the built environment and the countryside for disabled  people. (S1O-2500)

I thank the minister for his positive recognition of the role of access panels. Is the minister aware of the invaluable support that has been provided in the past by Disability Scotland, in particular to local groups such as Aberdeen Action on Disability and Aberdeen disability advisory group? Does he recognise the importance of access to a national body to local groups, service providers and individual disabled people? Will he ensure that any body that takes the place of Disability Scotland continues to base its work on the principles of inclusiveness and accessibility?

From the Labour back benches, I welcome and congratulate the First Minister. To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Executive has had with Great North Eastern Railways regarding the restoration of the east coast main line north of Edinburgh. (S1F-617)

In pursuing those discussions, will ministers remind GNER that its east coast main line franchise commits it to direct rail links not only from Edinburgh to London, but from Aberdeen to London? Will ministers press it to fulfil that commitment and make it clear that its continued failure to do so will jeopardise whatever credibility it still has in seeking a renewal of its franchise on the east coast main line?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what powers are available to procurators fiscal in relation to bail conditions when the grounds of bail are allegedly breached. (S1O-2377)

Does the Lord Advocate recognise the widespread public concern arising from cases in which those accused of offences while on bail do not appear immediately in court to have their bail reviewed? Will he agree to consider a further power for procurators to direct police officers to detain such people on the ground of reasonable suspicion as one way in which to bring them before the courts in the shortest possible time?

Does the minister recognise that the best diesel or electric train in the world will not run any faster on a track that is as inadequate as sections of the east coast main line are? Will he advise the strategic rail authority to address the issue when considering the franchise bids? Will he ask Railtrack to assess the costs and benefits of double-tracking the section of single track on the line halfway between Aberdeen and Dundee?

When I was a child, my grandmother told me a story—a tale of Highland battle, of sticks and stones and broken bones—which ended with the complete removal of the crofting population from the township of Sollas on North Uist. My grandmother told that story with such passion and in such detail that it was as if she had been there herself. In fact, it was a story that had been passed on to her by her grandmother, a witness and a participant who was also a seannachie—a folk historian—whose job it was to witness and to keep in memory the experiences of her extended family and her community. The day of the clearance of Sollas in 1849 was the end of that community, but it is remembered in our family as a day of pride as well as a day of anguish. Yes, it was the day on which we lost the land, but it was also the day that the fightback began. The fightback continued. In my teens, I heard another story, from the early days of the Labour and trade union movement in the city of Aberdeen. I heard how Aberdeen Trades Council organised a trainful of townspeople to support the landless cottars and squatters facing eviction from the slopes of Bennachie in Aberdeenshire, which they had brought into agricultural production after being cleared from land elsewhere and over which the owners of the neighbouring estate saw fit to exercise their legal rights to possess and to divide the land among themselves. On Bennachie in the 1890s, as in Sollas in the 1840s, the people resisted and the landlords won. However, those acts of resistance and the solidarity of working people in town and country helped to change the course of history. It is a tradition of resistance and solidarity of which I, for one, am proud. The laird who cleared Sollas was not a Sassenach or a stranger or a foreigner; he was a man with the title of Lord Macdonald. As a descendant of his victims, I do not want an apology from this Parliament. I do not even want an apology from the current Lord Macdonald. Instead, I want this Parliament to build on the resistance and achievements of the past 150 years to deliver the far-reaching land reform that will secure the future of our crofting communities, to deliver a secure future also for the Gaelic language and culture as part of the heritage of the whole of Scotland, and to deliver social justice and economic opportunity, which are the shared ideals of Uist land leaguers and Aberdeen trade unionists alike.

I support that point. As technically I have given way, I technically have the opportunity to make a further point. It is important that we educate people about their history, but it is also important to recognise that, although many of the descendants of those who were cleared from the Highlands went overseas, many more remained here. Therefore, the responsibility to the descendants of the cleared is not confined to those who are overseas, important though that is. This is also a matter of integrating the cultural tradition of rural and urban Scotland.

What discussions have there been with chief police officers about the proper way in which to deal with those who drive motor vehicles in a way that is calculated to cause maximum disruption to other road users? Will there be discussions with chief police officers about whether the approach that they appear to be taking at the moment will be followed in other disputes and protests in future?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to improve emergency dental services in Aberdeen. (S1O-2172)

I thank the minister for his reply and welcome the fact that those discussions are taking place. Does the minister recognise that dentists in Aberdeen provide more out-of-hours care for dental patients than is provided anywhere else in Scotland? Grampian doctors on call service offers an excellent out-of-hours medical service at the new primary care resource base at Foresterhill health centre. Will he take this opportunity to extend the principle of that kind of out-of-hours service to providing dental treatment of the same high quality?

Does the minister acknowledge—in the context of achieving secure status for Gaelic—that Gaelic-medium education is the most important means of securing the future of Gaelic? Will he ensure that Gaelic-medium education is made a national priority in education, and will he take steps to address the shortfall in teachers who are trained in  Gaelic-medium education?

rose—

Is Kenny MacAskill offering free fuel for fire and ambulances services? If so, is that another spending commitment to add to the SNP's large list?

Mr MacAskill criticises the minister for uncosted promises. What is the costing of that new pledge to provide rebated fuel for the emergency services?

Is the minister aware that I wrote to the Deputy First Minister several months ago to suggest that the meeting after the next meeting of the British-Irish Council could find no better venue than the excellent conference facilities that are available in Aberdeen? Will the minister reflect on the experience of the Irish-Scottish forum, which was held a few days ago at the Kings College conference and visitor centre in my constituency? Now that devolution in Northern Ireland is back on track, will ministers reach an early decision that Scotland and the city of Aberdeen should play host to the meeting after the next meeting of the council of the isles?

Will Mr MacAskill give way?

I welcome the opportunity to debate the link between railways and rural development and to congratulate those here and elsewhere who have  worked hard to put forward the case for a rail link to the Borders. As John McAllion said, the case for the rail link was brought before Parliament in the form of a petition. I want to reflect on the objectives of that petition in the context of the objectives of the Rural Affairs Committee to promote the social and economic development of rural Scotland. The petitioners said that a rail link would make the area more accessible for industry and development, create desperately needed jobs and opportunities, provide an alternative to the road system, promote a more sustainable transport system, reduce social isolation and improve access for tourism. Those are all objectives that will be widely recognised and supported the length and breadth of rural Scotland. Improved access for industry and development is critical to maintaining populations and sustaining skills in the north and south of Scotland. This week, the Rural Affairs Committee heard from Locate in Scotland about its efforts to attract inward investment and to create jobs. The representatives of Locate in Scotland faced hard questions about their traditional focus on the usual suspects—locations close to Glasgow and Edinburgh. However, they made it clear that they recognised the need for change—a rural investment team has been set up in the past year—and the importance of transport and communications when investment decisions are made. Railways are particularly important in meeting the other objectives of the petitioners—providing an alternative to road transport and promoting a more sustainable transport system. As Robin Harper said, those are not just local issues. The UK has clear commitments to reducing CO 2 emissions and to slowing the global warming that threatens to wipe out much of the Scottish rural economy over the next century. There is a good case to be made for continuing to find ways—as the Executive has done—of reducing road transport costs for rural areas in which there is no alternative to road transport. There is also no way of avoiding our wider international obligations, and increased rail transport, where that is possible, offers one way in which to square that circle. I hope that existing routes in the north and north-east of Scotland will be improved, and that routes will be extended when there is an economic case to be made for that. Reducing social isolation and promoting tourism are also objectives that railways can help to meet, not only in the Borders but throughout Scotland. The point has been made a couple of times that the Borders is the only area that lacks rail transport. It is certainly one of the areas that lacks rail transport, but, without presuming to speak for the constituency members  for Deeside, Buchan, Ullapool and Loch Ness-side, I suggest that there are other areas in which economic development could be supported by further railway development. The proposal for a Borders rail link is to be welcomed not as a uniquely deserving case, but as a case for the role that railways can play in promoting development in rural Scotland. I welcome the minister's comments, and hope that she will take the proposal forward as part of a basket of measures for discussion with national and local bodies, recognising that both national and local investment have a role to play and that railway investment throughout Scotland can help to achieve economic development, sustainable transport and social inclusion.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to announce which of the initial bids for support from the modernising government fund have been successful at the initial stage of the process. (S1O-1806)

Does the minister agree that this scheme has a role to play in achieving the aims of the social inclusion agenda? Moreover, is he aware of the dramatic increase in the uptake of free school meals since the piloting of smart card technology at two secondary schools in the city of Aberdeen? Does he further agree that that sort of project deserves and will benefit from support under the modernising government fund?

Will Mr Morgan accept that the whole point of the new approach and what has been lacking in the past is an integrated, holistic approach to policy in rural Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Are farmers and landowners the only local interest that should be directly represented? If not, how much of the representation should be given to other interested parties?

In the 1940s, Tom Johnston, the Glasgow socialist who was Secretary of State for Scotland in our previous coalition Government, commissioned a report from Lord Cooper that led to the establishment of the North of Scotland Hydro-Electric Board. At that time, national parks were often seen not as a support for social and economic development of rural areas, but as an alternative. For example, Lord Cooper's report said: "If it is desired to preserve the natural features of the Highlands unchanged in all times coming for the benefit of those holidaymakers who wished to contemplate them in their natural state . . . then the logical outcome . . . would be to convert the greater part of the area into a national park—and sterilise it in perpetuity." Tom Johnston rightly rejected that option in favour of creating jobs and bringing power to the glens. However, because of the well-founded suspicion in rural Scotland that many people from elsewhere saw the countryside either as a playground or as an unspoiled wilderness, rather than as a place where people lived and worked, Scotland has had to wait an extra 50 years for the benefits of  national parks. We have come a long way since 1948, and I believe that the proposals in the bill provide the opportunity to draw on the experience of others in creating national parks that are suitable for the particular needs of rural Scotland. We need national parks that protect both our natural heritage and our cultural heritage—with the potential, for example, to give a proper place to the use of the Gaelic language—and that promote actively the social and economic development of the communities of people who live and work in the areas.

That is a important question, which the Rural Affairs Committee—of which I am a member—considered very carefully. We came to the view that both section 1 and section 8 of the bill provide a proper balance between conservation and social and economic development. I believe that the bill, far from being opaque, makes it clear that there is a subtle balance to maintain. The principle of giving greater weight to conservation, outlined in section 8, does not overturn the bill's fundamental principle of providing a balance between the four aims of national parks that are set out in section 1(3). As members will know, the Rural Affairs Committee is in the middle of its first full inquiry, into the impact of changing employment patterns on the local economies of rural areas. I believe that the creation of national parks, rather than bringing perpetual economic stagnation, as was once feared, will provide new opportunities in the areas concerned—opportunities to diversify tourism on the basis of our natural assets and opportunities for the whole range of food-producing industries. The Rural Affairs Committee report cites the submission from Scottish Quality Salmon, which welcomed the proposal for marine national parks because of the marketing advantage that the label "national park produce" would bring. That opportunity is not confined to the fishing and fish farming sectors, but can be taken advantage of by our farmers and crofters. The flourishing agriculture in the national and regional parks of France demonstrates the opportunities that exist. As has been mentioned, all the committees that considered the bill have made recommendations, which I know ministers will consider. Several of  those recommendations relate to the balance between conservation and development and to the balance between national and local interests. As Nicol Stephen said, it is important that we get those balances right. However, the overwhelming message from stage 1 of the bill—as from the pre-legislative consultation—is that we should welcome this historic step. In my view, it will not be long before rural communities are not asking what they have to fear from national park status, but lobbying for the opportunity to join in.

To ask the Scottish Executive what priority is being given to the introduction of salaried general practitioners. (S1O-1745)

The minister recognises that overdependence on GPs who are self-employed contractors can limit the access to primary care services of neighbourhoods such as Tillydrone, Fersands and Seaton in my constituency. Does she agree that it is sometimes easier to meet the needs of users with salaried practitioners directly employed by NHS trusts? Will she join me in welcoming the steps recently taken by Grampian Health Board using the Primary Care Act pilots to achieve a mixed economy in GP services?

The reforms seem to me to strengthen the general position of tenant farmers, and I welcome them as part of the wider land reform programme. What guidance does the minister intend to issue  on what the changes to the legislation will mean for tenant farmers with existing tenancies, which will be affected by the change in the law, who wish to take up farm forestry and European Union agri-environment schemes? Will the same rules apply to those who take up the new type of tenancy that he announced today?

I thank Sarah Boyack for that answer. Will she confirm that Railtrack has published its view that a two-hour journey time can be achieved between Aberdeen and Edinburgh, using modern diesel trains, by 2011? Will she also confirm that a commitment by the strategic rail authority to bring forward that target date from 2011 to 2006 would meet many of the aspirations for rail enhancement on the east coast main line?

I, too, congratulate David Davidson on securing the debate and on combining two important aspects of the roads and transport policies for Aberdeen and the north-east. As members would expect, my main interest is in the construction of the bypass, or the western peripheral route, round the city of Aberdeen, and how that fits into a wider strategy. Clearly, we need a better road system in the area; we need a system that addresses freight traffic going from areas to the north of the city to areas to the south, and the linked question of commuter congestion on routes in and out of the city. In creating that system, we also need to see how far we can divert traffic off the roads altogether. Alex Salmond said, quite rightly, that Banff and Buchan lacks any railway lines, but that is not true of the whole of the north-east. I welcome the proposals for developing an Inverurie to Stonehaven commuter rail system that will help to speed people into and out of the city and to take some traffic off the roads. I also welcome the moves that have been made to make Aberdeen airport more user-friendly regarding delayed flights in the evenings. That is important. On the rail side, the integration of road and rail requires investment in the main routes from Aberdeen, in particular the Aberdeen to Edinburgh route, for which there is a proposal to save half an hour on the journey time. The proposal is to do that over 10 years, but I see no reason why the shadow strategic rail authority should not set that as a priority over five years. I also want to mention the role of sea transport, which is important and growing; it must be linked to the things that Mr Davidson spoke about. Members will be aware of the growing international trade through Aberdeen harbour. There are twice-weekly freight sailings to Norway and to Amsterdam and weekly container ships to Rotterdam and Antwerp, as well as the tourist links through Shetland to Faroe and Iceland. When we develop our transport strategy, it is essential that we protect and maintain the opportunity for sea-to-road and sea-to-rail transfer in Aberdeen. That means that heavy road freight traffic in the city will always continue. Protection of the position of the harbour and the maritime trade  through the city is a further argument for the importance of diverting as much through-traffic as possible off the city roads by developing the western peripheral route. I welcome the developments that point in that direction.

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it provides to sheriff courts on granting bail to offenders who are awaiting sentence, having admitted multiple offences such as theft by  house-breaking and robbery. (S1O-1588)

I understand that legal point. However, does the minister understand the anger that is felt in communities such as Seaton, Linksfield and Old Aberdeen in my constituency, when people see known serial offenders, such as serial house-breakers, walking away from court, free while awaiting sentence to commit exactly the same type of offences? Does he agree that the courts as well as the police have a role to play in tackling the growing incidence of drug-related theft, robbery and assault in city-centre communities in Aberdeen?

The member's party is the Opposition at Westminster, and it is appropriate for this Parliament to address our concerns about the matter to Westminster. Will he tell us what the policy of the shadow Cabinet at Westminster is?

As an important fact, I point out, in correction, that the convention is used more often than any other method that has been referred to by other members. It was used in 40 per cent of the cases that were cited by an earlier speaker, which is more often than any other method that is used.

Colin Campbell referred to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Will he confirm that that convention states that, in cases where two neighbouring countries seek to establish a common boundary but are unable to do so, the boundary may not exceed the median line?

Like other members, I was pleased to hear Mike Rumbles's new motto—"Stop bashing Labour"—and I hope to hear it resound around the chamber many times over the next three years. Like other members, I welcome the fact that we are debating a rural affairs issue, and a fisheries issue. However, I do not pretend to welcome the fact that the majority of members of the Rural Affairs Committee put this specific issue at the top of their list of priorities. I do not believe that it is the most pressing issue that faces the Scottish fishing industry today. It is important that members in general be aware of the full facts about the Rural Affairs Committee's report and the views of all the committee members. I draw members' attention, first, to one sentence in the report, in paragraph 13, which was quoted by Alex Johnstone, the committee convener. It states that "some members of the Committee felt that it should not follow the same course as the House of Commons Committee which considered this matter, by seeking to define a boundary line without adequate consultation." Alex Johnstone said that all views were taken into account in the preparation of the report but, sadly, that one sentence is all that survives—in the main body of the report or in the summary of findings and conclusions—as evidence of the fact that this issue divided the membership of the Rural Affairs Committee and led to considerable debate among those members on the correct way forward. Certainly, I was surprised to discover that there is no provision in the standing orders for a minority report from members of a parliamentary committee. I was even more surprised to discover that the majority of members of a committee, if they so wish, can vote to remove any reference to a division of opinion from the body of text of a committee report. So, there can be no minority report, and no right for minority views to be published or for the arguments to be laid out in the report of a parliamentary committee—that is very unfortunate. Further, as the drafts of the report were debated and decided upon in private, there is not even an Official Report of those proceedings.

Sadly, Richard Lochhead's intervention is very much in line with his approach to the whole debate. As a member of the Rural Affairs Committee, I consider the procedures of the Parliament and the committees to be of critical importance to us all; in no way does that detract from the substance of the issue that is before us.  To pretend that the way in which Parliament deals with such issues is unimportant is also very unfortunate. I hope that the way in which the report was put together, and the way in which minority views were removed from it, will not set an unfortunate precedent for the future business of other parliamentary committees. The Scottish Parliament should be ahead of other Parliaments, not behind them, in representing and reflecting all shades of opinion.

It is true that there is reference in the report. If the reader cares to search through the appendices and interpret them, it is clear what the divisions were about. This is an important matter, and I think that it is appropriate to bring it to Parliament's attention in the debate. The Rural Affairs Committee has failed to support the principle of representing all views as fully as it should. As I said, that is unfortunate. In the end, however, in spite of the arguments that were made in private, the majority of members chose to do just what they condemned Westminster for doing: declaring where the boundaries of the two fisheries zones should lie, without any consultation. One Parliament fails to consult fishermen on where the Scottish and English fisheries zones should begin and end, so somehow the other Parliament—this one—is supposed to pretend to lay down the law, without consulting anyone either, on precisely the same question. That proposition makes no sense at all.

I accept that we took evidence from the Scottish Fishermen's Federation. What seems to have escaped the attention of some SNP members is that this legislation defines the boundary of the English fishing zone as well as the Scottish zone, and that needs to be considered. Westminster is  responsible for this issue because it affects both Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom. It is precisely because Westminster has a duty to consult and has responsibility for the law in this area that it is appropriate that the issue should be taken up there and not here. This is a reserved matter. It is an important matter, but it is one that is appropriate for the House of Commons to determine.

Mr Lochhead is right to say that the Rural Affairs Committee is cross-party, but will he confirm that its conclusions on this matter were not reached by cross-party agreement?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that Dr Scobbie's legal opinion lays out very clearly that it is universal practice to employ the median line within the territorial waters of coastal states; that 89 per cent of cases involving the fishing and economic zones of opposite countries, such as Britain and Norway, are settled on a median basis; and that between countries that have adjacent coastlines, such as Scotland and England, the median line is the most common way of defining the maritime boundary?

I welcome the new aid measures and the commitment to a strategic approach. In the light of comments that were made during the dairy industry debate this morning, will the minister broaden the proposed opportunities for discussion around Scotland? We must include the views not only of farmers and crofters but of other industries within the supply chain in the agricultural sector and others with a stake in the future of rural Scotland such as the farmworkers union and the Transport and General Workers Union.

There is no dispute, in the speeches we have heard today, about the serious fall in the farm-gate price of milk over the past three years; nor is there any doubt about the impact of that on milk producers across Scotland, from the north-east to the south-west. Like my colleagues, I welcome the measures that were announced last week, which go a small way towards tackling some of the difficulties. They are designed to support Scottish dairy products in the market. We must not forget, however, that the market is distorted and that there is a limit to what  public subsidy can do. Agriculture in general is a distorted market because of its dependence on public subsidy and its dependence on and vulnerability to European currency transactions. That is why it is easy to go down the road, along which Adam Ingram started when he opened the debate, of saying that all the woes of agriculture in general, and of dairy farming in particular, can be laid at the door of Government policy. I am glad that Mr Ingram did not confine himself to that approach and that he went beyond it to identify some of the other difficulties and to recognise the role of the market itself.

I recognise that the strength of the pound is part of the problem, but I look forward to hearing from the SNP its policy preference for a weak pound and the consequences of that for the Scottish economy. It is also worth pointing out that the same currency weaknesses apply in relations between Northern Ireland and the rest of the European Union, yet the farm-gate price in Northern Ireland is 2p higher.

I am indeed aware of that. I am also aware that Mr McGrigor has probably stolen Mr Stone's best line on the subject. The abolition of the milk marketing boards, as the minister said, undermined the market position of the milk producers. Mr Johnstone made the case that that was no big deal and said that, in fact, the price of milk went up immediately after abolition. The point is that the milk marketing boards helped the industry to protect itself against both rises and falls in price and to maintain a stability that we no longer have.

I do not want to dwell for my last few seconds on the European currency, but I concur with Jamie Stone's comments on the crocodile tears. It is worth mentioning the internal distortions in the market. I acknowledge what the minister said about involving the whole industry in examining the way forward, but it is impossible to live in Aberdeen, as I do, and not be aware of how the processing stage in the supply chain has come under the control of one or two very large companies and of the market distortions that that produces. I hope that an examination of monopoly at that stage in the supply chain will be part of the consideration when the market is studied and the future strategy for agriculture is outlined.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give us an estimate of the cost he anticipates would be involved in preparing design briefs for three separate sites, to inform the public of what the potential costs of Mr Gorrie's amendment might be?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it expects to make an announcement about supporter involvement in football clubs following the deadline for responses to the leaflet, "New Mutualism—A Golden Goal". (S1O-1460)

I thank Rhona Brankin for her response. Does she recognise that this is one area where football supporters in Scotland might benefit from following the English example, by giving fans more of a say in the running of their clubs, as is being done through Supporters Direct south of the border? Does she recognise that holding the Scottish cup semi-final between Aberdeen and Hibernian in Glasgow at 6 o'clock on Sunday evening is a further example of the need for fans to have a greater say in the running of the game?

Will the minister comment on the steps taken to consult communities on this matter? Does she believe that aspects of that consultation might be relevant to the provision of public transport services elsewhere in Scotland?

I welcome Mr Aitken's comments—I am sure that Labour councillors will be pleased to be given so much credit for bringing down the Tory Government. That proves that our councillors were indeed effective in the 18 years in which the Tories were in power. Although it might not have been obvious from every speech, we are here to discuss the general principles that underlie the bill, which I welcome. The bill touches on the general principles that underlie the devolution settlement. Members will recall that, at the time of the devolution referendum and in the run-up to the Scottish Parliament election, there were genuine and widespread concerns about what devolution would mean for the powers and functions of local government. Some of those concerns focused on whether the provision of school education would remain the responsibility of local authorities, or whether that power would be sucked up and centralised by the Parliament. I believe that the bill answers those concerns. Far from reducing the role of education authorities, the bill gives them a clear role, within a clear structure and division of responsibilities among Scottish ministers, education authorities and individual schools. That structure is focused not on keeping things as they are, but on making them better. It is focused on excellence, as Nicola  Sturgeon said, and on recognising that achieving excellence requires improvement. That means new challenges for education authorities. A particular challenge faces Stirling education service, not only to maintain and improve high standards in all its schools, but to expose as groundless fictions the claims about bureaucracy and dogmatism that were expressed at such length by Mr Monteith and Mr Aitken. I am sure that Stirling Council will relish that challenge and that all the schoolchildren of Dunblane will benefit—as the local MSP, Sylvia Jackson, has said—from an integrated local authority education system. That is the right way forward in raising standards in Scotland's schools. The bill presents wider challenges to all education authorities. I welcome the opening sections of the bill, which spell out the right of the child to receive and the duty of the council to provide a rounded education. I welcome those, but not as the basis for litigation, compensation or—the SNP favourite—legal opinion.

Politicians are well advised to read legal opinions before they comment on them. However, I support the report of the committee and I am looking forward to receiving further clarification. The important thing about the bill's opening sections is that they lay the basis for the wider structure of school improvements, including the role of education authorities, which form the vital link between national priorities and school development plans. The challenge for councils is to translate those national priorities into a local sense of direction, adding local priorities where appropriate and ensuring that all schools in the area reach national and local standards. For the first time, education authorities will also be subject to inspection. They will welcome that as supporting, rather than weakening, their position. In Aberdeen, the Primary Headteachers Association has echoed the concerns of the GTC about the reserved powers—under section 50 of the bill—of ministers to take a hand in the membership of the GTC committees. I welcome the minister's comments on that and seek an assurance that it does not suggest a lack of faith in the ability of the GTC to handle its own affairs. Finally, in bringing forward the amendment to  which Mr Galbraith referred, will Mr Peacock reflect on the concern that mainstream education might not be appropriate for every child in every circumstance?

Does Mr Adam accept that there are circumstances in which it is educationally advantageous to close schools; or does he take the view that, no matter how small the school roll, a building should be kept going simply because it is open already?

Does the member accept that some of the hours of programming that have been advertised as being Grampian Television products are in fact programmes that are produced, cut and edited in cities other than those served by Grampian Television—that is, in Edinburgh and Glasgow?

I am glad that Richard Lochhead has secured this debate. I want to expand on what he has said about the historical contribution of Grampian Television to the regional identity of the north-east and the Highlands and Islands. One of the features of Grampian has been its decentralised nature. That reflects the fact that the transmission area is not one, but several distinct regions in Scotland. When STV merged with Grampian two years ago, the former was already thoroughly centralised in Glasgow. In contrast, Grampian Television still has studios in each of the three main regions that it serves; it has studios in Aberdeen, Inverness and Dundee. It also has a studio in Stornoway. The maintenance of that structure is written into the merger agreement of November 1997, which was signed by SMG and the ITC. The agreement was designed to maintain not only Grampian Television's separate nature, which distinguishes it from STV, but its devolved character. The merger was a bringing together of two kinds of company—a centralised company serving the central belt and a devolved one serving the disparate regions of the north of Scotland. It was clear that the merger would either strengthen the diversity of regional broadcasting in Scotland or diminish it. SMG freely undertook the responsibility to ensure that, at the very least, there would be no loss of diversity in the Grampian transmission area. As has been said, the evidence is that SMG has moved in the opposite direction. Members will know that representatives of the company attended yesterday's meeting of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee to give an account of their stewardship of the north of Scotland franchise for channel 3 independent television. The evidence that they gave did little to allay the fears of the committee.  In particular, company representatives were pressed on what they meant by co-production and co-commission, an issue that lies at the heart of whether Grampian is still genuinely producing programmes of its own. Instead of volunteering explanations, the chairman of the board suggested that such definitions were not a matter for him, but for the ITC—he suggested that we ask that organisation. Perhaps we will. I suggest that there is a choice to be made in independent channel 3 broadcasting. A company can either go down the road of becoming more like the opposition—quiz shows, game shows and so on—or it can play to its greatest strength, which is the fact that it was founded for regional television broadcasting. I urge the Parliament to support the motion and call for SMG to go down the road of regional broadcasting.

Tha mo nighean, Iona, dà bhliadhna an-diugh. Bhiodh m' athair, an t-Urramach Ruairidh Dòmhnallach—"Ruairidh eile"—moiteil aisde. Mar bhàrd agus sgoilear Gàidhlig, agus mar mhinistear ann an Eaglais na h-Alba, bhiodh e moiteil cuideachd a bhith a' cluinntinn deasbad mu dheidhinn na Gàidhlig ann am Pàralamaid na h-  Alba anns an togalach seo, an-diugh.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  My daughter, Iona, is two years old today. My father, the Reverend Roddy Macdonald—"the other Roddy"—would have been proud of her. As a Gaelic poet and scholar, and as a minister in the Church of Scotland, he would have been proud also to hear a debate about Gaelic in the Parliament of Scotland, in this building, today.  The member continued in English.  I belong to the generation in between. When my father learned to speak English at a primary school in North Uist, Gaelic speakers could still be found as far east and south as Aberdeenshire, Blair Atholl and the isle of Arran. However, the Gaelic language was frowned upon and officially discouraged. One hundred years ago, when my grandfather went to school the punishment for speaking his first language, even in the isle of Berneray, was to have his mouth washed out with soap. By my father's day, the hostility had lessened and, by the time I went to school in Stornoway in the 1960s, the idea that Gaelic was a barbarous and subversive language had finally died. However, my generation still grew up with the clear view that Gaelic was something that held one back in an English-speaking world. There was a policy not of suppressing Gaelic, but of allowing it to die. For my children's generation, I am pleased to say, the situation is very different. All parties now recognise—I apologise to Mr Russell for underestimating his knowledge of Gaelic history—that the Gaelic language and culture are a living and vital part of Scotland's heritage. It is now possible for us, if we choose, to send our two-year-old daughter, living in Aberdeen, to a Gaelic-medium parent-and-child group until she is ready for Gaelic-medium education, which is provided at the Gaelic-medium nursery unit opened last year at Gilcomstoun Primary School in my constituency and at the Gaelic-medium primary unit, also at Gilcomstoun, which has grown and flourished since 1991. Gaelic secondary education is provided at Hazlehead Academy, which was designated for that purpose by Aberdeen City Council education committee only a few weeks ago. I welcome the approach to Gaelic-medium education that has been pursued in recent years by my city and by the Scottish Executive, funded by local and central Government. It reinforces the principle of support for Gaelic within the state system and involves the wider local community. It provides the benefits of bilingual education and ensures access for a growing number of people to  the richness of Gaelic culture. The wider bilingual and cultural agenda is an important one. Promoting Gaelic is not a matter for the schools alone. Like other members, I want to highlight the excellent work done by the fèis movement and by Fèisean nan Gàidheal. Their festivals for young people offer tuition in arts and music in a firm Gaelic-language context right across Scotland. The fèis in Aberdeen a few weeks ago was a celebration of Gaelic culture and an example of the enterprise and enthusiasm of those involved, who raised most of the funds themselves. In general, the fèis is a model initiative for community arts, and an example followed by similar festivals in other tongues, such as the Gordon Gaitherin—now the Gaitherin—in Aberdeenshire, and by festivals in other parts of Scotland and the world. I am glad that Brian Monteith has now recognised that our links with Ireland should go beyond the football field and extend to wider cultural matters. The fèis movement has contributed greatly to those cultural links. Fèis Ròs and its counterpart in Roscommon have been linked for the past four years, bringing together young people from the Highlands and Ireland to perform, learn and simply to enjoy together their common Celtic culture. As the minister will know, young people from North Uist and South Uist are building similar links as we speak. The Barra fèis has contributed to the development of cultural exchange between the isle of Barra and the Pacific kingdom of Tonga, which sets a good example to us all. I hope that the minister will recognise the value of the fèis movement in the further development of support for Gaelic and in the building of links with our sister island of Ireland. Education, the arts, media and, indeed, this Parliament all have a role to play. I am glad today to support the Executive motion.

The member might be interested to know that Gaelic was last spoken in the Scottish Parliament in 1307.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether, in its forthcoming meeting with the chief executive of Railtrack, it will discuss the issue of investment to reduce journey times between Aberdeen and Edinburgh. (S1O-1269)

I thank the minister for her answer. Is she aware that it currently takes longer to travel to Aberdeen from Edinburgh by train than by car and that a journey time of two and a half hours represents an average of 52 mph, which is hardly acceptable for what should be one of Scotland's main communication links? Will the minister ensure that Railtrack is aware that many people now recognise that although electrification remains a desirable objective, much more could be done to enhance the quality of the Aberdeen-Edinburgh route and to reduce journey times?

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Executive has had with Railtrack and train operating companies such as Great North Eastern Railway, Virgin Trains and ScotRail about journey times between Aberdeen and Edinburgh. (S1F-126)

I thank the First Minister for that answer. He will recall that, at one time, the  east coast main line ran all the way up the east coast from King's Cross to Aberdeen, but that it no longer does so officially. Although electrification is an issue that has already been discussed, does he accept that the strategic authorities that Scottish ministers put to the rail authority and to Railtrack should include a significant enhancement of the status of the main line between Edinburgh and Aberdeen?

To ask the Scottish Executive what arrangements will be made for liaison between the new drugs enforcement agency and Grampian police in order to tackle the problems of drug abuse and street crime in Aberdeen. (S1O-1120)

Is the minister aware of recent vicious attacks, in broad daylight, on pensioners in Aberdeen? Does he share my concern that those random and heartless assaults are related to the increasing supply of hard drugs in the city? Does he agree that the best way of protecting our pensioners is to tackle the root cause of the problems by cutting off the supply of  those drugs?

Following on from that question, will the minister tell us how he intends in the consultation process to address the question of involving younger people and those with family responsibilities in some of the public bodies, given that those bodies make decisions affecting families, but tend to have input mainly from people who are retired or who have specific business experience?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on the Scottish Environment Protection Agency's current policy relating to the disposal of short-lived radioactive waste in the  national health service. (S1O-1061)

Is the minister aware that the way in which that law has been interpreted by SEPA means that clinical waste from Scottish hospitals has to be transported to England for incineration, despite the fact that in many cases, it is well within recognised safe levels of radioactivity? Does she agree that that is an avoidable cost for the NHS in Scotland, and will she urge the agency to complete its examination of the matter quickly and come to a sensible conclusion?

As Jamie Stone said, the British-Irish Council offers a new dimension for Ireland and, as several members have said, for Scotland and this Parliament. It recognises that we, too, have a role to play in assisting Ireland to move forward and in providing an appropriate role for Scottish ministers, as the Executive accountable to this Parliament, working within the family of nations in these islands. It may be of interest to members that David McLetchie, Alex Salmond and others used the name council of the isles. In this context, it is important not to be caught by history, as that name has a certain historical resonance. The last Council of the Isles existed to advise the head of clan Donald when, as Lord of the Isles, he was, effectively, an independent ruler. Indeed, the last Council of the Isles was put out of business by the last Scottish Parliament, some 500 years ago. It is clear from today's debate that the message of good will from the new Scottish Parliament to the new council of the isles will be very different.  The political and cultural traditions of Gaelic Scotland are relevant to today's debate. The cultural connections and the economic parallels between the western peripheral areas of Scotland and Ireland are ancient yet still very strong today, as colleagues who represent the Highlands and Islands will acknowledge and as George Reid just reminded us. The strong links between central Scotland and parts of Ireland, built over centuries of migration in both directions, are well known. Donald Dewar mentioned the Research Institute of Irish and Scottish Studies, which was recently established at the University of Aberdeen, which is in my constituency. The institute is of great significance, but it is not an isolated phenomenon. University College Dublin, the Queen's University of Belfast, the University of Aberdeen and the University of Strathclyde have worked together over a period of years to build on shared interests and ties through the Irish-Scottish academic initiative and to develop the recent renewal of a sense of community between our two countries. That work is not merely academic: it is about changing perspectives, reflecting changing communities and influencing communities. I believe that the council of the isles, or the British-Irish Council, creates an opportunity to contribute to that developing sense of identity of a community of interest that Scotland and Ireland share. Alex Salmond spoke about bilateral aspects—I hope that they will include direct co-operation between Scotland and the Governments of both southern and Northern Ireland. I have no doubt that all parts of these islands have much to learn and to gain from working together through the council in the years to come. It will be an important and positive development that will both strengthen British-Irish relations and underpin the devolution settlement of which this Parliament is part.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make a statement on the proposed Scottish sea fisheries safety scheme. (S1O-1003)

Does the minister recognise that fishing remains one of the most hazardous of all occupations, as we have all been reminded in recent weeks? Will he assure Parliament that the new scheme will go beyond technical safety measures and provide the kind of safety, training and support that most people working in land-based industries take for granted?

Will the member give way?

Does the minister agree that comments on the issue sometimes seem to suggest that the only area of higher and further education that we should be concerned with is the university sector? While acknowledging the importance of the university sector, will he comment on the differences that the deal will make for students in the further education sector and for further education colleges?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. Does he accept that the initiative of  local government and the industry, and the support and flexibility shown by the Scottish Executive in dealing with the waste water treatment directive, has allowed Aberdeen to make proposals that will meet those problems?

Like other members, I welcome the opportunity for Parliament to focus on the current issues facing the fishing industry in advance of the December Fisheries Council. A couple of practices that have been inherited from Westminster should continue: one is this debate on such an important Scottish industry. It has been pointed out that thousands of jobs, often in vulnerable communities, depend on the catching sector, but there are thousands more in fish processing, the fish trade and fishing industry supply in my constituency and other urban areas. The problems facing the fishing industry concern the whole of Scotland. Devolution should make a difference in this part of the economy. The minister reminded us of the setting up of the Scottish inshore fisheries advisory group, which is an important step in itself, and of other steps that have been taken to promote coastal management of fisheries around the Scottish coasts. I welcome today's announcement of a Scottish sea fish industry safety scheme and the fact that that might be extended to smaller inshore fishing vessels as well as vessels covered by the former Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food scheme. What will not change in the fisheries industry—at least not this side of 2002—is the need to get the best possible deal for the Scottish industry in annual negotiations with the EU and Norway. I commend the minister's efforts in those two areas. The minister spoke of technical measures that might help the problem of the haddock quota. A marginal reduction in the permissible size of haddock landed and in the levels of discards of young fish might help to achieve an effective  balance between conservation and sustainable levels of catch. My concern is not with what ministers should do if there is resistance to taking advantage of the Hague preferences, but with how to take full advantage of them. I ask ministers for an assurance that, when they go to Brussels to negotiate at the Fisheries Council, they will make maximum use of the available protection in cases where total allowable catch has been driven down for scientific reasons. Other matters dealt with by Europe that are less directly related to the Fisheries Council are still of concern to ministers and the industry. The urban waste water directive has been mentioned. I welcome the steps that have been taken in that respect by the processing industry and by Aberdeen City Council. I hope that similar steps can be taken elsewhere. Ministers should also consider control regulations on the landing of fish and make a case with their colleagues for promoting more rather than less flexibility in regulating the landing and transportation of fish. I realise that environment ministers deal with such matters, but the industry will be interested in getting a result in this area. I support the motion and wish the minister well in a few days' time. I believe that devolution of the Scottish fisheries sector will work to the industry's benefit and will provide a basis for the negotiations that will have to take place in 2002 for the new fisheries policy. We should seek neither to displace UK ministers in leading for the UK industry in European negotiations nor to supervise English fisheries from Peterhead or Aberdeen, attractive though that idea might be. Instead, Parliament should unite to support our industry.

I am afraid that I cannot give way during my summing-up. We should unite to wish the minister well and to seek the best possible outcome of the Fisheries Council later this month.

After the withdrawal of that grant, does Mr Lochhead welcome the minister's announcement today of plans to develop a Scottish sea fishing industry scheme? Is not the development of such a scheme a perfect example of how devolution can benefit the Scottish fishing industry?

To ask the Scottish Executive what provision it is making for the replacement of medical and laboratory equipment in the national health service in Scotland. (S1O-772)

I thank the minister for her answer. However, does she accept that there are many demands on the capital budgets of acute trusts, as is the case with Aberdeen royal infirmary, which is in my constituency? Will she consider whether longer-term budget planning might assist those trusts to plan for the replacement of equipment and to meet priority targets in equipment-intensive areas, such as coronary heart care and cancer?

Does the member accept that the leader of his party, Mr Salmond, spent 14 minutes and 50 seconds attacking the Executive and one minute and 35 seconds promoting the SNP's policies?

All parties have agreed, more or less, on the importance of constructive engagement with Europe, but the question that divides us is the terms on which we do that. I hope that recent events have concentrated minds, and reminded us of the importance of our European trading partners to Scottish businesses and jobs. Before we joined the European Community, EC countries accounted for less than a quarter of our manufactured goods exports; now they account for nearly two thirds. Of course, much of Scotland's inward investment comes here because we are a gateway to Europe. For example, a number of multinational oil companies are based in my constituency in Aberdeen, where they have their European headquarters, not just their Scottish or British headquarters. The same is true of other industries. The north of Scotland perhaps relies more than any other part of Britain on trade with Europe, whether that is the export of fish, lamb, whisky or many of the other quality products that depend on our continuing constructive engagement with Europe. For that reason, we should reject the Tories' instinct for disengagement from Europe. I was interested to hear Mr McLetchie—and I am sorry that he is no longer here—define his concept of flexibility as something quite different to disengagement. I am sure that his colleagues will pass on to him my request that, in summing up, the Conservatives should explain whether their policy on the common fisheries policy is so flexible that they seek Britain's withdrawal from it. If that is their position, is that practical politics? The Conservatives' amendment does not oppose constructive engagement with Europe and, as far as it goes, I welcome that. However, the party line that it adopted at its recent conference is different. The question of what it  means by a flexible Europe is one to which we have not really heard an answer yet. It seems to be a pick-'n'-mix Europe; not constructive engagement, but a code for disengagement. The Scottish National party is not so daft. It knows that it does not make sense to pull out of a union that works, brings great economic benefits, is vital to our trade and provides a framework within which progressive social policies can be agreed across the board. The SNP does not want to pull out of Europe, but instead it wishes to pull out of the British union—a union that also works, brings great economic benefits, is vital to our trade and creates a framework for social justice and policies for jobs. Nothing could be more illogical than to say, "A single currency is a good thing. We have one already, but let us walk away from it." The logic of pulling out of Britain to engage more fully in Europe is not logic at all. By all means, let us enter the European single currency as early as it is in our economic interests to do so, but surely it makes sense to do that as part of the single currency area to which we already belong rather than to pick one or the other. The Tories offer us a Britain on the edge of Europe, the logic of which is a Britain that will sooner or later slip out altogether.

I did not suggest to the chamber that we should move into the euro zone immediately. In principle, it is the correct place to be. However, we should reject the Conservatives rejection of that for at least a whole Parliament, and turn down the opportunity offered to us by the SNP, that Scotland should be in one currency zone while England is in another. Rather, we should go for a positive vision of a Europe growing closer together on terms that suit our interests. The correct way forward is Scotland in a devolved Britain as part of a Europe of the regions.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with pigmeat retailers about the labelling of pigmeat products. (S1O-541)

As the minister clearly agrees with me that Scottish pig producers are to be commended for the quality of their produce, does he further agree that our partners in the European Union could learn much from the standards that have been set by the Scottish industry? When he has the opportunity to do so, will he seek to persuade our partners to raise their standards to Scottish levels?

Will Richard Lochhead give way?

Will Richard Lochhead give way?

All sides in this debate recognise the central place of agriculture in the rural economy and agree that, if farming is in trouble, that is bad news for the countryside. Most members have recognised that agricultural policy alone is not enough and that  policies in areas such as housing and transport must recognise the particular needs of rural Scotland. I was pleased that Alasdair Morgan said in his introduction that the essential interests of the country and the town are fundamentally the same—I think that Mike Russell echoed that view. That view is not always held by those who engage in political debate in Scotland. There is sometimes an attempt to pretend that there is an unbridgeable gap between the interests of the town and the country. The view that there are common interests across Scotland and that agriculture is a key policy, but not the only policy, for rural development is fundamental to the Scottish Executive's programme for government. The Executive's policy is based on the recognition that although farming relates to the market, the sector benefits from very large sums of public money and the direction in which that money is invested has to be for the widest possible economic and environmental benefit. In the long term those interests are served by the policy to which the Executive has signed up.

I accept that and recognise the particular difficulties that are faced by those sectors. In the long term the solution to those problems is not simply to extend the scope of public subsidy willy-nilly. The emphasis must be shifted from production-based price support subsidies to a wider rural development focus. I believe that that is now happening. It is inevitable that there will be changes in Scottish agriculture—the National Farmers Union and others recognise that. It is also true that, if farming is left entirely to the market, we will risk losing sectors such as the pig producer sector. We will also risk losing some small producers such as hill farmers, who in some ways are the most important custodians of the countryside. We must not rely simply on market mechanisms, but need active Government involvement in those areas. I welcome what Ross Finnie said about the support the Executive provides for less favoured areas. I also applaud the commitment in the programme for government to increase spending on agricultural environmental measures and the commitment to introduce a long-term strategy to exploit Scotland's world-class research base in agricultural and biological sciences for the greater benefit of the rural economy. Much good work is already done in those areas. For example, the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute in Aberdeen works closely with the  industry to put support for less favoured areas on a less intensive basis. I hope that our research strategy will continue to support such work, which is the way forward for many sectors of Scottish agriculture. There are no easy or glib answers to the problems of Scottish agriculture. In the context of Agenda 2000, and working closely with the UK Government, the Executive's measures are the right steps to take. They will help us to meet present and future challenges to the agriculture sector in the context of rural development policy as a whole.

In light of that comment, what alternative proposal do you have to meet our obligations to reduce emissions under Kyoto—

I welcome the minister's historic statement. Is progress being made on our long-term objective of achieving regional management of fisheries within the European Union and, in particular, in the North sea, which the minister mentioned in his answer to Mr Scott?

As another member of the Audit Committee, I will touch on the audit and accountability aspects of the bill. It is in all our interests that we establish as wide a consensus as possible on the processes by which ministers are accountable to Parliament, and by which public bodies are accountable both to the Executive and to Parliament. From what we have heard today, there is the basis for a broad consensus on that, although there are areas of continuing discussion. On the establishment of Audit Scotland, it is a welcome development to create a single public sector auditing service, which will service both the Auditor General and the Accounts Commission. The National Audit Office has been one of the successful agencies in seeking good government at Westminster and has exposed abuses of power and of public money. I welcome the bill as a further act of devolution, in that it transfers the Scottish wing of the National Audit Office to a distinctive Scottish agency, making it directly accountable and putting its skills at the disposal of this Parliament. Like Karen Whitefield, I believe it right that NHS accounts and spending in Scotland should come under the new body, Audit Scotland. It is also right that its remit should extend to cover the further education sector. In our committee on Tuesday, we heard evidence from the head of the new Further Education Funding Council. He confirmed that many of our FE colleges have struggled to achieve effective financial management over the past few years. They will benefit from being made directly accountable through Audit Scotland. Andrew Welsh raised the point, as did John Swinney earlier, about bringing other bodies within the remit of Audit Scotland. It is important to recognise that the bill does not close the door on that, and leaves open the possibility of further evolution of the public audit system. It is also right that we should not leap ahead of ourselves in its development. Conservative and SNP members implied that they had concerns about the continuing split, in  terms of local government, between the Accounts Commission and Audit Scotland. Those concerns were raised at the Audit Committee, but were not agreed by the committee. It is a pedantic but important point to put it on the record that we discussed that, but did not take a committee position. The concern is that local government spends our money and should be accountable, but there is an important distinction between a local council and an FE college.

I think that to an extent the minister has already addressed that point. The global sum, the allocation to local government, is a matter for Parliament. It is appropriate that supervision and scrutiny of the detailed expenditure are kept at one remove from the way in which non-elected bodies account more directly to this Parliament. That is right and is in line with the principles of devolution and subsidiarity that we should continue to support.

In the bill, we are creating a distinctive Scottish structure for the Scottish Parliament. Its relationship with Westminster will continue to evolve. I recognise the point that Andrew Wilson has just made—which he also made in his speech—but we are engaged in modernising structures. There is a commitment throughout the chamber to achieving value for public money. This is an important step in that direction.

In the light of Mr Hamilton's affirmation that locating the food standards agency in the north-east is long-standing party policy, will he tell us where the SNP would locate the Scottish arm of the food standards agency?

I do not know why Aberdeen and the Grampian region suffer a higher incidence of E coli infection than other areas, not just in this country, but elsewhere in the world. I also do not know how campylobacter, which is the most common cause of food poisoning in Britain, is transmitted from poultry and wild birds to an estimated 50,000 people in Scotland every year. I know that people are trying to find out, however. Many of them work at the national reference laboratories at Foresterhill in my constituency. I welcome the minister's offer for talks between the management of the laboratories and the advisory committee and I hope that the outcome of those talks will be that the laboratories' very important work can continue. I also welcome the minister's outline of the broad remit of the UK food standards agency and of the steps that she will take to ensure that the Scottish arm of the agency is set up as quickly as well-informed consultation will allow. I welcome today's important declaration of principle about the dispersal of civil service and Scottish Executive jobs. Members will not surprised to hear that, like Mike Rumbles, I welcome the announcement that Aberdeen has been placed on the shortlist for consideration as the location of the Scottish arm of the FSA. The minister knows that I have been keen that the case for locating the agency in Aberdeen should be made directly by some of the many scientists in the city who work in the relevant fields. I hope that, in summing up, the minister will be able to tell us a little more about the consultation process that will be used to make the final decision about the shortlist. I welcome Kay Ullrich's positive comments about the work at Foresterhill and her reminder of the world-class work on E coli 0157 that is being done by Professor Hugh Pennington at the University of Aberdeen. However, I am a little disappointed that she did not say more about where she thinks the Scottish arm of the FSA should be located.  Constituency members in the north-east know that there is more distance between Aberdeen and Dundee than just 54 miles of dual carriageway. Perhaps some of Mrs Ullrich's colleagues will be able to indicate more clearly where they believe the agency should be located. I am sorry to disappoint Kay Ullrich; I will not support her amendment today. I have read it closely and it refers to "a food standards agency in the North East." I am sure that it means a food standards agency for Scotland in the north-east; the intention behind the amendment is the establishment of a food standards agency for Scotland only.

Mrs Ullrich misunderstands me. The reality is that her commitment is to a Scottish agency and mine is to a British one. I welcome the establishment of a Scottish arm of the UK agency. If Mrs Ullrich wishes to clarify her position further, I will be happy to allow her to do so. I look forward to welcoming the food standards legislation on to the statute book and to welcoming the agency's Scottish headquarters to Aberdeen.

I welcome the minister's commitment to the highest standards in food safety research. Does she accept that those in the management of the national reference laboratories on E coli and campylobacter at Foresterhill in my constituency feel that they have been meeting those standards and that they would welcome the opportunity to discuss any supposed problems with those who have been advised that the laboratories should close?

Does the minister agree that the scientific advice provided by the Marine Laboratory in Aberdeen is soundly based, but that scientific understanding of the related issues is at an early stage? The laboratory needs more support to progress that understanding.

I welcome the Executive's prompt action in bringing this bill before Parliament and addressing the widespread concerns raised, not only by the Ruddle case, but by a number of other cases over the years.  Like Margaret Ewing when she spoke in the earlier debate, I speak not as a lawyer, nor as a psychiatrist, although I recognise the importance of the perspectives that those professions will bring to bear when we discuss amendments next week. The legal and medical professions have a vital interest in this area of law, and we should draw on their expertise in getting the balance of this bill right. I am sure that we will do that, but in considering the principle of this bill, it is important to recognise that the issues of definition, which will exercise legal and medical minds, are not issues that always have as much meaning for the public.  The professional perspective of criminal justice social workers, who work on a daily basis with offenders and potential offenders, including those at large in the community, should also be considered. I suspect that every social work department in the country has at least one or two  individuals on their books whose behaviour is disruptive and chaotic, and who may have been in mental hospitals, but who are not currently diagnosed as mentally ill. Of those people who have some kind of anti-social personality disorder, only a small minority may be considered seriously violent or dangerous individuals, but when those few walking potential catastrophes are at large, they pose a constant threat to the lives, liberty and rights of others, and they demand constant resources and surveillance from social workers and the police. They divert resources from other needs.  Two years ago in my constituency in Aberdeen, a young child was abducted and murdered by a man who had been through the criminal justice system. He had attacked children before, been to jail and been let out again, and had not been identified and detained as someone who would pose a threat to others in future, as many of my constituents believe he should have been. After the death of that child the community was desperate for reassurance on the safety of its children. It welcomed the measures that were introduced in the Crime and Punishment (Scotland) Act 1997 and in the Sex Offenders Act 1997 to restrict the liberty of sex offenders. I believe that it will also welcome the principle of this bill, in making public safety adequate grounds for continuing detention, in order to reduce the risk of other dangerous men being released into the community when they should not be.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to focus on an industry that is a major provider of jobs in my constituency and elsewhere. The fish-catching sector attracts a good deal of public attention but, in providing jobs onshore, jobs for women and part-time jobs for lone parents who want to work-as well as in maintaining a range of skills in a traditional industry that provides a vital link in the food chain-the fish processing sector demands equal attention and status.  When we talk to industry leaders, such as those from Aberdeen who are with us today, we must listen to their concerns about the implementation of the directive. Although I take Mr Robson's point, I think that there is particular concern in the north of Scotland, because of the scale and expense of the proposed plant. The population factor means that fewer people and firms would pay for the plant that we need. That is why so many of the firms in the Aberdeen area face difficulties.  It is clear that my colleagues in Aberdeen City Council have been listening to the concerns that have been raised. I would like to congratulate the council and the Aberdeen Fish Curers and Merchants Association on working together on a practical scheme-the first in Scotland-to implement the regulations at a price that the industry can afford.  Will the minister confirm that the Aberdeen harbour scheme for trade effluent treatment that was announced last weekend will meet the requirement of the European regulations and so have the support and approval of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency? Will the ministerial team acknowledge that the fish processing industry is not opposed to the environmental standards that we have agreed with our European partners?  The industry recognises that those standards must be implemented; indeed, it seeks to meet those standards. Will the minister consider what support can be given to upgrade the industry's premises in order to reduce the cost of trade effluent treatment, whoever provides it? The more effective the industry is in dealing with its own effluent-other industries, such as the meat industry, have the same problem-the less it will be charged, either by the Aberdeen harbour scheme or by NOSWA, to deal with it.  It would be too easy to say that if Europe sets the standard it must foot the bill. However, we  should consider what resources we can bring to the industry, either from our reserves or from Europe, to allow the fish processing industry to raise the standards of water treatment.

It is too easy to get into a party slanging match and to talk about ministers acting with too much haste, dog-eared proposals and all the rest of it. We should focus on the positive agenda of what this ministerial team and this Parliament can deliver for our industry-that is the key. The timetable is critical and I urge ministers to meet representatives of the industry with the information that is required as soon as possible. Time is important, but getting it right is even more important, and I ask the ministers to arrange matters as soon as it is practical.

I would like to ask the Scottish Executive what areas of policy it plans to treat cross-departmentally to fulfil its commitment to integrated government.

My apologies.

To ask the Scottish Executive what areas of policy it plans to treat cross-departmentally to fulfil its commitment to integrated government. (S1O-148)  Thank you, Mr Presiding Officer, for giving me the opportunity to be the first member to ask the same question twice at the same meeting.

I welcome the First Minister's commitment to those matters and to making the policies work in practice. I commend to him the work that is being done at a local level by the great northern partnership in deprived areas of Aberdeen Central and Aberdeen North. That partnership is developing a cross-cutting approach at local level. Does he agree that tackling urban disadvantage and promoting a policy of social inclusion and regeneration in areas such as Woodside and Tillydrone in Aberdeen not only requires that housing is regenerated, but that GPs are encouraged to move their surgeries into communities? Does he further agree that we should develop a child care strategy that will allow young mothers to work and that we should provide work and training opportunities for young people?

First, I would like to take issue with Mr Morgan's problems about the essence of devolution. It seems to me that the essence of devolution in this respect is that we are having this debate today and that we are making the decision about whether to go ahead. I feel very strongly that we are right to go ahead with a single United Kingdom food standards agency, and to encourage the UK Parliament to proceed with this bill and bring it forward with all possible speed so that the agency is in place by the beginning of next year.  I am only just old enough to remember the last typhoid epidemic in this country 30 years ago, during which Aberdeen was placed in a kind of collective quarantine because of a single consignment of infected imported corned beef. Other nightmares are more recent and have been referred to. Human-variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is perhaps the most stunning failure of all in food standards. There has been an outbreak of E coli most recently in the north-east in Mr Salmond's constituency, but most disastrous was the outbreak of E coli in central Scotland a couple of years ago.  Mr Morgan asked if there are exceptional circumstances. Yes, there are and they include E coli and those other failures of Scottish food standards that should inspire our debate today. The problem is not just Scottish. It is vital that British consumers should have confidence in the food that they buy whether it is British-produced, imported, or from north or south of the border. I think it is appropriate that the standards should be the same.  This is not simply a UK bill in the old-fashioned sense. It is a bill that reflects the reality of devolution. As little as a year ago, it could not have been written in the terms in which it has been written. Not only will two of the board members of the food standards agency be appointed by ministers of this Parliament, and not only will there be a separate director for Scotland heading an executive wing of the agency, but there will be an independent Scottish food advisory committee in order to reflect the range of expertise and interests in food safety.  I hope that ministers will carry the cause of devolution further forward by locating the Scottish wing of the agency not in Edinburgh, but in Aberdeen, which boasts the highest concentration in Europe of expertise in life sciences, environmental sciences and food sciences. There are more than 3,000 people working in those fields.  We must first get the show on the road. The food standards bill belongs to the age of devolution in one respect above all others, and that has been referred to by a couple of my colleagues already. It recognises that the Scottish Parliament can, whenever it chooses, amend, repeal or adjust any aspect of the bill once it is enacted. We get the best of both worlds: quick, decisive action and the power to do otherwise in the future should we wish that.  I would draw the minister's attention to a point in clause 42(3) of the bill. That extends the agency's right of inspection and enforcement to territorial waters and the continental shelf. That will have a particular impact on food premises on oil and gas rigs in the British sector of the North sea. There have been some questions in this Parliament about jurisdictional matters in the North sea and I would be very grateful if the minister could answer those.  My constituent Professor Hugh Pennington is one of the experts in food safety whom I mentioned. I think that his report on E coli has set the tone for this bill. He has consistently urged ministers for the past two years to get a move on and not to delay, but to get the bill passed into law as soon as possible. I think that we should support the motion and do that.

rose-

I agree with Alex Salmond that it is nice that the important issue of fisheries has the high profile that it deserves. I also agree with similar comments made by George Lyon.  Two kinds of concerns have been raised during  the debate on the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order. First, there are concerns on the part of the Scottish boats that fish the Berwick bank, in particular about the alleged infringements that are being pursued in the English, rather than in the Scottish, courts and the likely expense that those cases might involve. Secondly, the Scottish Fishermen's Federation has raised reasonable issues-which were echoed by Dennis Canavan-about the different jurisdictions that apply when the oil and fishing industries share the same waters.  Those issues deserve to be addressed. The fishing industry is entitled to a voice and, when its direct material interests are involved, it should be consulted and informed. For those reasons, I welcome the minister's commitment to meet the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, to pursue these matters with UK ministers and to examine ways of addressing the concerns-some of which have been raised today-about the jurisdiction that affects Scottish fishermen.  Some of the rhetoric about piracy and theft that we have heard in recent weeks is less welcome. Even in the chamber today, we have heard that Westminster has stolen Scottish fishing waters from the Scottish fishing fleet. There is no shortage of serious and important issues that affect the Scottish fishing industry and there is no need to portray the important-but limited-issues that arise from this order as a matter of life and death for the industry. Of course, some people get excited about boundaries-regardless of whether those boundaries are on land or at sea or whether they affect the legislative competence of the Parliament-but to pretend that the whole matter is a gigantic conspiracy to run away with Scotland's fish does no favours to the Scottish fishing industry. There is something pretty bizarre about a nationalist party that objects to the use of an international convention, even if that party has the benefit of a last-minute legal opinion.

The point that I throw back to Richard Lochhead is that the SNP, as a party that is committed to Scottish independence, comes before the Parliament and says, "Here is a boundary line, drawn up in accordance with international conventions on a median boundary"-[MEMBERS: "No, the Government says that."] The SNP produced a legal opinion but, until it is tested in court, it is only an opinion. I hope that the fishing boundary between Scotland and England is never tested in an international court, because that would do more damage to Scottish  fishing than anything that we are discussing today.  I am interested to know whether the SNP's proposition is to revert to the line due east of Berwick and to continue to campaign for independence. The likely outcome of that would be that a median line such as the one that is now in force would be drawn.  We should listen to the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and we should welcome the minister's offer to take this matter up at the appropriate level. We should also ask ministers to make a distinction between the real concerns of our fishing communities and the party political advantage that some people are trying to make.

I welcome the nomination of an Executive to represent the whole of Scotland and to highlight the priorities for Government.  In my constituency of Aberdeen Central, there are areas of severe urban deprivation. There will be a warm welcome there for the creation of a ministry for social inclusion.  Aberdeen is also at the heart of a wide rural hinterland; there will also be a warm welcome for the creation of a specific ministry for rural affairs. Important city-based industries such as paper and food look to the country areas as a source of supply; people from country areas come into town for their health services, higher education and much else. So central is Aberdeen to the rural north-east that Aberdeenshire Council, as well as the city council, is headquartered in my constituency.  Beside all those things and beside all the economic links, there are family ties; today, most relevantly, there are shared values. I am confident that in both town and country in the north-east, there will be broad support for the principles which underlie the partnership agreement that has been presented today: principles of working together on a co-operative basis and of seeking to make this Parliament work not as a Westminster in miniature and not as a stepping-stone to independence, but as an open, accessible and new Parliament in its own right.

I appreciate Mr Adam's persistence in asking that question a second time. He misses the point of the partnership, which is to bring together the positive aspects of the two manifestos. That is what the partnership agreement-very notably-achieves.  There will be a particular welcome in the north-east for the strategic approach that the Minister for Rural Affairs permits on rural issues. The new ministry will have a straightforward but very wide remit, although it was criticised by a member of the SNP. In fact the ministry will be responsible for co-ordinating the delivery of services across a wide range. It will work with the transport ministry on integrated rural transport policy and it will work with the justice department on promoting and implementing land reform. These are positive and welcome developments.

The ministry for rural affairs will also develop policy and by its very existence send out the right signals about the priority that this Parliament gives to rural areas. I am disappointed that some of the parties here choose, as their first reaction to the proposal to create a ministry for rural affairs, to seek to delay the appointment of a minister. On the contrary, we should endorse the appointment of Ross Finnie and give rural issues the priority that they deserve.